Tuesday, 8 December 2009

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like to begin by altering the Order Paper to reintroduce an item, which we had been removed in the morning because there was no Certificate of Financial Implications, namely the Regional Tier Governments Bill. It will come in as item No.3. So, the adjustment should be made accordingly.

Secondly, I also want to request that item No.7 be moved to tomorrow. The report on the Bill on Female Genital Mutilation is ready, so they should be presented and debated together. 

Thirdly, I want to inform you that our colleague, hon. Anokbonggo, has suffered an attack of pneumonia and he is in Mulago Hospital. The doctors have issued strict instructions that he should not be unduly disturbed. So, I just wanted you to know that he is in Mulago. Please, permit him rest. 

Fourthly, as you recall, last week we lost our colleague, hon. Balikowa, whom we gave a farewell befitting him in this House and also laid him to rest in his home in Kamuli District. I want to thank all of you for the condolence messages, the financial support and for your personal attendance both at Christ the King Church and at his burial place in Nkondo in Kamuli District. I want to request each and every one of you to continue to pray for his family so that we are able to bear this loss. 

However, I was also disturbed in the last two days to receive press reports, maybe which were intended to deflect investigations. I am told that the Red Pepper publication had a story indicating that hon. Balikowa did not know how to drive. This is not true. I have known the late Balikowa for many years. When I first met him in 2005, he actually drove to my house. So I know that he has been driving. I would like to appeal to the press not to continue adding insult to injury but leave matters to be investigated properly and not try to divert attention from the issues.

Hon. Members, you may be aware that Government is moving away from the Poverty Eradication Action Plan to a National Development Plan. This requires that all the relevant stakeholders have to be sensitised on this new framework. As a legislative body, we have a great role to play in this plan. I am, therefore, glad to inform you that a half-day consultative meeting has been organised for Parliament on Thursday, 10 December 2009 at the Imperial Royale Hotel from 8.30 a.m. by the National Planning Authority. I would urge you to attend but in particular the following: all chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of all the sessional committees, members of the Budget Committee, members of the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Committee and members of the Public Accounts Committee. Please, ensure that you attend because throughout our debates the issue of planning has been very crucial in our contributions.

Another matter that has preoccupied Parliament is the draft National Land Policy. I have got a request from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who would like to consult Parliament on this matter. So, I am giving a notice that the fourth draft of the National Land Policy will be discussed on Thursday, 17 December 2009 at the Parliament Conference Hall. Again, here we require all chairpersons of sessional and standing committees, members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and members of the Committee on Natural Resources. Hon. Members, take the opportunity to discuss this very contemporary issue that is keeping the country occupied. 

We only have eight days remaining before we break off for Christmas on 23rd December. It is important that we use these remaining eight days, including today, to accomplish all the business that is pending so that we can go for recess as scheduled on the 23rd December. I want to appeal to you to avail yourselves. Thank you very much. 

2.36
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week, the four political parties in the Opposition, namely the Conservative Party, Forum for Democratic Change, Justice Forum and UPC, organised an inter party co-operation function in three regional centres. Before they went out, they duly informed the office of the Inspector-General of Police who allowed them to go on and assured them that they would be provided with security.

On Friday, the IPC team together with Members of Parliament from the Opposition visited Masaka and they were able to explain to the populace the purpose of their co-operation. Police gave them all the necessary support. 

On Saturday, the same team was in Jinja. In Jinja we were able to march through the town up to Busoga Square and dialogued with the public through a public rally. We were given police security and the whole function was uninterrupted. 

Unfortunately on Sunday, when the team took the mid-western leg to Hoima, they were accosted with a lot of brutality. In the first place, the Regional Police Commander mounted a roadblock at Kafu River to stop and check the entire team and yet earlier on, the communication which was given was that this team was supposed to have a joint rally at the Boma Grounds. The Regional Police Commander got back to us and said we would not be allowed to have a rally at the Boma Grounds because the following day, His Excellency the President had been scheduled to hold a meeting there and therefore they would not allow the IPC to go there. However, they went ahead to allow Dr Kizza Besigye to pay a visit to the present mayor of Hoima town, the FDC Secretary for Trade and Industry, who is on remand for ostensible offences of abuse of office. The Regional Police Commander and prison authorities allowed Dr Kizza Besigye to go pay a visit to him. 

When Dr Kizza Besigye and his team were on their way to Kolping Hotel, where they had intended to have a meeting since they had been denied the Boma Grounds because the following day His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni would be addressing a function there, that was the time when all hell broke loose. People were tear-gased and beaten up. Up to now, we have not understood or known the reason as to why IPC members were beaten in Hoima unlike in Jinja and Masaka. 

What puzzles me further is that even if His Excellency the President was to use the same venue the following day, which I know he did not use, as long as functions do not coincide and conflict in terms of day and time and that is the only facility in the town, should other parties in the Opposition be denied access to it? We very well know that as a country, during the Constitution amendment exercise we all agreed that we enter and enjoy the benefits of a multi-party dispensation. This therefore meant that all political parties vying for state power should be given unlimited access to facilities like open public grounds. For example, here in Kampala if there was any function to be held at Kololo Airstrip and the relevant authorities had been asked and permission granted, why would somebody come and say, “His Excellency President Museveni is going to use this venue the following day therefore you are not given an opportunity to use the venue?” 

The issue therefore that we would wish to put to Government is to give us an explanation as to why the IPC team was accosted with such hostility. In today’s New Vision, the Regional Police Commander proudly said he only administered a small dose of tear gas to them. 

The Police who beat up people were not only from Hoima but had been ferried from Masindi, Biso and other police posts to do nothing but beat and molest members of the Opposition. Can Government ask the officers who were involved in this fracas to be responsible for their actions and answer as to where they got the authority to harass, intimidate and beat? 

As I talk, some of the members of that delegation are nursing wounds; they are not even able to walk. One of our female party officials was manhandled and thrown into a ditch. A woman was manhandled –(Interjection)- No, she was not woman-handled but manhandled because the people who handled her were men. We wish to seek an explanation from Government for their actions. Is that the multi-party dispensation that they allowed us to enter into where they want to tie the hands of other political parties and not allow them access the public? Can we have an explanation?      

2.43
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for highlighting his allegations on the Floor of the House. (Laughter)

The honourable member did contact me outside the House and he raised that complaint. I immediately started an investigation on the matter and on Thursday I will be able to give you a full explanation.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS 
BILL, 2009

2.44
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Regional Governments Bill, 2009” be read the first time. The Certificate of Financial Implications to this Bill is duly signed by the Minister of Finance and I beg to lay it on the Table. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded. The Bill is committed to the Committee on Local Government for perusal and report back.

Hon. Members, in the public gallery there are police public relations officers from different police regions and divisions in the country. We are delighted to see them here. I do not know whether they will reappear on Thursday to hear the minister speak on the issues, which have been raised. You are welcome. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE 
FY 2008/2009

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on the Table the Public Service Commission Annul Report for the year 2008/2009. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Annual Public Service Commission Report for 2008/09 is laid on the Table and committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

I) STATEMENT ON OIL EXPLORATION RELATED MATTERS

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am reading a statement from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development:

Dear Speaker and colleagues, Government’s systematic efforts to promote the exploration of oil and gas in the country have been successful. Exploration companies are being attracted to invest in the country and discoveries of commercial oil and gas resources are being made. 

Currently, four exploration companies have been licensed in five out of an available ten exploration areas in the Albertine Graben; these are:

1. 	Heritage Oil and Tullow Oil - a fifty-fifty partnership over Exploration Area 1 (Pakwach Basin)
2. 	Tullow Oil over Exploration Area 2 (Northern Lake Albert Basin)
3. 	Heritage Oil and Tullow Oil - a fifty-fifty partnership over Exploration Area 3A (southern Lake Albert Basin)
4. 	Dominion Petroleum over Exploration Area 4B (Southern Lake Edward and Lake George Basin) 
5. 	Neptune Petroleum over Exploration Area 5 (Rhino Camp)

There is a lot of interest in the areas, which are not licensed. However, licensing of new areas has been suspended until a new regulatory framework for the oil and gas sub-sector is put in place by late May 2010. 

The licensed companies have undertaken explorations, which have led to the discovery of 15 oil and gas fields in exploration areas 1, 2 and 3A. More work is being undertaken, but the country’s reserve base is currently estimated at two billion barrels of oil in place. 

The collective total investment in this sector by the licensed companies as of December 2008 was US $495.8 million. Those who have the paper, you may look at annex II. It is expected that by 2009, expenditure will be much higher than that of previous years due to ongoing programmes in the fields. The above amounts have been invested in the acquisition of 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional seismic data. 

Drilling of Exploration and Appraisal Wells and Support Services 
To date, 5,118 km of 2D seismic data and 1,202 sq km of 3D seismic data have been acquired and 34 wells drilled. Out of the 34 wells drilled, 32 have encountered oil and/or gas. 

Appraisal of Discovered Fields and Development 
Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the country petroleum law requires that after the petroleum discovery has been made, the company which has made the discovery evaluates the discovery within a period of two years and applies for a licence to begin production. Before a production licence is given, the company is required to agree with government on a detailed plan for developing a particular field. This plan has to include how the field will be developed, which oil will be produced from the field and how the produced oil will be utilised. 

The appraisal and development phases of the petroleum value chain are very expensive and tend to require a continuous stream of funds over a sustained period of time. It is therefore common for companies which have undertaken explorations to find partners to join them especially in financing these expensive phases. Some companies even go ahead to implement outright sales to companies with bigger financial capacity. 

The companies licensed in Uganda can be considered as small to medium in size. Two of them, namely Heritage and Tullow, have so far been successful in their exploration effort and are now proceeding to appraisal and development phases. Both companies informed Government early this year of their intention to bring on board partners to join them especially in implementation of the subsequent phases of the petroleum value chain. 

The next phase of developing Uganda’s petroleum reserves will be very capital intensive. In the medium term, the following financial resources are required:

1. 	Appraisal and development of oil fields including construction of oil processing facilities and related infrastructure is estimated to cost US $1 billion.

2. 	Development of a medium scale refinery is estimated to cost US $2 billion.

3. 	Pipeline infrastructure to support oil exports once the domestic requirements are satisfied is estimated to cost US $2.5 billion.

Most investments will be supported by private capital with a partnership of public resources. 

Eni 

Eni was first introduced to Government as a potential buyer of Heritage Oil’s 50 percent interest in Exploration Area 1 and Exploration Area 3A in August this year. 

Eni is an integrated oil company, which is the sixth largest oil company in the world. The company has financial and technical capability to undertake petroleum exploration, development, production and processing. It is active in 70 countries around the world, including Angola, Algeria, Ghana, Republic of Congo, Gabon and Mozambique among others. The company is the biggest refining company in Europe. 

Government welcomed Eni and encouraged them to consider their discussions with Heritage Oil regarding the sale before seeking Government’s approval as required by the law.  

The Proposed Sale

Eni has offered US $1.5 billion to purchase Heritage’s entire 50 percent working interest and operator-ship in exploration areas 1 and 3A. If this offer goes through, Eni will effectively replace Heritage in Uganda. This offer is yet to be approved by the shareholders, partners of Heritage and by the Government of Uganda. It is anticipated that the transaction will be finalised during March 2010.

Implications of the Sale
•	A bigger company with more financial resources has the advantage of being able to undertake appraisal, development and production. Eni is bigger than Heritage and has the capacity to undertake the entire value chain from exploration through refining to marketing and sales of petroleum products. 

•	There will be taxation for the sales by the Government of Uganda. 

•	Due diligence of Eni and evaluation of Eni sales agreement will have to be undertaken before government gives any approval for sale to go ahead. 

•	There is need to note that the US $1.5 billion Eni is offering to pay is not what is recoverable from the production of petroleum when it begins. The amounts to be recovered are those to be spent on exploration in the area. These funds to be recovered will have to be audited by the Auditor-General before they qualify to be recovered. 

•	Government does not anticipate that the purchase or acquisition of the licensed companies will cause delays in the work programme that companies are required to implement as agreed in the production sharing agreement. 

•	It is important to note that the proposed purchase of Heritage by Eni is not concluding until approved by Government. This purchase, if implemented, will be a normal business transaction like any other transaction of buying and selling of assets in both the oil industry and any other businesses. The existing legislative framework and administrative structures in the country are sufficient to ensure that these and any other transactions are undertaken without causing loses to our country. 

•	The oil discovered in the country is still in the ground and production has not yet begun. The discovered oil fields are now being appraised to establish the extent of the oil field and how much of the oil can be produced. 

•	Government policy is to refine the crude oil produced in the country to satisfy the national and regional petroleum product demand before any options are taken. In this regard, Government has started a feasibility study for developing a refinery in the country. This study is expected to be concluded in May 2010. Therefore, efforts to secure funding and partners in developing the refinery will commence.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the sale is not yet finalised. It is yet to be concluded by the investors themselves and yet to go through the approval process of Government. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will continue apprising Parliament through the committees regarding any sales and developments in this emerging sector of development. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: I am standing up on a matter of procedure. For the last four years, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has committed itself to table in this House the oil sharing agreement. I am surprised that even today the minister has come to the Floor of this House without that document. I am seeking your guidance as to whether it is not improper for this House to consider this statement without that document being on the Floor of this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apart from that, the whole of your statement indicates that as a government, you have abdicated your responsibility to the country. That is what you are saying! Look at paragraph 13 - they are discussing a sale and they will let you know later. You as the government! 

3.04
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Considering the importance of this matter, you have rightly guided that the minister is abdicating the responsibility of Government. However, also looking at the colossal sums of money as far as the investment portfolios are concerned – over US $5 billion - we cannot simply gloss over this matter like that. I propose that this matter be sent to the committee and it synchronises this, so that we can come and debate with informed minds. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to react to my honourable colleague’s proposal that this matter be sent to the Committee on Natural Resources. Ministerial statements are subject to debate on the Floor. 

We are glad that the minister has attempted to respond to the issue of Heritage Oil and the Eni deal. However, my point of concern is that this statement that the minister has presented has a lot of controversies in it. In paragraph 15, they heap a lot of praise on Eni - “It is bigger than Heritage and has the capacity to undertake the entire petroleum chain from exploration through refining, marketing ….” Indeed in paragraph 13, government welcomed Eni; they welcomed them and have heaped such praises on them. However, in paragraph 17, they say they will have to do due diligence. What due diligence is required here for a company that you have been praising?

Madam Speaker, I think there is a lot to be unearthed in this oil deal. In any case, just like hon. Ekanya proposed, we would have –(Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Member. I am again rising on a procedural issue. Hon. Mawiya has raised an issue but I imagine hon. Epetait is also making a fresh submission. I think hon. Ekanya raised a very fundamental issue - we need those agreements here. 

Hon. Mawiya raised the issue of the controversies in this report. You cannot bring Eni to us today and you think we should talk about it for 30 minutes and leave the matter at that. So, instead of taking it to the committee, members have got the statement so let us read through it and also get the agreements and then we can debate it conclusively. Otherwise, this is a technical thing. There are controversies surrounding these companies. None of us is not aware about what went on with the Shimoni land, so we will really need to discuss it exhaustively, which we cannot do right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also not in for debating this matter now because every paragraph is a controversy. Anyway, can the minister explain to us where those agreements are? We asked you to bring them, you have not brought them. Where are they?

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, we have been sending the agreements to the committee, but if this House wants us to bring them here, we can do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have been in that ministry long enough. I have sat in this chair before and directed you to bring and lay those agreements here but you have not.

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, what I was asked to do today was to make a statement on the sale. If the others are asked for, we shall bring them, and I promise we shall comply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We already asked for them. We are not asking for them for the first time; we are asking for them for the third and fourth time.

MR LOKERIS: Okay; agreed. (Laughter)

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing make a point on this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No debating.

MR OKECHO: No, I am not debating. I just want to say that before any sale is effected on any of the assets in this country, we must know the Government’s participation. So, if they are taking away 50 percent of what Heritage owns, what is the Government’s take in that? The best thing is for us to get all the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot begin debating this matter today. I think members need time to look at it. Minister, when will you produce the agreements? 

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker and dear members, I will bring them tomorrow. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, after he lays the agreements, I will set the time for you to debate this matter. So, please study it. Thank you.

II) STATEMENT ON THE DELAYED SALARY PAYMENT TO POLICE OFFICERS IN TESO SUB-REGION

3.11
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, Sir –(Laughter)- she is both. Well, I just wanted to draw the attention of Parliament –(Laughter)– to the new topic. I think we are now ready to listen, to move to the internal order.

This is a statement to Parliament on the matter of unpaid salaries for the Anti Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) staff in Teso sub-region. I am –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can you allow him to read the statement. You will respond after he has presented it. What are you saying?  

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: No, it is not a draft.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, first listen to the content, no matter whether it is draft or not.

MR KIVEJINJA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, hon. Oleny Charles, Member of Parliament representing Usuk County in Katakwi District recently stated that salaries for some ASTU staff and people in the Teso region had not been paid for the last 20 months. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister directed me to clarify this matter. 

I would like to state that it is true that some ASTU staff have not received their salaries for the past few months. It is, however, not true that some have not received their salaries for the last 20 months.

Hon. Members, following receipt of the complaints suggesting distortions and anomalies on the police payroll, a police force salary verification team led by the Assistant Inspector General of Police in charge of human resources management and development was set up to investigate these reported anomalies and distortions. The team made on-the-spot checks of all police units in the country, examining all payrolls including some from the ASTU units. This team completed its work and submitted a report.

With respect to ASTU, the report indicates that some personnel missed their salaries for these reasons:

a) 	Hon. Members will recall there was decision that was taken by Government to pay salaries directly into individual officers’ bank accounts. As a result of this, ASTU personnel who had no bank accounts could not access their salary payments. Since then, many have opened bank accounts and are being paid.

b) 	Personnel who were working but not on the payroll – those affected were 113. However, I would like to report that these have been put on the payroll. Those not verified have not been put on the payroll.
	
c) 	Personnel appearing on the payroll but not getting their payments – those affected by this were 111. 

d) 	Personnel whose names had been deleted from the payroll in June 2009 due to having duplicate names on bank accounts - those affected by this were 227.

e) 	Personnel who were deleted by Uganda Police Force authority in July 2009 as unknown or unaccounted for by the unit commanders - those affected by this were 487.

Mr Speaker, Sir –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, out of a total strength of 2625 ASTU personnel, only 938 were found not to have been getting their salaries for the reasons indicated above. 

Secondly, the verification team discovered that personnel only missed their salaries for a period of between four to six months beginning from April 2009, and not 20 months as alleged.

Thirdly, following the submission of the report, the Police leadership has been rectifying the anomalies on the ASTU payroll and that of the whole Police Force in general. 

In addition, as a follow up on these matters, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs asked the Auditor-General to conduct a forensic audit. A forensic audit team has been put in place and is working closely with the investigations team from the Police Professional Standards Unit and the Criminal Investigations Department. All those found to be responsible for the anomalies and distortions will be prosecuted in the courts of law.

Madam Speaker, Sir and hon. Members -(Laughter)- I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary questions, hon. Oleny? It must only be a supplementary question.

3.18
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting this statement. However, allow me from the very onset to make it very clear that the personnel we are talking about are deployed in very remote areas of this country, the areas that were declared operational areas for cattle rustlers. These personnel depend on these meagre salaries to sustain themselves and their families. 

I am not convinced by this statement because if you look at it, Madam Speaker, you realise that it only attempts to dispute the number of months that I stated here. It does not tell us how few the months are. For example, look at the third paragraph; the hon. Minister admits that they have actually not been paying some of them but goes on to say that this happened only for a few months. How many are these few months? 

I brought up this issue after interacting with the leadership of the force. I think the minister should have been quite clear on this point. This is the major point of concern not only to me as a Member of Parliament from Usuk but also to members from the entire region.

I also would like to correct the impression that this statement attempts to create relating to the fact that I only talked about the ASTU personnel in the Teso sub-region. No; Katakwi hosts the headquarters of ASTU. So, I would like to make it clear that I referred to entire statistics that are at the headquarters of ASTU at Katakwi. These personnel have been deployed all the way from Northern Uganda up to Kapchorwa. 

Just to apprise the House, I would like to say that at the time I interacted with the commanders, I was told that over 500 personnel had been affected by this exercise. It is also important to note that some of the personnel actually started missing their salaries after the verification exercise; there are statistics to prove this. That is why I am saying that the minister has not done due diligence to this matter using this statement.

The other point that is of crucial importance, Madam Speaker, is that if this exercise were conducted, how come after all these months no corrections have been made and yet we are living in an era of ICT? If you talk to these people, they will tell you that some of them have had their photographs taken three times. They keep wondering why up to today no changes have been effected. How are we going to accept this? 

Finally, I think the issue of non-payment of ASTU salaries is very crucial because it does not only affect ASTU staff but it affects the entire Police Force. There are a number of police officers who also have not been paid for similar reasons. We just do not understand why this is going on in that ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I hand over the debate to the other members, hon. Minister, where is the nearest bank that these ASTU staff can go to open accounts? How far is it from their units? How much does it cost them to travel from their units to that bank? How much is the minimum deposit? This will help us get to know how quickly this process moves. 

3.22
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the response. However, I would like to refer him to the meeting that we held a couple of months ago with the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs where we raised the issue of delayed payments for nearly all the police officers. 

I remember in specifics, we went as far as reminding him with the team he came with about the exercise of stopping allowances for the VIP unit of the Police, which had been done by the senior police officers. They stopped this arrangement. Hon. Members will be interested in knowing that the police officers who are deployed in the VIP unit are those who guard foreign missions and so forth. Those officers receive an extra pay, which goes directly to their accounts. However, as I speak, the Police Force has stopped this arrangement and the officers deployed in that unit complained about that and I remember us reading this to you, Mr Minister.

I want to draw the attention of this House to page 2. Honourable ministers in general need to know that whenever they are coming to this House, they ought to do perfect homework so that the debates of this House are not taken as village meetings that deal with intelligent people without sufficient work to do for the nation. 

Look at the whole arrangement of the issues on page 2. Point (a) for example, is to the effect that Government decided to pay salaries directly onto individual officers’ bank accounts and that as a result of this, ASTU personnel who had no bank accounts could not access their payments. That is one reason, but we do not know how many have been affected in that respect. We also do not know those who were paid because we do not have the list in that respect. Interestingly however, this would be an innocent reason if you were not able to read the other reasons. 

Now, look at reason (b), which reads in part, “Personnel who were working but were not on the pay roll ….” They were working but not on the pay roll. It is not because they did not have bank accounts, but they were just not on the pay roll. When you read further in (c), the statement says in part, “Personnel appearing on the pay roll but were not getting their pay ….” (Laughter) Is this a serious ministerial statement in a House where those who were graded to come here and transact business on behalf of the state sit? My God! 

Madam Speaker, under your wise discretion, I would like to beg that you dismiss some of these reports because they are contemptuous to your Chair. What do you want to tell the House? Your own reasons are all contradictory -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please! No, I was asking them to keep quite.

MR KYANJO: I would beg, Madam Speaker, that with due honesty you allow the minister some time to go and do a clean job for the House so that we can debate a substantive statement rather than coming here and we consume important parliamentary airtime over nothing. That is my honest prayer.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Just like hon. Kyanjo has put it, this document is not worth debate here on the Floor -(Applause)- and there is even no assurance. Apart from giving us facts, what is the exact plight now of those people? I believe that the minister should take this back and bring to Parliament a more authoritative document that we can consider for debate; otherwise, the challenges are still big.

MR KIVEJINJA: This is a distortion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the distortion? Okay, you answer.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to tell the members to face what we have to face, and I do not want to be punished by being honest. I was giving you -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I want to give comfort to the honourable minister that we are not directing our anger to the personnel or to the person of Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja. We are saying that the statement is irregular and correcting this statement here is not going to be helpful. Is the minister therefore in order to continue repairing the statement, which is exceedingly irreparable in the face of every member? We come here to transact decent business; we do not come here to pass time. We are not marking time. I am begging that you rule the honourable minister out of order and dismiss him with the contempt -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the people who asked hon. Oleny to ask this question want real answers. They want to know when they are going to get their money and how quickly. You are continuing to talk about verification but the people in ASTU want their money. This is not want they want. They want to know when you are going to complete your records and give them their money.

MR KIVEJINJA: The question raised was the matter of unpaid salaries and I had to give you a full diagnosis and analysis of how that thing came up.

I said in the last paragraph that a forensic audit team has been put in place. It is working closely with the investigation team from the Police Professional Standards Unit and Criminal Investigation Department. All those found to be responsible will be held. So, the process is just still ongoing and it is already being handled. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I want you to look at your page 2; the people who have been working without pay want their money. All those you have itemised here want to know where their money is but you are talking about anomalies and this and that. Hon. Minister, we want a better answer than this to explain how the people will get their money.

3.32
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Beyond the salaries, we know that the ASTU work in very difficult conditions and for the last seven or so years, this House has been asking for a framework under which those forces that are not necessarily the Police work, how their wages are defined and how matters of discipline are defined. We have been asking for a law governing the LDUs, the Arrow Boys, the Amukas and all sorts of auxiliary forces. For a long time, every Minister of Internal Affairs has come here and made a promise. 

Is it because there is the absence of a legal framework to provide for the working conditions of the auxiliary forces that the Ministry of Internal Affairs can afford to take these people for granted when it is actually in their hands that the lives of thousands of people in those areas are really dependant on? I am inclined to ask that when the minister comes back, he should tell this House where the law is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In addition to that, honourable members, I do not know whether you recall that in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Amon Muzoora moved a motion to create a legal framework for those forces and the government took over that Bill and they have never come back. Prime Minister, what can you tell us about that law? The Government took over that Bill and it did not come back here for the first reading. Minister of Internal Affairs; please bring that Bill next week. There was a draft Bill but it was taken over by the government. I remember very well. Yes, you were the seconder.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, as you rightly put it, hon. Amon Muzoora moved that motion, I was the seconder and I still have my copy. If Government is dilly dallying, we can then proceed to help Government because it is very embarrassing for a senior minister to really lose locally like this. I think this is a matter we are going to pursue and have the legal framework for the auxiliary forces conclusively done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you move quickly with your motion; we shall give you time on the Order Paper very quickly. I think the country needs this. 

III) STATEMENT ON THE ATTAINMENT OF THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL No. 5

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, the statement as prepared by my technical officers was ready, however when I scrutinised it today morning, I found a lot of very useful information lacking. I have, therefore, requested my -(Laughter)- I have, therefore, requested my director-general to improve on the paper and the statement will be ready for me to present the day after tomorrow, which is Thursday this week. I thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

3.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the creation of Zumbo, Amudat, Otuke, Lamwo, Kyegegwa, Buikwe, Namayingo, Luuka, Kiryandongo, Ntoroko, Serere, Alebtong, Gomba, Kalungu, Buvuma, Butambala, Bulambuli, Kyankwanzi, Buyende and Maracha districts.

The Minister for Local Government moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament for the creation of 20 new districts on 11 November 2009 thereby amending the motion moved in June 2009 for the creation of 14 districts. The motion was referred to the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for consideration and thereafter report back to Parliament.

In the amended motion, the creation of two districts out of Tororo, namely Mukuju and Kisoko, was not included and the hon. Minister of Local Government did inform Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Can you please listen to the report?

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, the reports are in the printery down there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But some of the things you are reading are not what I have.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, can we proceed as they get copies from the printery?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t these members have reports?

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I need your guidance; should I proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please distribute on this side? Hon. Members, I think let us defer this for -(Interjections)- The members of the Opposition do not have the reports. Okay, proceed.

MR YIGA: I will try to summarise the report. Article 179 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states thus:
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may -
a) Alter the boundaries of districts; and
b) Create new districts.
(2) Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all members of Parliament. 

3) Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create new local government units within their districts.

4) Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.”

Basing on the provision of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, rule 130, and recognising the importance of the decentralisation policy in Uganda, the committee undertook its duties and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations. 

Methodology

1.	 The committee held meetings with Members of Parliament from the concerned districts. 

2. 	The committee held meetings with the ministers of local government and their officials.

3. 	The committee held meetings with the local leaders from some of the proposed districts.

4. 	The committee visited some of the proposed new districts.

Observations

Creation of Zumbo District out of Nebbi

I will summarise because the report is lengthy. The people of Okoro County requested for district status in June 2004 and Nebbi District Council supported that request.

Size of the District

Nebbi District is one of the biggest districts in the country. It is composed of Jonam, Okoro and Padyere counties. It has a population of 435,000 people. Nebbi District Local Government therefore finds it difficult to effectively administer and provide services to the population particularly in the mountainous areas of Okoro County. 

Geographical Features

Okoro County is mountainous.

The Distance from Nebbi District Headquarters

We were informed that the furthest sub-county is 80 kilometres away from Nebbi District headquarters and it is on the border with the DRC. 

Population

Okoro County has a population of 168,351 people. 

Economic Activities

It is basically subsistence farming.

Educational Services

Okoro County has 77 government-aided primary schools, four community-based primary schools, five government-aided secondary schools and five private secondary schools.

Health Services
They have a hospital at Nyapea, 13 government-aided health centres and five private health centres.

The committee never received any petition against the creation of Zumbo District. All the Members of Parliament representing Nebbi District were very supportive of the creation of the new district and did inform the committee that the people were eager and ready to start operations.

Creation of Amudat District out of Nakapiripirit 

The people of Upe County requested for district status in 2006 and Nakapiripirit District Council supported the request. 

Population

The population for Amudat is 63,572 people.

Distance from Nakapiripirit

We were informed that the furthest sub-county of Karita is 105 kilometres from Nakapiripirit District headquarters on the border with Kenya.

Social Features

The Pokot of Amudat speak a very different language from Karimojong and transacting business in the district council of Nakapiripirit is very difficult because of the distinct differences in language. This is one reason why they wanted district status for Amudat.

The committee did not receive any petition against the creation of Amudat District. The area Member of Parliament was very supportive and assured the committee that there were no conflicts over the creation of the new district.

Creation of Otuke District out of Lira District

The people of Otuke County requested for district status in 2004 but Lira District Council did pass a motion recommending that Otuke combine with Moroto County to form a new district. The people of Otuke insisted on being separated from Moroto County and in January 2007, the President promised to grant their request. 

Size of the District

The size of Otuke is given there and the population of Otuke is 62,018 people. The main ethnic group is Langi. They also have other groups, namely the Acholi, Iteso and Karimojong.

It was noted by the committee that the earlier motion passed by the Lira District Council recommended that Otuke and Moroto counties form a new district. However, later disagreements cropped up as each county wanted to host the district headquarters. The people of Otuke wanted the headquarters at Otuke while the people of Moroto wanted the headquarters at Alebtong. The matter was further compounded by the perceived fears of marginalisation by the people of Otuke because Moroto County is bigger in terms of population.

Cabinet later decided to approve both Otuke and Alebtong to form a new district each. The committee visited Otuke County and was shown the site for the new district headquarters and the people were very anxious to commence operations.

Creation of Alebtong District from Lira District

The people of Moroto County requested for district status. The district of Alebtong will consist of Moroto County and it has five sub-counties.

We give the reasons there. The population of Moroto County is 201,165 people. 

Creation of Lamwo District

The people of Lamwo County requested for district status which was supported by Kitgum District Council. Kitgum District is composed of two counties, namely Chwa and Lamwo.

Population

According to the 2002 Housing and Population Census, Kitgum District has a population of 282,375 people and half of the population is from Lamwo County.

Why they want a District

They cite distances between Lamwo and Kitgum District headquarters. They say that much of their land is along the Sudan border and it is 80 kilometres from Kitgum District headquarters. They also cite geographical features - Lamwo County is mountainous and swampy which makes communication and movement to Kitgum District headquarters very difficult. The population of Lamwo County is 115,345 people. 

The committee received a petition which supported the creation of the new district but wanted the headquarters to be at Padibe because it had basic infrastructure. Among the people against having the headquarters at Padibe was the MP for Lamwo who cited the issue of non-availability of land which would put the new district at a risk of land wrangles. They therefore identified a vast piece of land on the foot of Lamwo Hills, which was free from disputes. The local leadership had also earmarked the same piece of land to accommodate the headquarters. 

The committee visited Lamwo County, and en-route to the proposed site for district headquarters passed through Padibe. They appreciated the land factor and were persuaded by the proposal of having the district headquarters at the foot of Lamwo Hills.

The committee also noted that given support by way of physical planning, opening up of roads, survey and demarcation of plots, Lamwo District would be one of the best planned district headquarters in Uganda. Therefore, apart from the argument about locating the headquarters either at Padibe or at the site overlooking Lamwo Hills, there is no other dispute over the creation of Lamwo District. 

Creation of Kyegegwa District 
The people of Kyaka County requested for a district status which was endorsed by Kyenjojo District Council. Kyenjojo District is composed of two large counties, namely Mwenge and Kyaka. Kyenjojo District Council resolved to support the creation of this district. They give the distances involved; it is 53kms from Kyenjojo to the furthest sub-county, which is Mpara sub-county.

The proposed district would consist of five sub counties namely, Mpara, Kyegegwa, Kasule, Hapuyo and Kakabara. It borders with Kibaale in the north, Mubende and Ssembabule districts in the east, Kiruhura and Kamwenge districts in the south and Kabarole District in the west.

According to the 2002 population census, Kyaka County has 119,028 people. They have land of about 20 acres for the district headquarters. 

The committee visited Kyegegwa and met Members of Parliament of the current Kyenjojo District, local leaders and members of the community who welcomed the new district and expressed readiness to commence operations after approval by Parliament. No petition has been received against the creation of Kyegegwa District.

Creation of Buikwe District 

The people of Buikwe County requested for a district status which was endorsed by Mukono District Council. Mukono has a population over 784,000 people and it gave the following reasons while supporting the creation of Buikwe District. The distance, the size, geographical features are given on page 10. The population of Buikwe is now estimated at over 329,858 people.

The committee met two Members of Parliament from Mukono District, namely hon. Muwulize Norman and hon. Nsubuga who expressed support and assured the committee that the people were eagerly waiting to commence with the new district. The committee therefore has not received any petition against the creation of Buikwe District.

Creation of Buyende District 

The people of Budiope County requested for a district status and this was endorsed by Kamuli District Council. According to the 2002 housing and population census, Kamuli District has a population of over 707,332 people. The justification was given. The furthest sub-county is Kidera sub-county in Budiope County and it is over 135kms from Kamuli District headquarters. So, services are very difficult to render and effective administration is also a problem. The size, geographical features and the population are given; Budiope County has a population of over 210,221 people.

The committee did not receive any petition against the creation of Buyende District. The late Member of Parliament for Budiope County expressed support and assured the committee that there were no disputes. 

Creation of Maracha District 

Parliament on 20 July 2005 approved the creation of a district consisting of two counties, namely Maracha and Terego, which was supposed to commence on 1 July 2006.  However, the two counties failed to agree on the location of the district headquarters and therefore a district could not commence as required. 

In January 2007, the then Minister of Local Government declared Nyadri of Maracha as district headquarters. The hon. Member of Parliament for Terego filed an application for judicial review at the High Court. He also sought an order that the matter of the location of the district headquarters be remitted to the councillors of the two counties for a decision. After court heard the application, it ruled on 27 March 2009 that the decision of the Minister for Local Government declaring Nyadri trading centre as district headquarters be squashed and prohibited from taking effect. Court also remitted the matter of choosing the district headquarters to the councillors at LC IV of the two counties.

The Minister of Local Government was dissatisfied with the court ruling and he lodged an appeal in the Court of Appeal and obtained an interim order, that is, Court of Appeal Civil Application No. 40 of 2009 arising from Civil Application No. 39/09. This interim order is still subsisting and the appeal is pending the hearing of the Court of Appeal. 

In the motion moved on 11 November 2009 for creation of new districts, the Ministry of Local Government requested Parliament to approve the creation of Maracha District as requested by the people of Maracha County and also alter the boundaries of Arua District to include Terego County.

The committee met the Members of Parliament for Maracha and Terego counties and the woman Member of Parliament for Arua District. During the meeting, it was concluded that politics had caused confusion, thereby making it difficult for the two counties to form one district. 

The woman member of Arua informed the committee that Arua District was not willing to allow Terego join Arua since they had got their own district with Maracha. The committee therefore noted with concern the new district for Maracha and Terego counties had failed to take off and matters pertaining to the proposed district were being administered at Arua since 2006. It was the considered view of the committee that Government should consider granting each county a district status to avoid the impasse. Since Government has asked Parliament to approve the creation of Maracha District following the request of the people of Maracha County, it should also consider Terego for a district when requested, therefore, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the creation of Maracha district and urges Government to consider the creation of Terego district later when requested by the people. Terego County will, therefore, continue being administered by Arua District.

Creation of Namayingo district

In 2005, the people of Bukhooli South constituency requested for a district status to be called Namayingo with its headquarters at Namayingo trading centre. Bukhooli County in Bugiri District comprises of three constituencies and according to the 2002 Population and Housing Census, Bugiri District has a population of 412,395 people. 

On page 14, the council gave the justification as to why they supported the creation of Namayingo, which was basically to enhance service delivery and effective administration. They have also given distance as justification as well as the big size of the constituency, geographical features and that Bukhooli South constituency has a population of 145,451 people.

On page 15, the committee did not receive any petition against the creation of Namayingo district and the Members of Parliament for Bugiri District assured the committee that there were no disputes and that the people of Bukhooli South were eagerly waiting to start operations.

Creation of Luuka district

The people of Luuka requested for district status, which was supported by Iganga District Council. The justification is given, and one is size where Iganga is a big district and it finds difficulty in rendering services and also providing effective administration. The distance from Iganga is also cited where the farthest sub county of Bukooma is over 70 kilometres from Iganga’s headquarters.

Population 

Luuka County has a population of 156,891 people. The Member of Parliament for Luuka County informed the committee that the headquarters for the proposed district will be at Kiyunga trading centre and that there were no disputes. 

He concurred with the observations raised over the name and location of the new district and did submit that his people were in agreement that the new district to be created out of Luuka county be named Kiyunga. Therefore, the motion will be amended to cater for the change in the name of the proposed district from Luuka to Kiyunga.

Creation of Kiryandongo district

The people of Kibanda requested for district status to be called Kiryandongo with its headquarters at Kiryandongo trading centre. Masindi District Council supported the request and their justification includes the size; that Masindi is too big and they find difficulty in rendering services and offering effective administration. The furthest sub county of Mutunda is 90 kilometres away from Masindi headquarters and the population of Masindi is 396,127 people. The new district of Kiryandongo has a population of 270,500 people.

On page 17, we have indicated economic activities, education and health services. The committee did not receive any petition against the creation of Kiryandongo district. The members of Parliament for Masindi District expressed support and assured the committee that there were no conflicts. 

The committee visited Kiryandongo and met the local leaders who confirmed readiness to start the new district and requested that the new district be allowed to commence this financial year.

Creation of Ntoroko district out of Bundibugyo

In June 2005, the people of Ntoroko County requested for the creation of a new district called Ntoroko district to be carved out of Bundibugyo. Bundibugyo district council endorsed the request and gave the following justifications: size, geographical features and the distance from Bundibugyo headquarters.

The people of Karugutu sub-county however petitioned Parliament strongly proposing that the headquarters of Ntoroko district should be at Karugutu and not Rwebisengo. The committee requested the Ministry of Local Government to meet the local leaders to iron out the disputes relating to location of the headquarters wherever they had occurred. 

The committee was later informed that the local leaders, area Members of Parliament and the minister handled the dispute and agreed to have the district headquarters located at Kibuuku. The committee visited Ntoroko County and held a meeting at Kibuuku, the new identified site for this headquarters. During the meeting, the chairman LC V Bundibugyo confirmed that stakeholders agreed on Kibuuku as the location for the district headquarters of Ntoroko.

The committee further learnt that His Excellency the President had also advised that a neutral place, which is not Rwebisengo or Karugutu be identified to accommodate the headquarters. Kibuuku was agreed upon because of its centrality; it is 12 kilometres from Rwebisengo and 13 kilometres from Karugutu.

During the meeting at Kibuuku, the leaders of Karugutu sub-county once again insisted that the headquarters of the new district be at Karugutu. The committee advised them that if they are not happy with Kibuuku then they can identify another area, which is not Karugutu or Rwebisengo and discuss the matter with the other stakeholders including the leadership of Bundibugyo district.

To date, no alternative site other than Kibuuku has been identified, agreed to and communicated to the committee. The committee therefore has Kibuuku as the site for the district headquarters of the new district to be created out of Ntoroko County in Bundibugyo District.

Creation of Serere district out of Soroti

The people of Serere and Kasilo counties requested for a new district to be called Serere, which was to be created by altering the boundaries of the present Soroti District. The reasons were given as indicated on page 20 where they mentioned size, geographical features where they said it is located at the lake shores and gives the distance from the district headquarters of Soroti to Serere and Kasilo.  

The population of Serere and Kasilo counties was 178,425 by 2005. On that page, we also give the economic activities and they are basically agriculturalists.

On page 21, we are reporting that the committee received a petition from Kasilo County Member of Parliament seeking to have Kamod township as an alternative to Serere Township for the headquarters of the new district.

The committee was also informed that the Teso Parliamentary Group met on 6 July 2009 and discussed the proposed Serere district and concurred as follows:
i) 	They found that all the maps showed Kamod Township as being more central compared to Serere Township.
ii) 	Serere Township is just 17 miles from Soroti town and the distance from Serere Township to the furthest parts of Kamod County, that is Kagwara and Mulondo, is over 45km.
iii) 	Kasilo has enough land for proper planning of district town headquarters and future expansion.
iv) 	The group objectively found merit in granting Serere and Kasilo counties a district status with Kamod Township as its headquarters. 
v) 	They proposed that Serere Township be elevated to town council status. 

The committee visited Serere and Kasilo counties and held meetings with the local leaders and residents. The committee established the following:
i) 	Serere is ready for district status with enough land and infrastructure where the district headquarters was proposed to be located.
ii) 	The local leaders from both counties supported the creation of Serere district with its headquarters at Serere Township.
iii)	Representatives from Kasilo County requested that the county be granted a district status later because it also qualifies.

 Creation of Gomba district from Mpigi district  
A request was received from the people of Gomba County in Mpigi District seeking district status. The county comprises Maddu, Kabulasoke, Kyegonza and Mpenja sub-counties. It has a population of 143,900.

Mpigi District Council recommended the request giving the following reasons -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR YIGA: (a) Long distance travelled by the local communities to Mpigi District headquarters.
(b) Lack of adequate services to Gomba County from Mpigi District.
(c) The need to increase closer mobilisation of the local communities for development. 
(d) Gomba County is remote and undeveloped, therefore, granting it a district status would help take development to the area.

The Member of Parliament for Gomba County informed the committee that the headquarters of the new district would be at Kanoni trading centre and the people were eager to see this implemented.

Creation of Kalungu district from Masaka District –(Interruption)- a request was received from the people of Kalungu in Masaka District for the creation of Kalungu District to be curved out of Masaka. Kalungu has four sub-counties, one town council and a population of over 250,000 people. The following reasons were given to justify the request:

i) 	Masaka is too big with 24 sub-counties and one municipality and a population of over one million people. We have continued to show the economic activities on page 22.
ii) 	Page 23 shows that economic activities are poor in Kalungu County.
iii) 	The health services are also poor and even poverty eradication programmes are yet to take a firm root in the county.

The committee was informed by the Minister of Local Government that the people of Bukomansimbi County had requested to join Kalungu to form Kalungu District. The minister supported this since it will make a new district more viable and increase the population to over 400,000 people.

The request from Bukomansimbi was supported by the members of Parliament from Kalungu and the Woman MP for Masaka. However, the committee learnt that the Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi was opposed to the request.
 
Bukomansimbi County has four sub-counties, namely: Kibinge, Kitanda, Bigasa and Butenga. The leaders of the last three sub-counties submitted a memorandum to the Minister of Local Government on 2 November 2009, copied to the Speaker re-affirming the interest of their people to join Kalungu County to form Kalungu district.

The committee had initially failed to meet the Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi to get his views on the above matter. However, in a letter written to the Minister of Local Government dated, 26 November 2009, copied to the committee, he stated that he was opposed to Bukomansimbi joining Kalungu to form a new district. The MP got an opportunity to meet the committee on 2 December 2009 and emphatically said his people were opposed to joining Kalungu to form the new district.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Kalungu district be created comprising Kalungu County and Bukomansimbi be left under Masaka.

 Creation of Buvuma district from Mukono District-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of procedure?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The report the chairperson of the committee is reading includes aspects concerning Kalungu. From the records of this House, I am sure you have got a copy of a petition from the people of Kalungu. This includes various sub-counties, Lukaya Town Council and Bukulula who are petitioning this House opposing the idea of creating Kalungu –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you allow the chairperson to present his report and then we can debate the merits? Proceed.

MR YIGA: Thank you for your wise ruling.

Creation of Buvuma district from Mukono District

The people of Buvuma Islands requested for creation of Buvuma district from Mukono District. This was supported by the Mukono District Council. Buvuma County comprises four sub-counties, which are all scattered on the islands of Lake Victoria. It has a population of 42,483. The following were given as the reasons to support the request:
i) 	Since Buvuma is a group of islands, it has peculiar problems which Mukono District has failed to solve.
ii) 	The people of Buvuma have to go through Buikwe District to go to Mukono. So it will be a big problem for them in terms of distance to travel through another district in order to go to Mukono for services; education services are also inadequate and the huge size of the current Mukono District was also given as a reason why they want to be more effective and render services. 

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed by the Member of Parliament of Buvuma County that the headquarters of the new district will be at Kitamilo Trading Centre and that the people were very anxious to start operations. 

Creation of Butambala District from Mpigi District

A request was received from the people of Butambala County in Mpigi District seeking for the creation of Butambala District, to be curved out of Mpigi District.  Butambala County has five sub-counties with a population of 93,656 people. The reasons given were: long distances travelled by the people to Mpigi, lack of adequate services and need to increase mobilisation of the local communities.

The Member of Parliament for Butambala County supported the creation of the new district and stressed that it will greatly enhance effective administration and also bring services near the people. He informed the committee that the headquarters of the new district will be at Gombe Trading Centre and that his people were very anxious to start its operation. 

Creation of Bulambuli District from Sironko District   

Madam Speaker, Sironko District Local Council resolved to create Bulambuli district curved out of Sironko and they gave the following reasons as indicated on page 25: 

The population is 180,092 people, service delivery is poor; there is also a problem of security; on page 26 where Bulambuli has a problem from cattle rustlers by the Karimojong and the Zenzansi on Mount Elgon, therefore, a new district will assist them to enhance security in that area.

Madam Speaker, the attention of the committee was drawn to the matter of a long standing land and boundary dispute between Bulambuli County and Kapchorwa District that has existed since independence. The chairperson of Kapchorwa appealed to the committee to hold the creation of Bulambuli district until the Ministry of Lands dissolves the dispute. 

Since the problem has existed for a long time, the committee did not see merit in stopping the creation of a new district. It, therefore, recommends that Bulambuli district be created and the Ministry of Lands should proceed to handle the land and boundary dispute following the Colonial demarcations as directed by His Excellency the President. 

Creation of Kyankwanzi district from Kiboga District

People of Kiboga County West requested Government to grant them a district status and the following reasons are actually given for that request: distance, the population is also given as being high; there is a problem of lack of effective administration because Kiboga is too big. 

The proposed headquarters of Kyankwanzi District will be at Butemba, which is strategically centrally located and we continue down there given the economic activities where they also have a problem of water supply. 

Recommendations 

Madam Speaker, the motion tabled before Parliament proposed the creation of new districts in two phases: Those to take effect from 1 July 2009 and those to take effect from 1 July 2010. As a general recommendation, the committee strongly recommends that as far as possible the name of a new district should be the same as the name of the town where its headquarters will be situated. 

Parliament should also be specific on the location of the new district headquarters on approval. This will greatly assist to rule out confusion and misunderstandings afterwards.

The committee noted that there were more requests for creation of new districts that are still with the Ministry of Local Government which are causing a lot of anxiety to the people. The requests are from Buhweju, Sheema, Ngora, Kween, Kole, Matheniko, Kapelebyong and Kibuuku counties. 

To this, the Minister of Local Government informed the committee that Cabinet had not yet taken decision over them. The committee, therefore, recommends that as the country nears elections, let the creation of new districts be cleared by the end of December 2009 so that the Electoral Commission can have ample time to plan for the 2011 elections. 

The committee, therefore, accordingly recommends that Parliament approves the creation of new districts as per the motion moved by the minister as follows: 

(a) 	New districts to take effect from 1 July 2009: 
i)	Zumbo district, currently part of Nebbi District consisting of Okoro County, with its headquarters at Zumbo Trading Centre. 
ii)	 Amudat district currently part of Nakapiripirit District consisting of Upe County with its headquarters at Amudat Trading Centre. 
iii)	Otuke district currently part of Lira District consisting of Otuke County with its headquarters at Otuke Trading Centre. [Mr Omara Atubo: “Aye.”] (Laughter)
iv)	Lamwo district currently part of Kitgum District consisting of Lamwo County with its headquarters at Lamwo. 
v)	Kyegegwa district currently part of Kyenjojo District consisting of Kyaka County with its headquarters at Kyegegwa Trading Centre.
vi)	Buikwe district currently part of Mukono District consisting of Buikwe County with its headquarters at Buikwe Trading Centre. 
vii)	Buyende district currently part of Kamuli District consisting of Budiope County with its headquarters at Buyende Trading Centre. [Hon. Members: “Aye.”] 
viii)	Maracha District consisting of Maracha County with its headquarters at Maracha.

(b)	New districts to take effect from 1 July 2010:
i)	Namayingo district currently part of Bugiri District consisting of Bukooli South Constituency with its headquarters at Namayingo Trading Centre.
ii)	Kiyunga district currently part of Iganga District consisting of Luuka County with its headquarters at Kiyunga Trading Centre. 
iii)	Kiryandongo district currently part of Masindi District consisting of Kibanda County with its headquarters at Kiryandongo Town. 
iv)	Ntoroko district currently part of Bundibugyo District consisting of Ntoroko County with its headquarters at Kibuuku.
v)	Serere district currently part of Soroti District consisting of Kasilo and Serere counties with its headquarters at Serere Trading Centre.  
vi)	Alebtong district currently part of Lira District consisting of Moroto County with its headquarters at Alebtong Trading Centre. 
vii)	Gomba district currently part of Mpigi District consisting of Gomba County with its headquarters at Kanoni County. 
viii)	Kalungu district currently part of Masaka District consisting of Kalungu County with its headquarters at Kalungu Town Board.
ix)	Buvuma district currently part of Mukono District consisting of Buvuma County with its headquarters at Kitamilo Trading Centre. 
x)	Butambala district currently part of Mpigi District consisting of Butambala County with its headquarters at Gombe Trading Centre. 
xi)	Bulambuli district currently part of Sironko District consisting of Bulambuli County with its headquarters at Muyembe Trading Centre; and lastly
xii)	Kyankwanzi district currently part of Kiboga District consisting of Kiboga County West Constituency with its headquarters at Butemba Trading Centre.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report.  (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank you, honourable chairperson and your committee for this task which has taken so long. As you will appreciate many of the districts were requested for long ago and I think we need to conclude the process. 

I also want to know from the Minister of Local Government because in the past we have really harangued the Electoral Commission for failing to do work in time. I want to know from you as to when you will bring the last batch of districts so that we can assist the Electoral Commission to plan better? I want to hear you before we begin this debate. When is the last batch of districts coming so that we can help the country to plan?

4.32
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): As you know, there are various fora that are involved in the creation of districts and one of the prime fora is cabinet. We are going to do everything possible so that the last batch of districts is considered in a matter that will not interfere with the electoral cycle. We are in close touch with the Electoral Commission and we are going do everything possible to expedite the process so that the creation of local governments is completed as soon as possible. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you for granting me an opportunity. I stand up on a point of procedure. You recall that the people of Tororo started demanding for a district at the time the country had about 50 districts. As we speak today, I really have no problem in having these districts approved – we shall have over 100 and something districts. This Parliament in May 2005 recommended to Government that a motion be brought here to create Kisoko and Mukujju districts and the report was unanimously adopted. 

The Clerk to Parliament, Mr Tandekwire wrote to the Minister of Local Government informing the minister about Parliament’s position on the creation of Kisoko and Mukujju districts. Cabinet chaired by Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, sat and passed the creation of Kisoko and Mukujju districts. The minister came to this Floor and violating the rules of procedure, decided to amend his motion, which was not seconded or approved by this House and removed Kisoko and Mukujju. 

I want to refer you to rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure and after that, I beg that the amended motion of the minister be ignored so that Kisoko and Mukujju be included as part of the districts today. I am seeking for your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I should hear from the mover of the motion. 

MR MWESIGE: I did move the motion for the creation of new districts including Mukujju and Kisoko. After the motion was moved, it was referred to the committee of Parliament. Leaders from Tororo District as it is today started arguing and counter arguing over the spilt of Tororo District. Government could not ignore the tension that was emerging in that area and we started consulting the two conflicting parties in Tororo. 

The consultative process is not complete and it would not have been prudent for me to continue with the motion when Government is still consulting the leaders of Mukujju and Kisoko. That is why I returned to this House with an amended motion in accordance with the rules, with the leave of the Speaker and moved the amended motion. 

The honourable member did not contest – you did not contest this motion and that is why it was referred to the committee. The committee report is based on my amended motion and, therefore, I do not see the reason why the honourable member is questioning the amended motion.

MR EKANYA: I contested and hon. Edward Ssekandi – the Hansard is very clear – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what was the ruling because I was not here? When you contested, what did the House decide? 

MR EKANYA: I contested that the minister’s action was a violation of our Rules of Procedure.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the ruling of the Speaker?

MR EKANYA: The Speaker said that the committee should look at the matter and then bring a report –(Interjections)– and in this report there is nothing that the committee has said and has even contradicted itself when it comes to Bukomansimbi. It says here that the Member of Parliament of the area objected but the MP for Tororo Municipality, hon. Sanjay Tanna and I want the district. It is other people who are not part of Tororo Municipality and Tororo County who are objecting. So, I find a big contradiction in Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the chairperson explain what transpired? 

4.39
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): It is not true that we have not commented on the issue of Tororo. Actually we have made mention on page 2 – “… in the amended motion, the creation of two districts out of Tororo County, namely, Mukujju and Kisoko was not included and the honourable minister informed Parliament that he had withdrawn the matter to allow Government carry out further consultations.” 

Also during that time, the Speaker advised members who had any matters concerning districts to go to the committee and we invited hon. Ekanya in writing but he was very busy and did not come. So what could we do? 

MR EKANYA: Order! (Laughter) Is the chairperson of the committee, hon. Yiga, in order to state that I did not have a meeting with him? I went to his office and had a meeting with him where I presented –(Interjections)- the position because on Wednesday, the day he had invited me, I was not in good health. But I presented the position which I had stated in this House. Is he, therefore, in order for him to say that I never appeared? I presented the position and told him, “This is the position which you should take to the committee.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately I do not get the minutes of your private meetings and therefore do not know whether you met or not. Let us just debate.

MR WADRI: I rise on a point of procedure – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, I think there is information on Tororo. Please, hold a bit and let us hear information on Tororo. 

4.41
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I just wanted to make a very clear statement to supplement what the ministers said on the creation of a new district in Tororo. 

First and foremost, I want to restate the commitment of the NRM Government to the creation of a new district for Tororo County. There is no doubt about it. However, we passed this motion through Cabinet and through the process and brought it here. We realised that we had not done it in accordance with the constitutional requirements in terms of procedure because Tororo is already in the First Schedule of our Constitution and you could not amend the Constitution through that method. Therefore, we need to go back and in compliance with the constitutional requirements, bring that motion back. So, technically, there was no way this, even now, could be debated. 

Secondly, the debate which is going on is not whether a new district for Tororo County should be created or not. The debate is about where the Municipality of Tororo, even after we have taken a decision in accordance with the Constitution, would be located, and which is not going to prejudice the creation of this new district and we expect that in a harmonious way, we will be able to achieve it. Thank you. 

4.43
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. In the first place, I commend Government for having come up with so many districts, and my coming here is in no way to prejudice the position of the district that has been created. However, I have this to say. 

In the report, the committee has intentionally, and I repeat “intentionally” ignored all documents that I tendered when they invited me to appear before them on 19 November 2009. The issue of the people of Terego making requests for district status is in black and white and for your information I can once again lay the documents and correspondences between the people of Terego and the then Minister of Local Government, Maj. Gen (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire. I submitted all those. 

I think it is procedurally unfair for the committee and more particularly the chairman to be very oblivious of the documents which I gave him and the committee in broad day light. If those are lost, I am prepared to tender fresh documents to that effect and I can even read them depending on the dates when the Minister of Local Government corresponded with the people of Terego.

Madam Speaker, allow me to read this letter. The letter is from the Office of the Minister of Local government, P.O Box 7037 Kampala Uganda; it is dated 30 July 2007, addressed to hon. Kassiano E. Wadri, MP Terego County. 

“Subject matter: Proposal of Terego County for a district. I have received your communication dated 23 July 2007 with reference to the captioned matter above. 

As you are aware, the district comprising of Maracha and Terego should have taken off with effect from 1 July 2006. However, the councillors of the two counties had failed to agree on the location of the district headquarters, thereby causing the impasse. 

My letter of 25 January 2007 reference OM/460/01 declaring Nyadri of Maracha as the headquarters was written basing on the technical study carried out by the Ministry of Local Government staff. The decision has been taken in the interest of service delivery to the people of the two counties. 

I note in your submission that among other issues, there exists irreconcilable animosity between the people of the two counties, hence the need to ensure sustainable development. So, the creation of Terego District should be considered as a matter of alternative. 

The purpose of writing to you this letter, therefore, is to propose a meeting with the local leaders of Terego on Thursday, 9 August 2007 for an insightful analysis of the proposed creation of Terego District. Signed,Maj. Gen (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire Minister of Local Government.”

I lay it on the Table. Consequently, the people of Terego met as directed by the minister and this letter is referenced TC/LD/08 2007/1. Terego County Headquarters, C/O P.O Box 664 Arua. The letter is dated, 10 August 2007: 

“Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, (Maj. Gen. (Rtd). The Minister for Local Government, P.O Box 7037 Kampala Uganda

Dear Sir, 
Subject matter: Granting Terego district status. 
We, the leaders of Terego County, gratefully acknowledge receipt of your letter dated, 30 July 2007, reference MC 22 addressed to hon. Wadri E. Kassiano, which was read to us on 9 August 2007 during a consultative meeting held at Ayivu Sub-County headquarters and bring the following to your attention: 
1.	Land size and our wealth. The county occupies 1,162 square kilometres of land. It is a fertile land and produces a lot of wood, food crops and is the leading Tobacco producing county as a cash crop in the West Nile region. 
2.	It also produces a lot of Cotton to supplement income-generating activity and above all, its eastern side bordering Madi County is said to have oil reserves, another source of revenue to the country.
3.	Human resource/labour. The resident population which is without the Sudanese refugees and those who come to request land for temporary cultivation from other counties is well over 159,000 people as of 2002 Housing Population Census results. The recent population density according to the 2002 population size consists of 139 persons per square kilometre hence there is some available land for planning a modern urban town. The county enjoys having the highest number of frank, educated and trained skilled manpower in the region, quite capable of developing the county into a district, the reason for which the county has been able to offer leadership in the greater West Nile region since the colonial days ….” 

It goes on and on, and Madam Speaker, it comes up to say the following:

“You will recall a letter written to the hon. Member of Parliament for Maracha Constituency, hon. Alex Onzima, dated 22 January 2007, referenced NAR/002 MC 07J, in which the people expressed their desire for a district of their own in the names of Maracha District for the inhabitants of Maracha alone before February 2007. 

These two events will help history to judge and help the people of the two counties accordingly. So, in view of all these and those not mentioned here, the 309 leaders who participated in this consultative meeting under minute No.4.

So, in view of all these and those not mentioned here, the 309 leaders who participated in this consultative meeting under minute 4/TD/08/2007 resolved as follows: 
1. 	They accept on behalf of the entire people that Terego County be promoted and granted district status on its own by Parliament.
2. 	The headquarters of the district be Leju.” 

I wish to lay this on the Table to prove that the people of Terego submitted their request. 

The second issue on which I wish to seek guidance –(Interjection)- please, I am on a point of procedure. You cannot have procedure on top of procedure. 

The second issue on which I seek procedural guidance is, the committee in its own wisdom has made effect to the fact that the respondent in the civil suit petition to the High Court has made an appeal and this matter is still before the Court of Appeal, because the matter is to determine the headquarters to allow the councillors of the two counties to sit as required by the Local Government Act to vote where they want the headquarters to be. 

Now that Maracha County has been granted district status, will it not erode the grounds and the effect of what will come out in the Court of Appeal matter? Isn’t it subjudice? I seek guidance to that effect. 

The third issue is that Maracha and Terego were given district status by the Constitution amendment exercise in 2007. When you go to Schedule One of the said Constitution, District No. 23 provides for creation of a district consisting of the counties of Maracha and Terego and since that time, these two counties have been operating as a district with vote 577. 

Logically, if Maracha is to be granted district status, won’t Terego remain where it had been created by the Constitution? Would it not be unconstitutional for us to go ahead and demand that a district which was created by the constitutional amendment exercise revert to Arua yet it has not been part of Arua for all these year? These are some of the issues on which I seek clarification so that we can go into full debate in this matter. I beg your advice, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are the respondent in this matter. What is the matter that is before the Court of Appeal? 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, when the district of Maracha and Terego counties was created by this House in 2005, it was controversial and that is why Parliament itself did not give it a name –(Interjection)– yes, even in the Schedule to the Constitution, the district is referred to as a district comprising of the counties of Maracha and Terego. Parliament did not name it. 

Secondly, Parliament did not determine the headquarters of this district. My predecessor, the Minister of Local Government attempted to declare the headquarters of this district at Nyadri. That declaration was challenged in court and in its wisdom, the court ruled that the Electoral Commission should organise elections of the Interim Council of Maracha-Terego in order for the council to determine the headquarters of the district. 

Government did not agree with that decision because we feel that the power to create districts, name districts and by extension the headquarters of districts, lies with Parliament. The appeal is still pending in court. The issue in court is whether the district council of any district, let alone an interim council, has power to determine the headquarters of a district or not. 

The issue before court is not whether Maracha-Terego can be divided or whether the boundaries of Maracha-Terego District can be altered. The case before this House must be distinguished from what is before court -(Interjections)– I am making my submission; you will have your chance to make your submission. 

Under rule 60, the subjudice rule is not an automatic bar to this Parliament to consider issues pending before the courts of law and that is why the rule gives the discretion to the Speaker, having regard to the facts before court, to decide whether the matter is subjudice or not and I am here to invite you, Madam Speaker, to allow this matter to be entertained by this House because the issues before court have no bearing to the motion before this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, the matter which went to court was the two counties of Terego and Maracha. By seeking to remove one, you are altering the subject matter of the suit. Those two were taken to court and if you remove one, you will actually be interfering with the suit. 

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, perhaps if you want we can adduce the court documents here. The issue before court is whether a district council, and it is a matter of principle, can determine the headquarters of a district. It is not whether a district can be divided or not and, therefore, that is why I am saying that the court case pending cannot tie the constitutional power of this Parliament to alter and create new districts. That is my view. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Procedurally, it has been that when a motion comes, a district is read one by one and if someone contests what is read is when we can discuss it; but from the way we are progressing, there are districts that do not have any problems. That is how we did it last time; they would read a district and you would say “Aye” or “Nay” and move on. So, isn’t it procedurally right that we follow that and the districts that have problems can be referred to the committee? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware that there are districts which have no disputes but there are also these which have disputes. Why don’t we debate those which have disputes and then proceed to vote? Also, I want to remind you that we require more than half of the members here to create a new district, which we do not have yet. 

5.00
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am a person who loves peace -(Laughter)- and peace everywhere including West Nile between the people of Terego County and Maracha County. On the basis of that background, I have the following:

1. 	I support the creation of Maracha district.

2. 	I support the creation of Terego district. I see no point in objecting to the creation of Terego district. This is my opinion and as a Member of Parliament, I am entitled to giving you my opinion.

3. 	Terego and Maracha people have all followed the procedural matters required to request for a district. What I see here is a hidden agenda to destroy West Nile through creation of internal conflicts. This is an idea of perpetuating conflicts between Maracha and Terego. I, therefore, say -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO: Madam Speaker, is the speaker holding the Floor in order to allege that there is a hidden agenda to destroy West Nile by creating confusion and hatred between Maracha and Terego when actually as Government we are trying to help and solve the conflicts between Maracha and Terego? We have tried our best to see how Terego and Maracha can co-exist harmoniously. Instead, it is them who are trying not to live together. Is he in order to say that Government has a hidden agenda to destroy West Nile? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the government attempted to take services closer to both Maracha and Terego and having done that, the conflict came from there about the location. It is the people who brought the conflict back to the government.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for your wise guidance. I would like to take a very short time and conclude on this matter with a request. We have a lot of issues of development that are pending. We should not waste a lot of time on such clear things which are even obvious to a person who uses the principles of common sense. Terego should be given her district status; Maracha should be given the district status here and now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lets us hear from hon. Abia. Let us finish with Arua and then we shall go to the other areas.

5.04
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. This House may wish to know that Terego and Maracha counties have a historical bond but because of politics at play and a dirty one, that is why there has been this conflict.

Before I talk, let me just show you what we are talking about using the map of Arua District and where these counties are. I beg hon. Fungaroo that you help me so that hon. Adolf Mwesige sees this as well.

This is Arua District (Laughter) Do not cross. Come closer this way so that I may show, Madam Speaker. This dot is Nyadri and this is Kubala where Terego said the headquarters should be but the last boundary of Terego from Nyadri here is as far as here. It is 56 miles. If you take the furthest boundary of Nyadri, you have this. Nyadri is as small as this, then Terego is here. By simple implication, the people of Terego are not asking that much.

Today, as I speak here, my heart is very heavy for one thing. Not so long ago, we met as the West Nile Parliamentary Forum with the Head of State of this country in the names of President Museveni in State House.

The people of West Nile though their representatives asked for one thing: that for peace to reign in the two counties, we should split the two counties into districts. What happened in that meeting was when hon. Mavenjina asked the President to prevail over this, the President explicitly said this and I beg to quote. “Why should I reward Kassiano who has not seen the light?” This is where and when we say, this is sincere politics other than service to the people.

When the President remarked like that I said this, “Mr President, if you have two prodigal sons and one of them returns to confess to you and the one in the wilderness still carries your blood”. He just did not say anything more but said “This will be sorted out”. The MPs from the West Nile region were present. This matter has been here since this district was created and if there was willingness on the part of Government to ensure that this district takes off, it would have resolved this matter ages ago. 

Now what we are seeing is that when there are changes in colour in terms of political achievement for the NRM regime, a district will be created. Why is it therefore, Madam Speaker, that Bududa and Manafwa were split and Terego and Maracha continue to exist as a problem to this country? It is the for the simple reason that Terego and Maracha counties have been the bedrock of opposition in West Nile and therefore this is just the ordinary game of divide and rule - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this House may wish to know that when we were on the tour of the West Nile region with my brother Kassiano and our party president -(Interjections)- Kassiano and I reached Nyadri and while we were there, they almost started stoning us for the simple reason that our ancestry is in Terego. Therefore, the lack of the executive powers there be in this country to resolve this problem is a sincere commitment to the entire hatred for the people of Terego and a personal vendetta against Kassiano because he does not believe in the current regime.

Madam speaker, I have presented to you and to this House this map. If hon. Adolf Mwesige was serious enough, having tendered in all the documents from his predecessors, there would be no reason to say and stand here and proclaim Maracha district at the expense of the people of Terego. But because we have an agonising interest in self promotion against the interest of service to the people of Terego, today he stands here, together with the chairman to whom I had displayed this map, to pronounce a district called Maracha and none of Terego.

Let me inform you that the people of Arua District are explicitly saying this -(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I would not like to distract the hon. Member of Parliament but it is as if she is taking us into a personal war. (Laughter) We are here to discuss districts but she is now discussing hon. Kassiano Wadri and honourable somebody. (Laughter) Is she in order to derail Parliament on personal issues? We are discussing districts here. Is she in order to distract Parliament with personal wars?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abia, the reason I gave you the Floor was because you represent all of them. Can you tell us what the people want instead of engaging in this conflict?

MS BAKO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I talk with this explicit passion because this matters to me and it matters to the people of the two -(Interjections)- but at times death can be unfair. 

Anyway, the people of Arua District are not ready to welcome Terego back and if it is not our choice, we shall therefore ask one question: If districts are created in essence to take services closer to the people, why does it become an extraordinary issue for Government to take services closer to the people of Terego who are currently 200,000 in number and holding over seven sub-counties at the moment? It is simple. Give Terego a district and give Maracha a district and we shall be in peace. 

But as long as you want to stay the current state and impose the people of Terego back onto the people of Arua we shall understand that there is a historical vendetta by the NRM regime against the people of Arua District. And we shall have no excuse but to remind the powers that be that on the next leg of your visit to the region, we would have explained to the people what this actually means. Because some of the districts you are creating are actually even three times far smaller than Terego. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you but at an appropriate moment we might have to move a motion to either stay the current situation until a court matter is resolved or that Government gives us two districts. I thank you.

5.15
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened quite carefully when the Member of Parliament for either Kinkizi East or Kinkizi West was speaking and he raised a constitutional argument when explaining Tororo-Mukujju district. The facts seem to be a bit similar with this one. 

In my hands here is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. In the first schedule containing the districts of Uganda numbering 75, the 23rd district is that one comprising Maracha-Terego District -(Interjections)- yes, but a district and it is the 23rd district of West Nile in the Constitution. 

So, the clarification I am seeking either from the hon. Amama Mbabazi or the Minister in charge of Local Government, or the Attorney-General for this matter - unfortunately he is not here - is that can we have an interpretation of this, whether the argument as advanced by hon. Amama Mbabazi is not the same legal argument as advanced by the people of Maracha-Terego?

Secondly, for the last three financial years, this House has been voting monies for Terego-Maracha District. So if there was no district, where was this money going? Has it been a ghost district because we have been voting money in this House to go to this district? How can the minister, my learned friend, now say, “Actually there is no such district”, when we have been voting money to this district -(Interruption)

5.18
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to hon. Katuntu’s voice. This Parliament approved the district of Maracha and Terego. We approved it here. Now you have made Maracha a district, automatically the other also becomes a district because it was a district for two counties; we voted money every year. Now you have separated one from the other, logically one remains a district so we should not waste a lot of time here. 

For example we had Mbarara District and as soon as Isingiro became a district and Ibanda, Kiruhura became districts, automatically Mbarara remained a district. Why do we have to have double standards? I appeal to people to be fair. Let us not cause a lot of confusion; let Maracha and Terego be independent districts and we move on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Local Government, in the Constitution, as amended by Act, No. 1 of 2005 and Act No.21 of 2005, I see here Terego and Maracha. It is here. 

5.19
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Of course I recognise that a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties is in the schedule of the Constitution. There is no doubt about that and you can see the nomenclature of that district is different from others. The other districts are called Tororo, Kabalore, Soroti, Masindi and others. This district, unlike others, is referred to as the district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties.

There was a reason for that difference; one of the reasons is that Parliament, because of the controversy, failed to get a definite name for this district. Now what did we do? (Interjection) I gave you time to make your submission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked the minister to explain because I want to understand. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I painfully raise on this point and the honourable minister should excuse me and know that I do not want to disrupt his submissions. I need to bring this to his attention: when he says that the only district in those terms is Maracha-Terego, which is district No. 23, I would like to refer him to district No. 62 and district No. 28. District No. 28 is the district comprising of Buliisa County. District No. 62 is a district comprising of Dokolo County. So is the minister in order to say that actually it is only No. 23 that refers to a district comprising of a county or counties?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it seems to me that if you remove Maracha and create a district, under this Constitution we have no authority to revert Terego to Arua. 

MR MWESIGE: With due respect, Madam Speaker, I do not share your view for the following reasons. Article 179 -(Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: My colleague minister is a lawyer and he has been in this Parliament for a long time. It is clear in our Rules of Procedure that if you want to challenge the decision of the Speaker, you move a substantive motion and therefore is the hon. Minister in order to challenge the decision of the Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think I am really questioning the power you have to simply move Terego out of West Nile into Arua without a constitutional amendment.

MR MWESIGE: If I can be given the opportunity to explain myself it would be better. Article 179 of the Constitution allows this Parliament to create new districts and that is what we have done for Maracha -(Interjections)- why are you afraid of arguments? Civility demands that you listen to those you do not agree with. 

The same Constitution allows Parliament to alter the boundaries of a district; you alter by addition or subtraction. There is nothing unconstitutional as far as I am concerned in altering the boundaries of Arua to incorporate Terego County, and therefore my submission is that my motion is not unconstitutional. Those who are aggrieved can test it in the Constitutional Court but this Parliament has the power to alter the boundaries of even the remaining part of Maracha-Terego to take part of it to Arua; it would be within the powers of this Parliament to do it.

MR KATUNTU: I think this is no longer a time where we raise legal arguments for the sake of arguing. It has been the practice sometimes of the Front Bench when defeated with an argument, to say, “Those who don’t agree with us should go to court”. Why should one go to court to waste time and resources on a very clear legal matter like this? There is no contradiction and in fact this very argument we are raising was raised by a senior minister a few minutes before. It would have been better for hon. Mwesige to reconcile his legal arguments with that of hon. Amama Mbabazi before he refers us to court otherwise he should have referred hon. Mbabazi to court first.

I suggest this as the way forward. Can we have this matter referred to the Office of the Attorney-General and we have a clear interpretation on record rather than having two ministers giving conflicting legal positions, which some of us actually –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. I thank my honourable colleague, hon. Katuntu for giving way. I don’t see that – if hon. Ekanya could listen also - Madam Speaker, we all know that when we create districts the creation process is completed by the resolution of Parliament but it is possible that this Parliament can pass a resolution to create a district and the district does not take off. Why? Because administration becomes impossible and that is why under Article 202, those who promulgated that Constitution – the principle is that where administration becomes impossible in a district for instance, it is a ground for intervention by the President.

The point I am making is that it is possible for this Parliament to make a resolution for the creation of a district and that district does not take off because they have not complied with other requirements for a district to exist; for instance that you must have a district administration, a district council - I wish I was listened to and hon. Ssekikubo obviously should listen more because he may learn a few things from this. 

Therefore, when we create a district by resolution of Parliament that in itself is not enough for you to say there is a district. That is why we created Maracha-Terego in 2005 to become effective in 2006 and here we are in 2009 and we don’t have that district. Up to this moment, the budget we pass is actually sent to Arua as this place is administered from Arua. That is why Government is asking Parliament, using the powers Parliament has under Article 179, to revisit this issue, alter the boundaries of this entity by creating Maracha and then through the due process create Terego. I don’t see any contradiction and I don’t see why anyone would say that we are up to any mischief of any kind.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I listened to hon. Mbabazi, if he can be gracious enough to listen to me too. First of all and with due respect, Article 202 does not apply under these circumstances. It talks about a different scenario and handles districts that are already in place. It also states in 202(1), (2) and (3), the circumstances under which a President can take over the administration of a district. This is very different from the scenario we have today.

I also expected the hon. Mbabazi to actually explain his earlier argument in regard to Tororo-Mukujju but he is loudly silent about the argument he had already made on the Floor justifying why we could not proceed with Tororo-Mukujju. These are two senior ministers. I do not think we can resolve this problem the way we are proceeding. I am suggesting that we refer this matter to the Attorney-General to get a clear legal opinion and then we debate it. Otherwise, the way it is – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon. Katuntu for giving me the Floor.

Hon. Wadri told us at the onset that this matter is before court. I am sure the Attorney-General is a party to the matter, which is in court and he is defending a position in court. The Minister, hon. Adolf Mwesige, told us that Government was not satisfied with the decision of court and they decided to appeal. Why don’t we leave this matter in the hands of court and let the appellate court make its judgement after which, we return to it at an appropriate time? That would be the proper way to go.

5.36
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I want to put certain records right. On behalf of the people of Maracha, we are sorry as a county to be part of the confusion and wastage of Parliament’s and Government’s time. It is a good intention to take services nearer to the people of Maracha and Terego. However, all these years, in spite Government’s good will, we are just wasting time, discussing a district, which has failed to take off because of our political selfishness. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MR ONZIMA: We are sorry to Government and to Parliament! I want to say without mincing words that the Museveni administration has no intention of creating this district for Maracha and Terego, although it is a common source of confusion. I am surprised that a Member stood up and said that because Maracha and Terego is the stronghold of the Opposition in West Nile, “Government intended to create a district to divide the people.”
 
I want to tell the nation that the opposition in Maracha and Terego against the NRM Government is less than the opposition to NRM in the counties of Nwoya and Kilak, which were previously part of Gulu District. But when Government granted them a district status – have you ever heard the people of Amuru District taking Government to court? Have you seen the type of confusion in Maracha and Terego in Amuru District? What is the problem? Why didn’t the people of Amuru go to court? Certain selfish politicians from Maracha and Terego decided to take Government to court when the opposition in Amuru is stronger than the opposition in Maracha and Terego. So, the government has no intention. It is only the selfishness of the politicians –(Applause)- it is their only creation.

The NRM Government has created so many districts in anti-NRM regions like Teso, Lango and Acholi, but they have never gone to court. So, I want to put that record clear. 

Let me get to the substantive issues. When Government was about to create a district for Maracha and Terego, the people of Terego started playing dirty games and they have continued up to now. When we were here, they wrote a letter to the then Minister of Local Government. There was a meeting, which had a negative motive. They met and claimed it was a meeting of the people of Maracha and Terego and wrote to the then Minister of Local Government, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere. The heading was: “Resolution of Maracha-Terego Consultative Meeting on the Proposed New District.”

When this anonymous document was produced, they sent a copy to hon. Kassiano Wadri, another to the minister and another one to Bakoko Bakoru, the former minister. They never gave me a copy -(Interjections)- I photocopied this one from hon. Arumadri. That was one indication.

The minister rejected this document so they communicated to hon. Kassiano Wadri that they should prepare a better document, which they produced here. And again they addressed this document to the minister and sent two copies to hon. Kassiano Wadri and copied it to Bakoko Bakoru, the former minister but never copied it to me and yet this was a district for the two counties. I got this photocopy from the hon. Wadri, which even on its surface I do not appear – these were again minutes of the joint Maracha/Terego consultative meeting held on 10 July 2001. They were trying to give the impression that the people of Maracha had agreed to shift the district headquarters from Nyadri which is in Maracha to Kubala in hon. Kassiano Wadri’s constituency. So that was once again a bad motive. 

When Parliament had eventually failed to name the district Kubala here, the matter was reverted to Arua District Council. So, Arua District Local Council met and wanted to once again vote and yet they had previously named that district Nyadri but the councillors from Terego walked out and so no voting was done. When the life of that council expired, fresh elections of the current councillors were done and the present council attempted to vote on this issue once again in the presence of the hon. Kassiano Wadri together with the councillors from Terego. They blocked voting in council and said that the only neutral body to determine the district headquarters was the Ministry of Local Government.  

A letter was then written by the Speaker of Arua District Local Council mandating the then Minister of Local Government, hon. Kahinda Otafiire, to help them choose from either Nyadri or Kubala. The hon. Kassiano Wadri and his people were quiet about it. I think they assumed that the Minister of Local Government was going to side with Kubala. So it was until the minister went there that a decision was taken and which was not Kubala that they decided to go to court. So now that is history. 

But now let me inform this august House that on the day the hon. Kahinda Otafiire came to Arua and went to Terego and Maracha and addressed council, this is what the hon. Kassiano Wadri said on the 13 September 2006 in the Arua District Council. If I may quote this document: “He (Kassiano Wadri) accordingly declared that the people of Terego had sent him to inform Arua Council that if Kubala was not a candidate for establishing the headquarters of the new district, they would not be part of the new district but remain in the mother Arua District.” (Applause) This is signed by the Speaker and the Clerk to Council.

One week later, the people of Terego met at Ayivu sub-county headquarters and said this under Min 6/KB/2006: Way forward and resolutions (iv): “Failure to consider Kubala as district headquarters for the new district, the people of Terego would wish to disassociate themselves from the proposed district for Terego and Maracha and instead remain in Arua District.” This is what they said. And it was signed by Mr Donato Mawa, the former LC V Chairman, Arua District. This was sent together with another letter to His Excellency, the President, which I am going to read now and copied to His Excellency, the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and, Madam Speaker, this letter was also copied to you. The Prime Minister also got a copy and the Minister for the Presidency and that of Local Government.

Finally, one day later, the people of Terego wrote to the President: “Your Excellency, if the above suggestions are not possible, the people of Maracha and Terego have lived harmoniously since time immemorial; we would not like to see the issue of a district headquarters being the cause of dividing us. We the people of Terego will, therefore, like to remain under Arua District where services will be more accessible.” Now this was also part of the other letter. So, it was copied to the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of the Presidency, the LC V Chairman Arua, the RDC Arua and I. So all these documents are here; I want to lay them on the Table. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Onzima, did you appear before the committee? 

MR ONZIMA: Yes, I did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you present these documents? 

MR ONZIMA: I presented to the committee; I presented to the Speaker; I presented to the minister; I presented to His Excellency the President and they all have copies of this. 

We the people of Maracha are not against Government granting Terego a district status -(Applause)- but the decision lies with Government. As for us, the people of Maracha, we met the President and because of this confusion, we requested him if Government could grant us a district status which the President blessed and the matter then went to the Ministry of Local Government. The President informed the Minister of Local Government who again presented the matter in Cabinet which Cabinet approved and here we are. What we do not want is some people who think they can use any method, wrong or right to cause trouble – that they can make it impossible for Government to render services for the people of Maracha. We are totally opposed to that. 

I also want to lay on the Table –(Laughter)- I do not care whether you call it yellow to mean NRM but I will also say I am a devoted Roman Catholic and yellow is the colour of the Vatican. (Laughter) Any person looking at the Deputy Speaker and our staff from the Office of the Clerk will see yellow. Are they also NRM? They are not. So, I beg to lay on the Table our petition to His Excellency, the President, to grant Maracha a district status which has brought us to this level. I thank you very much for your time and thank the Members for supporting Maracha. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter of Maracha–Terego is a serious matter dealing with representation. Minister, in my view, this is what we call in law a right of representation and where rights of representation are in court, they take precedence over any other business. Is it possible to ensure that this matter is addressed very expeditiously because they take precedence over everything else in law? Is it possible to have these issues resolved expeditiously because it is their right to be represented where they want? You can apply to court for an expeditious hearing ahead of any other matter even in the court recess. (Applause) Can you request for an expeditious resolution of this matter in the court because you can? Yes, you can request for an expeditious resolution. 

5.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Government can do that and you are absolutely right. As the minister so ably put it, the issue on which Government is seeking pronouncement by the Court of Appeal over the decision of the High Court is whether the district headquarters can be declared and determined by a district council or even in this case, one that does not exist like people who were old members of a district council getting together and making a resolution. That is the only ground and the issue of appeal. The issue is not whether we should have Maracha and Terego as districts or even to create a new district or not. It is simply whether the right lies with Parliament to determine the district and the district headquarters to be named. So the – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the hon. Amama Mbabazi for yielding the Floor. Yes, the issue is whether the district council has that right as said. But it is of what? The subject matter is actually Maracha–Terego district. It is not in the vacuum but about Maracha–Terego district. And today, if somehow that district does not exist, it even renders that suit irrelevant. I do not know why we should run away from court and why we are rushing over this. As the Deputy Speaker says, issues of representation and determining the future of the people – there is a process going on, why do we not give it a chance such that both the people of Maracha and Terego, including the Attorney-General, can subject themselves to the process of law. The point I am trying to make is that the subject matter is Terego-Maracha and it is not in the vacuum.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you my brother, the minister. I want further clarification. I have been standing anxiously wanting to know from the budgetary perspective of how Government is going to move based on the decision, which Parliament is going to take today because I have seen the list of the districts; the first batch which will have budgetary effects from 1 July 2009 and the next one, the following financial year. We are aware that since 2006, Maracha and Terego have been getting a vote. So, I want this clarification and I wish the minister could tell me.
 
I know that Maracha with effect from the financial year in July, they will now get a vote for Maracha District. Where will the vote for Maracha–Terego District go? This is where I have been urging because this is already approved because starting from the next financial year in July, Maracha will be an independent district with a vote. I am just urging that if we could allow that vote which was going to Maracha–Terego to continue administering Terego District –(Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: To clarify on what the hon. Abdu Katuntu said, you know the explanation given by the Minister of Local Government actually gives you the answer because if I may repeat what he said, under Article 179 of the Constitution, this Parliament has the power to alter the boundaries of a district, it has the power to create new districts. Therefore, what Government is asking this Parliament to do is to create the district of Maracha –(Interjections)- wait, I am coming to the question raised by the hon. Cecilia Ogwal although I had in a way responded to that as well. 

Right now, the budget for Maracha–Terego that this Parliament passes is actually administered by Arua because this new district that we created by resolution of 2005 is not functional as it never took off. It does not have a district council; it does not have a functional administration, including a civil service. That is why that district, for instance, does not have a woman district representative in this Parliament. So, it is with this in mind that Government is coming up and saying, “In the case of Maracha, this is what we propose. In the case of Terego, we propose that it remains under the arrangements of Arua administering Terego.” Like I said in the case of Tororo, we really as Government –(Interruption)  

MS BAKO: Thank you, Secretary-General, hon. Amama Mbabazi. I wanted to seek clarification from you sine you are a lawyer by training. This court injunction says, “It is hereby ordered that nothing should be done to implement the minister’s decision to create the new district of Nyadri until the final outcome of the application for judicial review.” And to further put the political interest in this district, an RDC was posted to Nyadri. Now you have a district police commander in Nyadri. Can I seek this clarification from you whether there is nothing political in this despite your explanations? Why is there an RDC and DPC in Nyadri and yet there is this court order that nothing takes place in this district?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Minister. I am satisfied with what has been explained but I want the hon. Minister to clarify to me how the district of Arua has been getting two votes: one for Maracha-Terego and the other one for Arua. I want to know how one district has been managing two votes. I also want to know whether that one vote - now that Maracha is gone with its own vote - which was being managed by Arua, can now be managed by Terego. That is all and I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for accepting clarification. A vote is given where there is an accounting officer. Now you are telling us there is no civil service in Terego and Maracha. Who is now the accounting officer for Terego and Maracha yet Arua has its own accounting officer?

Secondly, there are two different votes and should have two different accounting officers. Does hon. Amama Mbabazi now see the need that every county is now yearning for a district? Do you now see the need that it is time to pass a resolution that all counties become districts because it will mean every county will have two Members of Parliament, local government administration, an RDC and a DPC. Will we not create employment? Don’t you see that? (Laughter)  

MS ALASO: I thank you very much, hon. Amama Mbabazi. I am seeking clarification. When Maracha-Terego was created, I imagined that there was a council resolution as provided or as required by the Local Government Act so that Parliament moved on that basis to alter the boundaries of the old Arua District. Now when you ask or come here to say that Parliament should again alter the boundaries of Arua by taking back Terego, do you have a council resolution and not just a question of minutes? You know that what we discuss here does not necessarily amount to a resolution of Parliament. What was discussed in Arua during the council meeting does not necessarily amount to a resolution. Can the Minister of Local Government give to this House a resolution by Maracha-Terego council or by the Arua council asking that Terego be taken back to Arua -(Interjections)– not minutes; I am asking for a resolution of the council. Thank you. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and my friend and colleague from Kanungu, for giving way. I am rising on a point of clarification. From the report, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the creation of Maracha District and urges Government to consider the creation of Terego later, when requested by the people. From the documents laid on Table by hon. Kassiano Wadri, I think it is very clear that there is a request from the people of Terego. So, the clarification I seek from hon. Amama Mbabazi is, what will Government lose if Terego becomes a district of its own? Now that we are convinced that there is a request from the people of Terego and the committee has no problems with Terego becoming a district on its own and there is evidence that the people have requested, through the various documents provided, what would we lose if Maracha and Terego became districts and the rest of Arua remains a district?

MRS BYENKYA: Madam Speaker, just a small piece of information to the House. As many of you are aware, the leadership of Arua is preparing a petition to bring to Parliament and to the respective minister. They are interested in Terego becoming a district; that is the leadership of Arua by the Chairman, Feruwa Andama. So, it is on the way. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I wish to thank my colleagues for raising these important points. I will respond to them quickly. The question of injunctions which my colleague, the Woman Member of Parliament for Arua District raised -(Interjection)- and Terego and Maracha district; yes, this is evidence to prove my point. She is the woman MP for Arua, Terego and Maracha. Okay, this injunction that she read about is the injunction that Government applied for in order to stop a decision of court in the High Court – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. The injunction which has been laid on Table was issued by Justice V. Kagaba in the High Court of Kampala. I have got a document here relating to the injunction. It is dated 14 April 2009 and signed by the registrar and for the last part of it, it is order that –

HON. MEMBERS: Read all of it!

MR WADRI: Okay. “The Republic of Uganda in the Court of Appeal of Uganda at Kampala, Civil Application No. 40 of 2009 arising from Civil Application No. 39 of 2009. 

Hon. Minister of Local Government (Applicant) vs. hon. Kassiano Wadri (Respondent) 

Before His Worship Ruhindi Asaf Ndejje in court; upon hearing Mr Elisa Bafirawala, counsel for applicant, and upon reading the affidavits attached hereto and in the absence of counsel for the respondent, it is ordered that:
1.	An interim order of stay be issued immediately on the following conditions:
a) 	The applicant shall file and serve conference notes in the main application within 20 days of this ruling. 
b) 	The respondent shall reply and serve the applicant within 10 days from the receipt of the conference notes. 
c) 	There shall be a joined conferencing in this court on 26 May 2009 at 10.00 a.m. and thereafter the application shall cause list for hearing.
d) 	For avoidance of doubt, this interim order, unless renewed, shall lapse by 28 May 2009; costs to be in the cause.

	Extracted on the 14th day of April 2009, given under the seal of this court on the 14th day of April 2009 and signed.”

In any case, it expired. Not only that; twice you have not come to court so really, you are the one who appealed. You should even show more interest in this case than myself who is respondent but twice, you have failed to come to court. I lay this document on the Table - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Secretary-General finish and then we take a decision. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am beginning to suspect that some people are trying to stop me from speaking. If I may continue with this question of injunctions - I think in a way hon. Kassiano Wadri has answered it for me because that injunction, on which I obviously was mistaken, was won before the substantive matter was heard. If I may inform you, it was overtaken by the decision of the court substantively. Then there was an appeal and what you have just read was very clear; it was self evident, it was giving a timeframe in which this would apply and after that it lapsed. That is what it means. So, therefore, we are absolutely free. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I know whether this order of Vincent Kagaba has been vacated? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No. but it was an injunction before the substantive hearing. 

Two, I think this was a point raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, which was really the same with that of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Who controls the vote? This Parliament passes a vote every financial year for this new district. Who controls it? I think I had answered that. The problem is that that district never took off, it does not have an administration, it does not have an accounting officer, it does not have a council and therefore all these years, it has been controlled via Arua. [Mr Katuntu: “I am the Chairman of the Local Government Committee.”] You know, I am used to playing by the rules and respecting the Rules of Procedure and that is why when hon. Katuntu asks, I give way but when he gets up, I do not know how to relate to him now.

That is how the vote that we pass in this Parliament is managed. You see, the creation of a district has a certain procedure and as you know, we have always made this point that you cannot create a district by a motion on the Floor of the House unless the Executive has considered it, considered the financial implications and taken a decision on it.

I would like to make a clear statement on Terego. The government is not opposed at all to the aspirations of the people of Terego to have a district of their own. As far as I am concerned, it is a matter of even procedure to make sure that we conform to the procedures we have followed in the creation of these districts.

I would like to support what hon. Alex Onzima said. This government of NRM does not create new districts only in areas where there is overwhelming NRM support. In fact, the evidence is that we have created more districts in areas that we have been voted against than where we are voted for and that is the position.

The committee’s recommendation that Government should consider if Terego wants a district, their desire to have one will have no problems at all just like Tororo County as well. I will take your clarification.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, the way we are debating is like we want to create a new Terego district. The Minister of Local Government came here in 2005 with a certificate of financial implications from the Minister of Finance.

Hon. Adolf Mwesige has come with another certificate of financial implications meaning that we are now creating Vote No. 3 from Arua District. We had Vote I for Arua, Vote 2 for Maracha-Terego and now Vote 3 for Maracha. Is there a procedure that we use to withdraw a district that has been created by this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I asked whether the minister has authority to change what was decided here and is in the Constitution.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nathan Byanyima raised a very pertinent issue which we ignored and did not pursue. There is a case of Mpigi; it has Gomba and Butambala and what remains now is Mpigi. When you sever off the other two former counties into districts, ultimately what you retain is a constituent district on its own.

When we have this matter, how shall we move because Arua is district number 19? When we come to Maracha-Terego, it is district number 23, how shall you conjure up now by this resolution of Parliament, a procedure now to transfer one to another.

In view of that, it is common sense; unless when we sometimes want to go petty but if we really are reasonable, there is no winner or loser in this matter. There are Ugandans expecting services and when you engage more in legal gymnastics - that is why I was really perturbed in the sense that we are setting a precedent, honourable members, we are debating on a matter that is before court by all standards. The more we elongate this debate, is the more worried I get.

We are here to protect this Constitution; there is the separation of powers, we have the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature and now we as Parliament, we are invading the jurisdiction and powers of court. Are we at liberty to proceed in this matter when we are clearly offending the separation of powers and when we are offending the Constitution? And we seem to be agreeable with you sitting in the chair and allowing this scenario which is most unfortunate to proceed in this House. Are we procedural right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since the Minister of Local Government subjected himself to the court, I think he should conclude that court process. (Applause) What we are asking is that you use the principles of the Constitution to ensure an early resolution of this matter even in the court recess. If the court decides on the matter, it will resolve whether we go to Maracha or Terego. Can you please do this in January so that we can resolve this issue? Since you have gone to court, complete your matter in court. No more about Maracha-Terego.

6.27
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would now like to welcome you back from Maracha-Terego and welcome you to Ngora.

In December 2007, the Kumi District Local Council unanimously resolved to create Ngora district out of the present Kumi District.

On the 20 February 2008, we submitted a request for creation of Ngora district to the Minister of Local Government. That request was also accompanied with 27,000 signatures from the people of Ngora in support of the creation of Ngora district. That request was submitted to the Minister of Local Government then hon. Kahinda Otafiire.

However, when I followed it up two weeks later, he claimed he had not seen the original documents so I decided to again take him a photocopy of the request and the 27,000 signatures. When there were changes, in fact hon. Kahinda Otafiire in his comic manner of expression did say that if he had the power, he would even grant it alone. Unfortunately, there is a principle of collective responsibility. 

When the reshuffle took place, I got in touch with hon. Adolf Mwesige, the new Minister for Local Government, who also claimed not to have seen the copies and I personally handed him another set. So, in the Ministry of Local Government there are three sets of the same request for Ngora District.

On 15 August 2008, while at Ngora County headquarters which will be the district headquarters once the district is granted, His Excellency the President, on his tour for the Prosperity-For-All campaign did say - and in fact I am glad that the hon. Minister for the Presidency was in attendance in that meeting - that for as long as all the necessary documentation has been completed, he would follow it up with the Ministry of Local Government to grant Ngora a district.

I have also appeared before the Committee on Local Government and made submissions. In fact I have appeared to the Committee of Local Government and Public Service and I also presented another set of the same request and the 27,000 signatures, and gave strong justification in support of the creation of Ngora District. But I was utterly surprised that in the whole of this report, the committee never made reference to the Member of Parliament for Ngora appearing before it. 

I also would like to report that as Teso Parliamentary Group, we had a meeting with His Excellency the President at State House in April 2009 and among other issues that we discussed was the creation of Ngora, Serere and Tororo districts. The President succinctly said that he had no problems with Serere and Ngora districts but Tororo District, which had a bit of contention over the location of the municipality. We had a long debate with the President in State House over Tororo District but as far as Ngora and Serere are concerned he said he had no problem. 

I also decided to make another personal follow up with His Excellency the President, on 4th June immediately after the delivery of the State of the Nation Address in Parliament -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, if you could protect me from the Information and Guidance Minister. I would like to guide the Minister for Guidance to respect parliamentary procedures. (Laughter) 

His Excellency the President told me that the omission of Ngora District from the list submitted by the Minister of Local Government had also surprised him. He said that he had not attended Cabinet when the Minister of Local Government presented a list to Cabinet. He promised that he would follow it up. The minister later told me that he had submitted a fresh list of new districts to the President and up to now he has not got instructions. He has always said it to me, and he even wrote to me that he has not yet got instructions.

I am surprised that whereas Ngora has all the justifications - in terms of population size, it is actually much bigger than over ten districts that are currently being proposed and when you go to infrastructure - I would not like to get into all the details for lack of time. All the issues justifying Ngora for district status are much bigger than what I even see presented for the other districts that are proposed.

Therefore, I am demanding from the Minister of Local Government and from the Presidency for that matter, to come out clearly because it is not good to just keep people speculating and feeding on hope. I would like the Ministry of Local Government to explicitly state when Ngora District will come aboard. 

Madam Speaker, you asked a question to the Minister of Local Government and I was dissatisfied with the response. You asked him as to when the other districts that are pending will come on board and he said they would try to see how to do it and follow the schedule that would not disorganise the election process. I would like him to state categorically, when we shall have those pending districts because as of now it would give the impression that Ngora District is in abeyance and that is very absurd. I would like to beg the minister to be clear on this. The people of Ngora seriously pray that their request will be granted for the creation of Ngora district. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.36
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Madam Speaker, when the amended motion for the Minister came on the Floor, we raised issues and the Speaker directed that the committee should invite the districts that had raised contentious issues on the Floor. Rightly so, the committee invited me and the people of Kole, Buhweju and Terego. Those were the three districts that the committee invited.

I am dismayed that in the committee report there is no mention of interaction with these three groups of districts that even brought - by the way, personally I brought a group of people from Kole and the Member of Parliament from Buhweju brought a group from Buhweju and that was at our own expense, to appear before the committee. They appeared before the committee and gave justification. I even gave a letter of support from the Lango Parliamentary Group supporting the creation of Kole. The people of Kole came and all the documents were submitted both to the minister and the committee. It is unfortunate that the committee could not make mention of these interactions and issues that arose during those interactions. 

The minister talks about districts that are pending and says that he will bring them on board. The committee also says on page 28, that:  “The committee therefore recommends that as the country nears election time, let matters relating to creation of new districts be cleared by the end of December 2009 so that the Electoral Commission can have ample time to plan for the 2011 election.” We also know that yesterday the minister issued a press release saying that he was stopping the creation of districts. 

But now, in view of what the minister has said, in view of the districts that are pending, in view of the fact that three of us appeared before the committee, in view of the fact that the minister has privately, in office and everywhere assured the three of us, that is, Terego, Kole and Buhweju, that he is handling the matter with the cabinet, I want the minister to explicitly tell us -(Interjections)- ok, I withdraw “privately”. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, since the committee has given a timeline of December 2009 which I agree with, because if Electoral Commission is to organise elections we cannot create new districts next year, can the committee explicitly give a time frame within which a motion can be brought to this Parliament before we break for Christmas recess? Since it is in the committee report we do not need to refer the matter again to the committee. An amended motion just has to come with the names of these districts either tomorrow or the other day and we conclude the matter.

MR ANGIRO: The information I would like to give to the hon. Member of Parliament for Apac is that Erute County North is bordering Lira Municipality, bordering Aruu County, and bordering Omolo County which is Gulu District and boarders Oyam North which is already a district and now bordering Kole which is being discussed.

I was in Lira yesterday and people of Kole County are already applying in Erute County North because I boarder them. They are saying that by 2011 if there is no district in Kole, they are all going to vote in Erute County North and that I should be prepared to welcome them because they have been pleading for a district in vain.

MS BETTY AMONGI: My appeal is that the question of Kole District started in 2005 in the last Parliament, it was moved and the minister then pledged that Kole would come in the subsequent districts. New districts have come and they have been approved and we have not seen Kole coming. It would really be prudent for us to know the criteria for getting a district because we met the criteria and we have gone beyond the criteria by statistics and distance but we are still not having a district.

6.42
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): When I look at page 22 of the report, the committee says that a requested was received from the people of Kalungu County in Masaka District seeking for the creation of Kalungu district to be curved out of Masaka District.

I was earlier on saying that there is a petition from the people of Kalungu and the petition was submitted to the Speaker. I have a copy from the sub-county of Bukulula and Lukaya town council and they are raising pertinent issues.

Some of the issues touch the conduct of the chairperson, unfortunately. This is because the chairperson of the committee comes from that area. I did not want to go into that but the petition is here and I have got a copy. I hail from Kalungu; I am a stakeholder in the area.

I have a copy of a resolution by Lukaya Town Council it is dated 19 November 2009. The resolution of the council is clear that they are opposed to the new district. I have it here and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you are bringing those petitions here; did you appear before the committee with those petitions?
 
MR LUKWAGO: I did not appear before the committee but this is information brought to my attention and I felt duty bound to bring it to the attention of the House.

The other point is why double standards? When you look at all these other areas, they say that district councils passed resolutions, for example, when you come to an area like Kamuli they say that for the creation of Buyende there is a resolution; when you talk about Kiboga there is a resolution; but now in the case of Masaka, where is the resolution of Masaka District Council? It is not there and I have here resolutions from Bukulula.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are really ambushing the House; if you had those petitions you should have taken them to the committee for consideration but now you are bringing them here.

MR YIGA: The motion moved by the Minister of Local Government was made on 11th November and Parliament did give a time frame for the committee to handle the matter. We were given three weeks and those three weeks actually expired on 1st December. The committee did its work and completed in the three weeks which were given.

On 2nd December I wrote to the Speaker and the letter is here. I wrote that, “On 11th November, the Minister of Local Government moved a motion in the House for creation of 20 districts and you did refer the matter to the Sessional Committee of Public Service and Local Government with instructions to handle the matter and produce a report in three weeks. The three weeks expired on 2 December 2009 and I am pleased to inform you that the committee report is ready for presentation to Parliament. I am therefore requesting that you allow time on the Order Paper for the report to be presented on Tuesday, 8 December 2009.”

I went personally and met hon. Edward Ssekandi, I gave him the letter and the report of the committee but he never gave me any petition from Masaka. The rules are very clear how petitions are presented to Parliament. If the Speaker got a petition and never sent it to a relevant committee maybe he handled it himself.

The other way is for the Member to have an item on the Order Paper and present the petition to Parliament. I was expecting hon. Lukwago to present a petition otherwise as far as I am concerned the Speaker has not given us any petition from Masaka.

6.48
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): I think the hon. Member has a habit of ambushing Parliament and Parliament does not work like that. We have properly laid down procedures as how we have to move in Parliament but we must guide you anyway.

Not to do any injustice to any Member, the hon. Member from Bukomansimbi petitioned the Speaker and his petition was sent to the committee chaired by hon. Yiga Anthony. Hon. Lubyayi was given time and even came and gave in his submission. That was why originally when we were presenting our request, it was inclusive of Bukomansimbi but because Bukomansimbi had objected to the creation, being together with Kalungu, it was dropped. 

When the minister was presenting a motion to Parliament, it was exclusive of Bukomansimbi because of its objection. The report is very clear so I don’t know why hon. Erias Lukwago comes and wants these quarrels all the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawiya, you are saying that this only involves the two Kalungus and nobody else?

MR MAWIYA: It is Kalungu alone; four sub-counties and one town council of Lukaya. I represent Kalungu East where Bukulula and Lukaya town council, which he mentions, fall. I brought resolutions of Lukaya T.C, Bukulula and Lwabenge and of all the three, nobody objected. Why at this time unless he has a hidden agenda? Thank you very much.

6.50
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I am just seeking guidance. I, Sauda Namaggwa Mugerwa represent Masaka District and I take it as my constituency. I gave my opinion as far as Kalungu and Bukomansimbi are concerned. I am wondering why my opinion cannot be considered because I really appealed that Bukomansimbi should be taken together with Kalungu. I don’t know whether a woman representative is not a full representative so that we know our position. When can I say something and it is taken as something representative?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mugerwa, I think the minister had a problem in that you and your colleague of Bukomansimbi did not agree on the inclusion.

MS MUGERWA: Where is he? Because I am here to present my position and I don’t see him here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you want Bukomansimbi to go with Kalungu?

MS MUGERWA: Yes, because this is what I have been agitating for and this is what my people want. They have asked me and even petitioned the Speaker about this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister will answer. She says that they want Bukomansimbi to go with Kalungu.

6.52
MR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent Kween County in Kapchorwa District. Kween County did request for elevation to district status. The district council passed a resolution last year in October and on 29th June in your presence, Madam Speaker, and with the Minister in charge of the Presidency at State House, the President gave a go ahead for Kween County to become a district. Hon. Beatrice Wabudeya, you were there. We had the leadership for Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Amudat districts. The issue why we had gone there was female genital mutilation but we added the issue of Kween to be elevated to district status.

The President accepted and all along the Ministry of Local Government has been saying that they are waiting for feedback from the President. As far as this is concerned and on page 28 the top paragraph, Kween is among those, which are to be cleared and according to the minister, as soon as possible. 

As hon. Amongi said, we need a definite answer on this issue not just as soon as possible. The committee has even recommended that they be cleared by December 2009 so I am requesting that the minister gives a clear answer on this instead of keeping us waiting. That is what I wanted to comment on about Kween.

6.54
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Buhweju, which is part of Bushenyi. Bushenyi is one of the biggest districts and it has never been sub divided since it was created in 1974. Buhweju happens to be part of that area. The people of Bushenyi sent the resolution of the district requesting for the split of Bushenyi District in January 2007. Thereafter, the people of Buhweju and Sheema brought specific petitions to the hon. Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige.

When the first motion was brought in June this year about these districts, I raised the issue on the Floor here and the Speaker sent me to the committee. I appeared before the committee with a delegation from Buhweju. When we were there, we were assured by the minister that Buhweju would be considered in the next batch. My people went hopeful that they would be there in the next batch. 

When he brought the amended motion in November, Buhweju was not there. Again, I raised the issue on the Floor and I would like to thank hon. Betty Amongi for raising the issue concerning Buhweju as well. I raised it on the floor here and the Speaker categorically stated that if it was within his powers, he would have granted Buhweju a district status but that he could not. He referred me to the committee again. 

I again undertook the trouble to bring a delegation from Buhweju, which appeared before the committee the second time but remember that I had also brought the delegation to meet the Minister of Local Government but alas nothing has been decided on this except a promise. As the secretary general has indicated, he says that in giving this, it seems the opposition districts have had more opportunities to get district status and yet Buhweju is overwhelmingly NRM. Does that mean that being a supporter and overwhelmingly supporting NRM is a disadvantage as far as creating districts are concerned?

Our request is that the minister, as my colleagues have requested, becomes specific as to when this decision will be taken so that people can also know because nobody has disputed the reasons that were given for requesting for Buhweju district. For your information, some people who have been to Buhweju have always referred to it as the Karamoja of Ankole and with respect to my friends from Karamoja, this refers to development. So, can I again humbly appeal and request the minister and Government to take the request of these people very seriously and grant them a district status before the elections? Thank you.

6.58
MR SALEH KAMBA (NRM, Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no problem with the creation of the new districts. However, I have a simple observation to make and seek clarification from the Minister of Local Government.
 
The report is very clear that districts will be given the names of their headquarters. That is the principle. But there is a problem when it comes to Ntoroko District. The headquarters for Ntoroko will be called Kibuku, yet we have a gazetted county called Kibuku, which has also submitted a request for a district status. I represent Kibuku County in Pallisa District. I need clarification. We need to clear that confusion.

Kibuku County in Pallisa is among those counties, which have remained unnamed as districts, yet we submitted our request in 2007. All along, the Minister of Local Government has been saying he is handling the matter together with the President. But to date, we have not received any positive response. 

To echo what my colleagues said earlier, I request the Minister of Local Government to at least give us a timeframe within which he will submit the remaining districts to help us ease the tension, anxiety and confusion among the public. Otherwise, we are waiting to hear from the Minister of Local Government. Thank you.

7.00
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the creation of new districts.

I have one question for the honourable minister. Moyo District Council resolved that Obongi becomes a district. On 30 October 2008, the elders from Obongi County met the Minister of Local Government. I expected to see Obongi on the list of districts to be considered in future but it has not even appeared. It puts us politicians in a tricky situation. 

I ask the Minister of Local Government to come up with a list of districts that have not qualified and the reasons why so that we show our people that we have presented our issue and they have failed to get a district status because of technical reasons. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I went to Obongi and they told me they had been waiting for a district status since the Sixth Parliament. We need to look at the records. 

7.03
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true I represent Bubulo West and I have a district. But it is also true that I have full instructions from the people of Bulambuli as Chairman of the Bugisu Parliamentary Group to support the creation of Bulambuli district, which is a big county. It has had a problem, yet it is endowed with natural resources. If it wasn’t for disturbances from our neighbours, the Karimojong – now that administration is coming nearby, it will be easy to keep the Karimojong, who disturb us, at bay so that we can develop. We have fertile soils from Mountain Elgon.
 
I also have a request from the people of Namisindwa for a district. This place borders Kenya. It is a very important area because it is on the gateway to the interior of East Africa. It is a big area; all the way from Mountain Elgon bordering Bududa down to Tororo. It is a highly-productive place. It also has a big population. Its population triples the one of some of these districts, which have been created. It has 11 sub-counties. It is also one of the under-developed areas like Bulambuli. 

If we are creating districts so that areas can grow and if Members have been making requests and have been granted those districts, sometimes it is good to be told why we are getting or not getting. But to say nothing – and what is worrying is that on page 28, a request, which was brought by the former chairperson - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, Bulambuli district is on the list. 

MR BUKENI: I am talking of Namisindwa district, which was presented by the former Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service, duly processed with the minutes of the sub-counties and the district council resolution. Nothing is mentioned. It is not even on the list of those to be granted a district status. This is creating acrimony in the constituency because people think that small areas, small counties and small constituencies  in the neighbourhood have been getting districts while a big constituency with a big population and large land area on our gateway to Kenya  - and we are here talking about the East African Federation – is not being granted a district status. I request the hon. Minister to consider this so that the people of Namisindwa who are very good supporters of the Movement are given a district. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have dealt with the contentious issues. I propose an adjournment now but tomorrow, both sides should have at least 150 Members in total. Please, ensure that Members are present so that we vote on these matters. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.06 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 9 December 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

