Tuesday, 04 December 2007

(Parliament met at 2.25 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you to this rather changed Chamber, but we shall make more improvements. We have cleared that space to see whether we can fit in this Chamber without those extra chairs, so try to squeeze in and see whether we can really use the Chamber as it should be used.  

I want to thank you very much for the befitting welcome you gave to our distinguished visitors, Her Majesty the Queen and his Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, when they made the historic visit to our Parliament. Thank you, very much. (Applause). I want to thank you, the Clerk and his staff, and the contractor who made the renovations, for the change he gave the place especially when we were welcoming Her Majesty the Queen. 

I also want to thank you for all that you have been able to do during the recess, by way of development projects in your constituencies. The Business Committee sat last week and decided that we should try to clear the pending work and then we shall have a break on 20th for the Christmas recess, which will take about one month. I hope you have come with the necessary energy and the commitment to do your best during the three weeks that we shall be here.

We are trying to make adjustments to the Order Paper to allow the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare, Dr Otaala, to make an important statement on a very serious health problem we are facing; that of Ebola and other problems that we have in the country. Also, I shall allow hon. Obua Ogwal to make a very brief statement on another important subject. You are welcome. 

2.31
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance relating to local governance in this country. Right now our local governments are almost at a standstill; they do not have money, yet we recall that when Her Majesty the Queen visited Parliament, our local Government setup was really commended by His Excellency the President. But as we speak, our local governments do not have money. All the sub-counties are almost closed. Actually, the political leadership is almost resigning. So I would like to know what the sector minister is planning to do to alleviate this matter so that our local governments can have funds to operate. I am requesting that the Local Government Minister should update Parliament on what they are trying to do to address this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister answers, I want to inform you that in the gallery we have pupils and teachers from the Uganda Air Force Primary School, found in Entebbe Municipality. The constituency is represented by hon. Kawuma Mohamed. You are welcome to your Parliament. (Applause) I have not been given information on the other guests we have but as soon as I get it, I will introduce you.

2.32
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you well know, local governments used to survive on resources generated by collection of Graduated Tax and other resources in the districts. For the last three years since Graduated Tax was abolished, local governments have survived on stipends from the central Government, known as Graduated Tax Compensation. Unfortunately this year, I think because of some elements of miscalculation in our budgeting, Graduated Tax Compensation was not adequately budgeted for. It is a matter I am trying to iron out with my colleague, the Minister of Finance.

Mr Speaker, as you know, national resources are not in abundance. The hon. Minister of Finance is trying to raise a supplementary to cover this shortfall in the financing of local governments. I wish the Minister of Finance were here to explain what he is trying to do, but that is how far I can go. We are doing our level best to try to redress this otherwise unfortunate situation. Thank you.

2.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the media it was reported that the Chair of the Local Governments Association called for a boycott of the local Government review process. The clarification I want to seek from the minister is whether that boycott is true and whether you have had dialogue with the local governments on the matter?

Secondly, I looked at the list of districts that have been invited for this review process, and I kept wondering what criteria was used to invite the districts because if it is a review of local governments, you either stratify the local governments so that representatives of the various categories of local governments are invited, or you make sure that everybody is there so that their concerns are heard. If I had looked at the list of invitations I would have some very specific objections to make in the category of people who were invited for example from my sub-region. Could you also let us know how that went about?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two other questions related to this. Could you get them and answer all of them at once so that we dispose of them? 

2.36
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under the Local Governments Act, a number of responsibilities were allotted to local governments. Fortunately for the first ten years of decentralisation, local governments have been doing very well. They have actually been upholding the entire plight - and all the wonderful flowers and praises that we have been receiving, simply because of the very little resources being made available to these local governments until very recently when in the last financial year Government decided to abolish the only reliable source of revenue, and that was the Graduated Tax. 

Well, bygones are bygones, but then a commitment was also made by Government from then on to increase VAT by one percent so that this one percent over and above 17 percent will go directly to funding local governments. We all applauded this and we all welcomed this but unfortunately, I do not know what has come to that one percent addition on VAT. As we talk today - my colleague has more or less ably put it - local governments can hardly convene a meeting. Local governments are only relying on receipts of salaries to pass on to the workers. The workers are being paid for no services rendered because operational funds are not there anyway. So, I think it is important that may be the Minister of Local Government –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since this was a question, you can only put questions? 

MR BYARUGABA: I want, therefore, to get further assurance as to whether even this JARD will be taking place given the circumstances under which we are now operating. JARD stands for Joint Annual Review of Decentralisation. Yes, there is that scare; there is that threat that it is being boycotted simply because of this lack of funding. Is it still necessary that we continue with that JARD under the circumstances? 

2.39
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue on the Floor about the problem of funding of local governments. The honourable minister has made a very interesting statement that during the budgeting process, there was an omission - that funds were not provided for which were otherwise being provided for before. I wonder what caused this, because the Budget of the government of Uganda is no longer handled by a few people. All those concerned are involved, and I know that the local governments have been raising their concerns to the ministry. Government sends money to local governments, which they call unconditional grants, but this is not really an unconditional grant, Mr Speaker. It is just basically salary and in some cases it is not enough for some councils! 

It is true, and I was with one of the leaders of the association of local councils, who have said they will not come for this meeting because they have called it a period of mourning, which is very unfortunate. I want to get assurance from the honourable minister as to whether this time around his colleague from the Ministry of Finance is listening to him and is going to provide for money for the local governments to be able to perform? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can now answer those questions, and then we move on to another subject.

2.40
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must express my gratitude to the Leader of the Opposition for raising the issue of invitations. It has been a tradition that when JARD is convened, a number of districts are selected to participate. I am told that not all the districts are invited and it is a policy I would like to reverse, because I do not see why certain districts are invited and others are not. 

As you well know, this is my second year running the department and with effect from this year, I am trying to reverse that position and have every district represented at JARD, because JARD is an annual review of the policy of decentralisation and every district has got its own unique circumstances, which ought to also be brought to the annual review. No district is like any other district; what affects Kaabong is not what affects Kisoro. So, I do not see why anybody brings Kaabong and leaves Kisoro behind because they are geographically different and their needs are different and so is the assessment. So, the policy of positive discrimination is going to stop with effect from this year.

Mr Speaker, I am aware that a percentage was added to VAT as a way of raising resources for compensating local governments over their loss of Graduated Tax, but as you know, Government has priorities. This money was put into the Consolidated Fund and when issues like USE and UPE came -(Interruption)- CHOGM was only yesterday. 

There is electricity; you know we had a shortage of power and we had to go for thermal power. It was unfortunate that there was no water in the lake and we had to go for thermal power. So, this money was diverted for these emergencies and I have been trying my level best to make sure that this money is recovered and put to its proper purpose. That is why I told you that I am working very hard with my colleague the Minister of Finance to ensure that we raise a supplementary to cater for local governments. 

You see, if the local governments do not perform, there is no way the central Government can perform because the local governments are the legs and feet of the rest of the government. So, it is not that we do not know the importance of local governments; we do and we appreciate it but we have got competing priorities and local governments is one of them. 

Like we say in Kiswahili “Kupanga ni kuchaguwa” -(Laughter)- when you are washing yourself you start with the head, then the chest, then you go on until you get to the feet (Laughter) So I want to meet with the district chairpersons and I am sympathetic to their grievances. But you see, the question of lack of Graduated Tax compensation is an internal matter to Uganda and yet JARD involves other people who participate in the financing of the operations of the local governments.

So, I would like to persuade the honourable district chairpersons to ensure that we first of all interface with these foreigners who support our programmes in the local governments and then we can sort out our own internal quarrels after we have interfaced with these others. This does not mean that we do not appreciate the problems the district administrations are facing; we do. But then boycotting will not help them; it is aggravating a situation already bad. So I am going to meet with the leaders of the Local Government Association and we shall see how to even out these problems.

As you know, local Government involves managing people and people are not like an electric switch which you turn on and off. Let us solve the matter by discussion and we should not panic. We shall sort out the matter and I hope all will go very well.  

Like I said before, the one percent that was added to VAT was supposed to fill the gap - the vacuum created by the abolition of Graduated Tax.  However, the mismatch in this year’s budget was a result of the presumption that the taxes we have introduced this year for raising resources for local governments, that is, the Local Government Service Tax, would be operational by this time. I think the technocrats of the Ministry of Finance did not know the exigencies of getting a Bill prepared and put through Parliament and that the infrastructure for collecting this new tax needed to be put in place. So they presumed that this Local Government Service Tax would be collected this year and it would fill the gap left by Graduated Tax. Unfortunately, this is not the situation. 

I have had occasion to appeal to the Chairperson, Local Government Committee; I have appealed to this Parliament to work together with Government to ensure that first of all we speed up the passing of the Bill authorising Government to collect this local service tax so that we can try to end this bad situation. But also, like I have told you, I have agreed with my colleague the Minister of Finance to try to raise a supplementary to support these local governments. For the time being I think we have done our best and I beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank you.

2.49
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a very brief statement on behalf of the African Parliamentarians Network Against Corruption, APNAC, Uganda Chapter.  

As you are aware, APNAC Uganda is a non-partisan organisation in this Parliament with at least 80 MPs as members. These are Members who are keen on fighting corruption. Every year APNAC joins anti-corruption civil society organisations to observe what they call the anti-corruption week. This is to highlight the campaign against corruption in specific sectors. This is done under the banner of ACCU, which is Anti-Corruption Coalition of Uganda. This year the focus is on improving transparency and accountability in the distribution of essential medicines. 

The campaign started yesterday and it runs until Friday 9th with different activities in all the regions of the country. I would like to call upon Members to lend credence to this campaign by participating as much as possible in the campaign activities whether in Kampala or in the respective regions.  

This week the activities are focusing on the creation of social accountability. The approach is relying on civic engagement where ordinary citizens and CSOs directly or indirectly participate in extracting accountability. As people’s representatives, we owe it to the public to be part of the struggle to ensure that the essential medicines are always available and not stolen, resulting in unavoidable deaths as has been very rampant lately.

As we all know, our health is our wealth and to steal medicines is actually to kill. Let us all join in the fight against corruption of all forms especially in leakages of essential medicines. On this note, APNAC Uganda would like to commend our colleagues who sit on accountability committees for the good work they are doing in controlling corruption. Mr Speaker, thank you again for this opportunity.  

2.53
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am making this brief on the outbreak of Ebola in Bundibugyo District of Uganda under rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I will also make mention of other epidemics currently in the country. After my presentation, I will be flying to Buliisa to assess the Cholera outbreak there.

On 20 August this year, my ministry reported to the public about a mysterious disease that had broken out in the district of Bundibugyo. After about one and a half months, on 29 November, we confirmed that this mysterious disease that was killing people was actually Ebola. Initially we did not stretch our imagination to Ebola, knowing very well that three weeks earlier we had just been dealing with Marburg, a hemorrhagic illness that presents exactly in a similar manner to Ebola. So, when we started detecting these cases in Bundibugyo, we thought we were actually dealing with Marburg whose outbreak we had just curbed in the neighbouring district of Kamwenge. Indeed the neighbouring country of the Republic of Kenya had had Rift Valley Fever. This disease also presents with symptoms that mimic Ebola and Marburg. So, we were actually thinking about three diseases and when we got these cases, the first action that we took was to define the illness that we were dealing with. 

THE SPEAKER: Clarification. Are you reading your statement? 

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that guidance. I will now read the statement as it is. (Laughter)

As I said, this outbreak was later confirmed to be the Ebola disease and so far, a cumulative total of nine cases have been confirmed and 75 suspected cases have been reported with three alert cases. These alert cases are in the districts of Kabarole and Mbarara, two of them in Kabarole and one in Mbarara. Later on I will define what an alert case is.

In response to this epidemic, steps have been taken to curb further spread of this disease. The response is being led by the national and district Ebola taskforces and their sub-committees. These sub-committees are the committees for coordination, epidemiology and laboratory diagnosis, case management, social mobilisation, communication and logistics. Membership to these committees is multi-sectoral and multi-disciplinary and includes Government and non-Government organisations, both local and international. The committees are operating under the umbrella of the national disaster management guidelines under the Office of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

This is the second time Uganda is experiencing an Ebola epidemic, the first one having been experienced in the year 2000 up to early 2001.  

The current status of this epidemic is as follows: as of 5.00 p.m. yesterday, we had registered 84 cases of the Ebola disease in this country. It is unfortunate that of these, 18 had died and the rest are admitted at Bundibugyo Hospital and Kikyo Health Centre IV. The details of these cases are as per the tables shown here. We have 75 suspected cases; nine of them have been confirmed by laboratory diagnosis, making a total of 84 and as I have already said, 18 of these suspected cases died. 

As per the districts, Bundibugyo so far has 83, nine of whom have been confirmed by laboratory diagnosis. In Kampala, we have one case which is now isolated in Mulago isolation ward. This actually happens to be one of the doctors from Bundibugyo. We managed to trace him when he had come this way to pick his children and we thought he was going to spread the infection, so we had to isolate him. Indeed he is now sick and is a suspected case. We have removed blood from him and we shall confirm later on when the results from the laboratory come out. 

In Kabarole we got two cases in Virika Hospital, one of whom died but the blood samples were taken. The other one is under isolation. In Mbarara, we got one case who presented with vomiting blood, headache and fever. The patient died immediately and was buried in accordance with the ways we bury victims of Ebola. We also got a blood sample for further confirmation.

My ministry has taken the following actions to address this epidemic, but it is also important to realise that this disease is spread through close contact with body fluids of infected persons or people who have died of Ebola. These body fluids include blood, urine, vomit, faecal matter, saliva, vaginal fluids, seminal fluid and others. Anybody handling suspected cases must, therefore, use appropriate protective wear -(Laughter)- I will not go into the details because when I mention some of the things that I feel -(Interjection)

Mr Speaker following the confirmation of the epidemic we have taken the following measures:

1.	We have in place a national response plan that we have developed on how we are going to tackle the epidemic.

2.	A response team, which has been working with the district has been strengthened to conduct case management, contact tracing and public education.

3.	The required supplies and drugs for case management have been mobilised and two isolation facilities have been set up and have already become operational in Bundibugyo Hospital and Kikyo Health Centre IV. All close contacts of the suspected cases are being closely monitored and followed up.

4.	All close contacts of the suspected cases are being closely monitored and followed up.

5.	All districts have been put on Ebola epidemic alert and the respective district health officers and in charges of health units have been directed to immediately report any suspected cases.

6.	The public has been requested to report to the health facilities suspected cases reporting with the following symptoms: very high fever of sudden onset, diarrhea, vomiting, and it is many times associated with red eyes and a measles-like rush. 

I am also happy to report, Mr Speaker, that with support from the CDC, a permanent laboratory is being put up at the Uganda Virus Research Institute to quicken laboratory diagnosis.

These are the constraints that my ministry has been facing in our efforts to combat this epidemic:

(i)	The atypical presentation of cases has led to some delays in detection of new cases leading to the spread of the disease as a result of person-to-person contact.

(ii)	The absence in Uganda of a laboratory that can diagnose Ebola disease and other viral hemorrhagic fevers, delayed the confirmation of the epidemic and detection of new cases. This also led to the spread of the disease as a result continued person-to-person contact with patients.
The porous nature of the Uganda-DRC border complicates the control of the epidemic due to the complication of reaching everywhere with public education.
Finally, inadequate resources: both financial and human, but I am happy to report that efforts are being made to mobilise resources from within and outside the country. Some of the health workers who participated in the 2001 Ebola epidemic management in Gulu and Mbarara districts are also being asked to volunteer.
As a conclusion, it is important for us to note that prevention of Ebola cases is dependent on efficient and early detection of the cases, minimisation of person-to-person contact, and barrier nursing of the existing cases by health workers with appropriate protective wear. 
To achieve the above, there is need to continue implementation of the various interventions that I have already alluded to.
Substantial amounts of financial resources and logistics will be required to support this cause. A tentative budget of about Shs 6 billon has been drawn to meet the operational costs. Mr Speaker, if you can allow me, I would also mention the other epidemics in the country after this submission.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, proceed.

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, we are also currently facing an outbreak of Cholera in Buliisa and Nebbi, specifically in Butyaba and Wonseku in Buliisa and in Panyimur in Nebbi District.
 
In Nebbi also, we are currently experiencing an epidemic of plague and my team, a technical team from the ministry, is already on the ground. 

In Arua, we have suspected cases of meningitis in Vurra County. 

In Kitgum, our epidemic surveillance has also detected cases of suspected Hepatitis. Mr speaker, my ministry is doing all it can to make sure that the district epidemic preparedness task forces are able to handle the situation as we look for more resources. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, honourable member for Bundibugyo.

3.08
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Ministry of Health for the good work so far done in the district. (Applause)

Just before CHOGM we were in touch with the minister, with the directors and the commissioners of the Ministry of Health and they were very helpful; they did what they could and they sent protective gear. However, I want to tell this august House that what the ministry has done, they have done it on their own but they need urgent financial resources, otherwise, the nurses, the volunteers, the doctors who have gone there as volunteers and the communities are withdrawing from looking after these people because they are not being paid. They cannot continue to work when they know they are working in a very dangerous environment. So, I want like to call upon the Ministry of Finance to act very quickly. This is about life and death. 

This morning we lost another person who was the chairperson of the business community in the town, Mr Maitene, he has died. Another person, a medical assistant, is on oxygen, he is dying. So I would like to call upon Government: do not leave it to the Ministry of Health alone. Please, Ministry of Finance through the Prime Minister’s Office, we want to see money in the district as soon as possible. Otherwise, people are withdrawing. (Interruption)  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you. Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, yesterday I slept at 2.00 a.m. –(Laughter)- this morning. We were at State House with His Excellency the President and the Minister of Health and we were discussing these problems, and the problems of financing them. So I would like to make it clear that these are very critical matters and that we are not leaving them to any ministry, we are working as a team and we call upon you to support us. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, according to the statement of the Minister of Health, in his conclusion he laments that a tentative budget of Shs 6 billion has been drawn to meet operational costs. When you read further into his statement, on the first page, it says in the response to the epidemic that steps have been taken to curb further spread of the disease, a response being led by a national and district Ebola task force. 

When you read through this statement, the action from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is not anywhere and the Member for Bundibugyo District, which is affected, is also lamenting. She is calling for quick action and release of money. Has not the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness released this money for immediate action? And the Member of Parliament for Bundibugyo is saying that people are not being paid, those people who are working on these cases. There is an urgent need for release of money and she is asking the Minister of Finance, “Where is the money that is under the ministry of disaster preparedness for handling such cases? 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENSE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the hon. Member of Parliament for Bundibugyo that this case, the Ebola case, needs collective effort. That is a fact. And the Prime Minister has told us that Cabinet is doing everything possible to make sure that we gather whatever logistics we need. But I am standing up to inform this House that my ministry, which is the Ministry of Defense, always comes in fast to help where possible. 

We have the UPDF deployed in those areas to guard -(Interjections)- and -(Laughter)- I beg to be protected from hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Okot Ogong, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS NANKABIRWA: And this information can sensitise them further. We have units deployed in those areas to guard Ugandans and protect the borders of this country. Therefore, when we heard that there is a likelihood of Ebola in those areas, we had to swing into action and my ministry, the Ministry of Defence, is working with the Ministry of Health to give whatever we can but with caution because we are working with technical people. Therefore, when the honourable member stands up and calls upon everybody and all the ministries, what she needs is an assurance that Government is doing everything possible to make sure that these epidemics are dealt with. Thank you very much. 

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you my colleagues for those contributions. I am calling upon the government to send resources as quickly as possible. One of the issues is that the people who are working in the hospital, even those ones attending to the general population, which is not yet affected, are also scared. They also need protection because those ones who are presenting with fevers and other symptoms are not sure whether they are handling Ebola cases. So, I call upon Government to quickly intervene. Let these supplies go to all health centres in these affected areas and let it not be to only Ebola areas. Then –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Ebola is very serious; it is about life and death. In this House we have acted during times of emergencies. When we wanted money for CHOGM, a motion was brought here, we quickly passed it and the money was found. Here is the Ministry of Health lamenting that they need Shs 6 billion; the Prime Minister has just told us that they met until late into the night. What is the process that they are taking now? Are you mobilising resources from outside here that does not need the action of Parliament?

MR SPEAKER: But you see, the person on the Floor was hon. Babiiha. Are you seeking clarification from her? Is this the type of clarification that you would seek from her? This is the clarification you should direct to the minister.  

MS ALISEMERA: So, I can see that he was trying to give me information and clarification but I think it went somewhere else. I want to also say that money is also needed for social mobilisation in the communities. We also need money for those ones who are burying the dead. We need urgent financial help as soon as yesterday. 

Hon. Prime Minister, I am happy to hear that you had a meeting in the night and I hope the outcome of that meeting will give the people of Bundibugyo money tomorrow or today. I hope your finance minister is already preparing money to be sent electronically -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you, hon. Member for Bundibugyo, and Members of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I want to assure this august House that this morning we were in a meeting where the Ministry of Finance was directed to find all possible means and raise that money. So I want to assure the august House that Government is doing its level best to see that the situation is handled immediately. Thank you very much. 

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, hon. Minister of Finance for that assurance and I hope we are receiving that money tomorrow or by the end of the day today. Because money can be sent to Bundibugyo electronically, you cannot now say we have to get somebody to take it there and it spends two or three months before it is got. So this week I hope people will have money in Bundibugyo District. 

However, I want to say that some money should also be sent to the other areas which are affected: Kabarole and Mbarara because they are also getting the spillover from Bundibugyo. 

I also want to give special thanks to the NGOs, which are already participating in this fight, World Health Organisation, UNICEF and others, which have come to our rescue. Right now I want to tell this august House that the little money, which was remaining was from UNICEF – about Shs 4 million, this is what they used this morning and I think the money is finished. So I would like to emphasise that money should be found for Bundibugyo and other districts, which have been affected. Thank you very much.

3.19
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice of thanking everybody, Government and all those that have got involved in curbing this situation, but I have one question and I am perplexed. Just like the hon. Minister for Defence has said, one single bullet shot on the island of Rukwanzi calls for a brigade to be around there in action. But from reliable sources and from the papers, this disease should have been detected right away in August but when I rang the Director of Medical Services, Dr Zaramba, he said that Government and the ministry started becoming active after CHOGM. But one would wonder: how long should it take the Ministry of Health to respond? 

Why do they not borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Defence, which acts very fast immediately a problem is detected? That defeats my logic and the logic of every person in this country. Why should it take from August up to December when we are still handling this and that? I feel, Mr Speaker, that it is high time Government especially through the Ministry of Health became as serious as the Ministry of Defence in trying to handle this situation because all this is after life. 

Secondly, even before Ebola I always got confused and concerned, whenever you lose a person at a hospital, the only best thing you get -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. The honourable member on the Floor was wondering why it took long to diagnose and actually confirm the case. I just want to give him information from the professional point of view that the Ebola case or epidemic, which has been identified in Bundibugyo, is new.  The strain - the virus is new; it has never been detected before in the world because we know there are four strains: Zaire strain, Sudan strain, Cote D’Ivoire strain and the Reston strain. And probably this will be the Uganda strain. That in a way could partly explain why it took time because definitely the scientists and the specialists had to do a lot of tests for them to confirm that indeed it was Ebola, and for them to know it is a new type. So it is different from the one, which was in Gulu et cetera.  

MR KYETUNDA: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi. I just want to give –(Interruption) 

MRS MUGISA: I want to know, since you are a medical doctor, whether you have given an explanation. When I was in the constituency last week in Kabarole, four people had died of Ebola related symptoms but these people died in their homes. I was told that they walked across to Bundibugyo and went for a burial when they came back they died. So I want to know what is going to happen to these people who come back home and just die because the Ministry of Health will concentrate on hospitals. 

All that is needed is really to sensitise people who go for these burials on what to do because the people who went back and died in their homes must have infected others. The village where four people have died of Ebola is called Nyakitokoli, in Kazingo parish, Bukuku sub-county in Burashiya County. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think that information will be answered by the ministry but since we know that we now have a confirmed epidemic of Ebola, it is up to us as a Government and as a ministry to put in place a comprehensive programme not only addressing those who are sick but also those who are exposed, in the rest of the country. That is the information I wanted to give the Member on the Floor.

MR KYETUNDA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Dr Baryomunsi - he has talked about four strains. What is the difference in their mode of attack? Does it necessarily mean that this new strain called the Uganda type has a different way of attack that it takes longer from August up to December to be detected different from the others? And in any case, where do you base your cause of action or starting period to act to save the population? And how does it manifest itself? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I cannot give a lecture here on the genetics and the chemistry of this problem. What we know just briefly because I was just giving information - I was not the substantive Member on the Floor but briefly like I said, we have four strains and we know that the Ebola Zaire, Ebola Sudan and Cote D’Ivoire are highly violent and actually kill in a relatively short period. Ebola Uganda, if at all that will be its name, I think is less violent than those strains. And also, this type actually does not cause clinical manifestations in human beings; it only affects primates. So the science is known but I do not think I should go into - in any case you would not understand me if I went into the science.  I thank you very much.

MR KYETUNDA: Thank you, Dr Chris Baryomunsi for giving me that technical information. I have also taken it technically, thank you.  

Mr Speaker, I was on the second issue that whenever one goes to the hospital and you lose a person there, the best - the final thing you get from there may be a death certificate. Although these facilities are not enough, my observation is: medical practitioners use protective wear whenever they are handling cases. But whenever you lose a person and you are going away, and yet they know that you are to handle the same body for burial, you are not given any protective wear. Why should it be all the time that after some incident has happened they say, “You ought to have used protective wear”? Why do they not technically - I hope Dr Baryomunsi will again advise me - on what to do in such circumstances? 

You have given me a death certificate; you know I am going to bury and you are not giving me any other protective wear which I am going to use at the same burial! How do you know that this will not also be infectious? I thought the Ministry of Health ought to realise that every situation has got to be taken seriously and whenever it happens it should be given the due respect and seriousness it deserves. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I am saddened by another Ebola outbreak in this country. And listening to the Member of Parliament Bundibugyo and then the preamble given by the Minister of Health, I think there is something wrong either with the statement or with the situation on the ground. Because from the hon. Member of Bundibugyo, I get the impression that it was known before CHOGM. According to her words, she heard of an Ebola outbreak and then a statement by the minister, which says from 20th August, I want to consider this as very unfortunate. From 20th August 2007 up to today somewhere in December then we begin to tell this country! 

I imagine that the number of people who have died majorly have died because of lack of information in the public domain which whether for CHOGM purposes or for some inadequacies in the management, we decided to withhold from the public. Otherwise there is no explanation, with the experience we had in terms of Ebola management in this country in 2001; there is no explanation why the public should not have been told that they are battling with Ebola. 

I do not buy Doctor Baryomunsi’s argument of the various types of viruses. I do not buy it; I think whatever it was, the public should have been educated and told.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it says a lot about the present management of epidemics and the approach adopted by the Ministry of Health. If you have such a deadly thing and you are going to take four months, all of us in this House must get worried. Really we must be worried because he tells us that there is a lot of danger and the capacity of the Ministry of Health is declining. They used to do a very good job; they would tell of a Cholera outbreak within two days and Marburg within three days. So how come that they took four months to tell us about Ebola? And now we have so many cases, 18 cases is not an easy thing.  

But I also want to comment, Mr Speaker, on the statement by the Ministry of Health that they are going to call upon volunteers. I think this should provide us with an opportunity for reflection. What did we do with the families that lost their dear ones - medical workers, for instance, Doctor Mathew Lukwiya’s family? What did we do when he died battling Ebola? Are we helping the children? This is what provides motivation. Nobody likes to go onto the frontline of such a hostile disease when you do not know that there is an insurance of sorts for your family.

So, I hope that from this point, we are going to seriously reflect on how we manage our health workers whom we subject to going to the frontline because they would like to save our lives. Once something happens to them, what do we do to those families?  

I want to put it to the Minister that we are very disappointed that it took four months for them to tell this country that this is Ebola. Whether for CHOGM purposes or for anything, we think it is very dangerous to withhold information from the public domain. We went on burying everybody the traditional African style, touching dead bodies and thinking it is okay when actually you had the information that this is dangerous. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had finished hon. Baryomunsi?  (Laughter) I think the House has expressed its concern about this incident and the appeal is that the government should do whatever is possible to arrest the situation. There is no more according to me. However, we have not heard from Kabarole. 

3.33
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a suggestion. Hon. Alice Alaso has said that there are 18 cases, but these are the reported cases. Like I have said before, there are some cases which were not reported and indeed there are some cases that end up in the villages. I think what Government should immediately do is to sensitise the people through radio programmes. 

You are talking about the money that is going there, but where is it going? I do not know whether it is going to pay volunteers or treat patients, but the most important thing at this critical moment is to educate the public.

On Friday, I went to a village to meet constituents and they told me that people had died in the next village and people feared each other. Everyone feared to pick whatever they could eat. People’s businesses had collapsed, for example those selling juice, kabalagala and other things, because everybody feared to eat. No one knows how it is transmitted or where it came from. No one knows its symptoms properly. Unless there is sensitisation, especially on radio and even in the churches, we shall not know. If we sensitise people over radio, even the churches would announce. We need to put in place programmes to let people know exactly what is taking place around them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Doesn’t this summarise it? This is now taking over an hour. Okay, Mama Mabira (Laughter)

3.35
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. If Ebola breaks out especially for us in our situation, we become very vulnerable and memories are still fresh in our minds. Therefore, we would really like the Minister and the government to do all they can and we join hands so that this is done very quickly.  

I would like to give some information to the Minister. This morning I talked to my medical superintendent because I heard that there was a suspected case - and I would like the Minister to take this seriously - in Madi-Opei in Kitgum District. There is a suspected case, which I would like you to follow up and monitor. The medical superintendent and the administrator are already looking at that case. We would really not like to have Ebola in the IDP camps. It would be disastrous. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, I think that we have really covered what needs to be covered with that statement. 

3.37
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Well, this is just a request to the Minister in charge of Health; we have a problem in our regional referral hospital, which is Fort Portal Referral Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, I was in Fort Portal this morning and - (Interjection) – some suspected case of Ebola was brought to Virika Hospital. The health workers had to run away because they do not have protective gear and the victim was immediately transferred to Buhinga Hospital. What is worrying is that there is no running water in that referral hospital as I speak now. There is no running water, the toilet system is completely broken down and yet they are telling us that we can get this disease from sweat, urine, faeces; so, the people are very scared. 

As I was coming from Fort Portal this morning, they had buried two suspected victims in one of the Fort Portal cemeteries and they left the gloves and all the protective gear they were using just exposed. There was a lot of panic, but thank God the District Director of Health Services mobilised people quickly and they removed those gloves and other protective gear and buried them. 

The situation is very pathetic in Fort Portal. By the way, that case is suspected to have been brought from Kyenjojo District. So, as we think about Bundibugyo, let us also think about Fort Portal, mainly the regional referral hospital. Our ambulance is broken down and there is no way we can help ferry the victims from one place to another. I would like to call upon the Minister to immediately think about sending some drugs, protective gear and facilitation to Buhinga Hospital and Virika Hospital in Fort Portal. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, following your statement, the House is in total support of your efforts to arrest the situation. I think that ends the statement. 

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to mention something about gatherings, fundraisings and other such functions. This is one of the ways by which people get in very close contact. We would recommend that the affected districts try as much as possible to avoid gathering people. (Interjections) Even churches can be suspended if the people so feel, but they can sit quite far away from each other. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Next week, the Vice-President has organised a tour of Hoima District; should he be called to order? What do we mean by affected districts? All districts are potentially affected.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that is a call for you to sensitise the public about this so that people do not move here and there. Honestly, let us move on. We have ended this subject.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CHOGM

3.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON CHOGM (Mr Onyango Kakoba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to proceed under rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure to lay on table the report of the Parliamentary Select Committee on CHOGM on Uganda’s preparedness to host CHOGM. I note the concern of the members and I therefore wish to move under rule 28 (3) to give a short explanation of this paper.

The Select Committee on CHOGM was given terms of reference and one of the terms of reference was that we produce two reports. The first report was on the level of preparedness, which was ready by the end of October but because Parliament was on recess we were not able to present that report. I am now laying it on the Table. The second report, according to the terms of reference, is supposed to be produced after CHOGM and that is an evaluation report. However, when the Business Committee sat last week, the committee had been advised that in the interest of time, this report should not be produced. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was privileged to have a copy of the report that is now being circulated and I have looked at its contents. For the purposes of what Parliament must do, a lot of what is in that report becomes redundant. He is saying, for example, that this hotel was not yet ready; that is no longer an issue because CHOGM has been held. I think the second part, which the committee considers not important, is the most important. Therefore, I would suggest that the committee takes back this report, knocks off what is no longer relevant and combines it with what should be an overall picture of what happened and how it went. 

I see we have a motion coming, and it is so easy for us politicians to stand up and say beautiful things and then tomorrow we get embarrassed when the detailed report shows that money has been embezzled; how then will you retract what you have said? I think it is important that the committee goes back and does what it thinks is no longer relevant because that is the most relevant.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you may demand that we get an evaluation report so that we do not discuss this one now but they give us their assessment and we discuss that, rather than asking them to take away their report. They have already tabled it. Do not debate it because you think it is not necessary; just ask them to produce the other one. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, actually I did not say that they should just take it because it was not relevant. I said there are elements that remain relevant but there are so many other elements in it which are actually no longer relevant. I thought that to make their work easy, they could go back - in fact, even some of the elements that do not seem relevant now, if they are reported as an outcome of the CHOGM activities they become much more relevant. That was the only reason why I said that.

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make a clarification. It is not the committee that considers the second part of the report irrelevant. Actually, the committee had planned to start working on the report this week but we were advised by the Business Committee, not the CHOGM Select Committee. The committee is very ready to proceed with that work should it be given permission to do so. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I think I agree with what the Leader of the Opposition has mentioned. I want to inform you that Parliament, and indeed the rest of Uganda, are anxiously awaiting the outcome of the forensic audit of the CHOGM funds. I would like to point out my disappointment; why do we set up committees that we never allow time, room and space to operate? We were very eager to have this report before CHOGM, but to our disappointment it is just coming now, and yet in the wisdom of Parliament we had thought that we needed an oversight committee to specifically check our level of preparedness. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I happened to have been in that Business Committee meeting. What came out clearly was that because of the long recess period we had during the renovation of the Chamber, it was not possible for the committee to present its report. So, the report has come after the exercise is over. 

However, the Business Committee also considered that there were a lot of pending and urgent issues that needed to be handled. So, considering the short time we have, it was prudent to have the report laid on Table and we continue with other business. Later on, we can discuss the report when some other evaluations have come out about CHOGM. We did not say it was irrelevant, but we were just trying to take priority decisions based on the little time that we have.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I do acknowledge the response of my colleague, but it is still beside the point. My point was: why did we have to put in place a committee to perform an oversight role and yet we never allowed it the opportunity to do so? For instance, I was a bit disappointed that during the historical visit of Her Majesty the Queen to Parliament, we were never accorded the opportunity to debate her speech. (Laughter) If we had had a committee, probably we would have pronounced ourselves on the Queen’s speech because there are not many times that the Queen visits such parliaments. Probably, if we had that early, it would have been part of the arrangements. Further still –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you would have been given two minutes to debate the speech? You know how the time was allotted; I was given three minutes, Her Majesty the Queen four and the President five; how long would the debate take? But you are free to debate it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, that is a procedural question; I know very well that we would have allowed the Queen to exit and then we come back to Parliament and proceed to debate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you can bring a motion to debate the Queen’s speech. Definitely, if you want to, you bring a motion and we shall debate it. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I really imagine that at this point in time it is not very late, but let us have the audited report of CHOGM. The other opportunity was missed. We all know that this is now a multiparty parliament and we would have even suggested, if we had the opportunity, that probably the Leader of the Opposition could be afforded two minutes to move a vote of thanks to the Queen. It is our duty, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, on auditing the funds used, that cannot be done by Parliament. The Auditor-General is the one who is going audit, make a report to Parliament and we examine it. Parliament cannot undertake auditing funds. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I must thank you for that guidance. More often than not, as you know, we follow up what has taken place. We make value–for- money audits here in Parliament and we verify what has been spent.

THE SPEAKER: It is a mistake. As a Member of Parliament you cannot do audit work. The audit work must be undertaken by the Auditor-General who sends a report here and the Public Accounts Committee only uses the Auditor-General’s report.

MS KASULE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance; as far as I know, the Office of the Auditor-General is part of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: The Auditor-General reports to Parliament. 

MS KASULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can we as Parliament direct the Auditor-General to audit CHOGM?

THE SPEAKER: No, the Auditor-General is aware that part of his schedule is to audit public expenditure. I am saying this to protect Parliament. If Parliament takes up the work of the Auditor-General, we may have problems. However, we expect the Auditor-General to look at the way the funds were used and report to us. That is the procedure.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you that this Parliament and its committees must be very careful in the manner in which we handle our affairs; otherwise, we will be accused of overstepping our mark. 

Having said that, however, I want to come back to CHOGM; I have this report of the select committee and I am hoping to have another report of the select committee and yet I have this motion, which I think we are about to debate. To me, the fundamental matter is that the people of Uganda should be told in no uncertain terms how we handled CHOGM, how the money that this Parliament appropriated was used and whether there was value for money. This is not to say that we are auditing, but we are entitled as representatives of the people to be told. 

My problem is that I would have wanted this report not to be tabled but rather to be presented. Even in the absence of the other report, it could have been used as a basis for discussing what happened in CHOGM, how it was handled and whether we were, as representatives of the people, satisfied with certain aspects of CHOGM. It is only then that we can adequately debate this motion. If we rush into debating this motion, we might end up saying things which we might be forced to withdraw when handling the reports. That is the way I handle it. But I agree with you that we should be very careful as a parliament not to overstep our mark when dealing with matters of our committees and matters of this House because we have boundaries which we should not over step.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I think what our colleagues are mixing up is the use of the word “audit”. I think our interest here is to generally do an appraisal of what transpired at the time - the successes and the failures - but not to produce accounts like the Auditor-General. I have been wondering, for example, whether you will resume having your seat the way it was or this is how it is going to be because this was under the preparations for CHOGM. Look at National Theatre here, the wall has remained. We should be able to get explanations as to what happened, whether it will remain like that or it is going to be completed. That is why I support the suggestion that hon. Kakoba continues and gives us an evaluation report but not to produce the accounts.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the issue on the Floor is about trying to find out how the event was carried out both in terms of value for money and even the actual work. Some time back, we read in the papers and heard on radio that His Excellency the President had put up a commission of inquiry. We would like to know from the Leader of Government Business whether this is so, and whether the commission of inquiry has started its work or whether it has been made public. Perhaps this can also answer some of our worries. Thank you.

MS MUHANGA: I have been a member of the Select Committee on CHOGM. A lot of people got to know that I was on this committee and I have been getting a lot of complaints from people. I got complaints saying that people gave in their cars and they were asked to pay some money - Shs 350,000 – but their cars were not used and they were not refunded. There are people who were asked to surrender their houses and they did surrender these homes and they were told that they would be paid $450 per night. They paid a non-refundable fee of Shs 500,000 but when they went to the CHOGM website, they found their houses had been priced at $900 per night. So, are they going to get back their money? What will happen to these people? They are already bringing complaints; who is going to handle them?

THE SPEAKER: That is contract law. There is a contract law to deal with that situation. The Leader of the Opposition’s view was that we should get another report covering the assessment and I think that is possible. We can get another report stating the evaluation. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural concern on the way Parliament will proceed in regard to the select committee. I think it is important for us to refresh ourselves on the rules, because they provide for select committees and the terms of reference we give them, so that it does not become a matter of debate thereafter. 

The last term of reference for this committee was to present to Parliament an evaluation report on the CHOGM events. Until this committee has done this, we will consider their work incomplete in regard to the terms of reference. So, we should not be debating whether they have to present a report or not; they have not handled the last term of reference that we assigned to them.

THE SPEAKER: Then that is okay.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, when I said what I said, I also linked it to item No. 5 on the Order Paper, and hon. Ben Wacha has actually expounded on that. 

The danger of us pronouncing ourselves without the facts is that it will be some subjective assessment - an emotive expression of how we saw things - but when the committee report comes and hon. Okecho finds many difficulties, we will really look ridiculous standing up here to withdraw what you had said was so beautiful. 

Therefore, when it comes to item No.5, I would suggest that in light of this issue, the pressure should be on the committee. I think that Government should work closely with the committee so that it is able to do a quick evaluation for us to debate it. It is not for any bad motive; it helps all of us to say “this was good”, “we can improve here” or “this was bad”. If we rush things like this, it will not be good for our country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the problem we are going to have with item No.5 is that if an individual Member of Parliament decides to move a motion, can you really tie his hands to another?  (Interjections) I think these are contributions that you will make once the motion is moved. So, let us wait and reach this point and then we shall decide to either debate, reject or postpone it. But we should not do that before the item is tabled.

MR WACHA: Sorry Sir, but the reason I said that was because I see a linkage between all the other possible reports and hon. Okecho’s motion. I would personally advise, without forcing, that if hon. Okecho wants us to do justice to his motion, he has to wait until we get all the facts.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us do that; let us dispose of this issue of the report from the select committee. Hon. Alaso has drawn our attention to the terms of reference and that means we need an additional report of evaluation of what happened. We can go to next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2007

4.03
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move and I have the Certificate of Financial Implications, which I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE BILL, 2007

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I wish to present a Bill entitled, “The Public Service Bill, 2007” for the first reading. I also want to present the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and then report.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007

4.05
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007” be read the first time. Like my colleagues, I have a Certificate of Financial Implications attached and I lay the same certificate on Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent reporting.
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO EXPRESS ITS APPRECIATION TO GOVERNMENT FOR SUCCESSFULLY HOSTING CHOGM AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES

4.06
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, in view of the discussion which has taken place, would you allow me to present this motion? I personally would not mind going ahead to present this motion because it has nothing to do with the results of what is anticipated from the select committee. It is a motion for a resolution of Parliament in appreciation of the efforts of the government and the people of Uganda in organising and hosting the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2007 and other associated activities. 

We have done quite a lot of research and managed to dig out a lot of information for the benefit of the members and the country. Therefore, it is not a lethal motion to interfere with the outcome of the various investigations that may be undertaken by the select committee. So, if I may go ahead  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is your motion; you either decide to present it or you accept the advice. It is up to you.

MR OKECHO: I feel strongly, Mr Speaker, that I should go ahead and present this motion, which is definitely a personal motion. I know that it does not have much effect and it is only in recognition of the government effort in successfully organising this meeting. It is moved under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of this House. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members – (Interjections) - I am going to get secondment from this side -(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is it seconded?

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to now present the motion: 
“WHEREAS the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) comprising Heads of State of 53 countries is one of the most prestigious gatherings in the international arena;

AND WHEREAS at CHOGM 2005 held in Valetta, Malta, Uganda was confirmed as the host of CHOGM 2007;

AWARE that 48 member countries of the Commonwealth, 36 of which were represented by their Heads of State or Government, were hosted in Uganda for the CHOGM 2007;

CONSCIOUS of the fact that the Commonwealth Business Forum, the Commonwealth Youth Forum, the Commonwealth Peoples’ Forum and other events were held alongside CHOGM 2007;

NOTING that the Parliament of Uganda was greatly honoured by the historic visit of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and Head of the Commonwealth and Prince Phillip, Duke of Edinburgh;

RECOGNISING that organising a meeting of such magnitude as CHOGM required the unequivocal support, effort and co-operation of all people of Uganda within and outside Government, and that the Parliament played a pivotal role in ensuring that all preparations progressed as envisaged;

COGNISANT of the fact that Government spent a substantial amount of money on infrastructural improvement, accommodation, beautification, security, constant supply of utilities and upgrade of ICT facilities, among others, in preparation for CHOGM 2007;

APPRECIATING that the opening ceremony, transportation, security, Her Majesty the Queen’s state visit and all events associated with CHOGM 2007 were well managed with minimal glitches;

FURTHER aware that the Heads of Government deliberated on issues concerning fundamental political values, conflict resolution, respect and understanding, disarmament and non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons, international co-operation on criminal matters, corruption, human trafficking, terrorism, human rights, the digital divide, climate change, HIV/AIDS among others;

BEARING in mind that the Heads of Government, in the Kampala Declaration on Transforming Societies to Achieve Political, Economic and Human Development, re-affirmed the Commonwealth’s commitment to raise standards and achieve a more equitable international society free of poverty, ignorance and disease through economic, political and human transformation;

NOTING that the President of Uganda is to be the CHOGM chairperson until 2009;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the Heads of Government reconstituted the membership of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group on the Harare Declaration (CMAG) to include Uganda (Chairperson-in-Office);

APPRECIATING that all the events associated with CHOGM 2007 such as the Women Ministers’ Meeting, the Youth Forum, the Business Forum and Peoples’ Forum were indicative of popular participation and involved more Ugandans than ever before;

REALISING that as a result of Uganda hosting CHOGM, the people stand to benefit from the international exposure, a boost in the country’s image, increased foreign exchange inflows and improved social infrastructure;

NOW, THEREFORE be it moved that Parliament resolves as follows:

(1) 	That Parliament thanks the President of Uganda, H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the government and the People of Uganda for successfully hosting CHOGM 2007 and proffers its best wishes to H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as he embarks on the task as Chairperson-in-Office.

(2) 	That all people of Uganda continue to embrace the opportunities that CHOGM 2007 has brought to the country and work towards transforming the Ugandan society while respecting difference and promoting understanding.

(3) 	That the government and all the people of Uganda ensure continued maintenance and sustainance of all infrastructure developments that were put in place for CHOGM 2007.

(4) 	That copies of this resolution be circulated to H.E the President of Uganda as the Chairperson-in-Office of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Head of the Commonwealth, and the Secretary General of the Commonwealth for onward transmission to the member states.”

The motion is moved by me.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, when I look at the last page of this motion, I see that the seconder is the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi and he has signed it. However, our procedure is that after the mover presents the motion, the seconder then comes in to second and signs it. In this case, I am surprised that the motion was signed before being presented. I am also surprised by the fact that hon. Prof. Kabwegyere is getting up to second the motion when the Prime Minister, the seconder who has even signed it, is here. So, I need to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think they are two. Prime Minister, are you seconding the motion? Okay, then stand up and say “I second the motion”. (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I do of course second this great motion on hosting this great event. Why not!

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is seconded by Prof. Kabwegyere –(Laughter)- and Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. Can you speak to your motion?
 
MS ALICE ALASO: Mr Speaker, I need your help because I am having a bit of difficulty in harmonising the motion and the business that we have just handled relating to the fact that the select committee will do an evaluation and the subject matter will be the same. So, I wonder if we should not refer to rule 67, which talks about anticipation, especially sub-rules (2) and (3). 

Mr Speaker, I really need your help so that I can proceed when I know that these subject matters are covered. If you read rule 67(2) it states: “It is out of order to anticipate a motion by discussion of any matter directly relating to the subject of the motion prior to the date appointed for the consideration of the motion.” 

Sub-rule (3) reads: “In determining whether a discussion is out of order on the ground of anticipation, the Speaker shall have regard to the probability of the subject matter in anticipation being brought before the House within a reasonable time.” So, I just need your help, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem, honourable member. This motion is by a Member of Parliament called hon. Okecho and our rules allow him to move such a motion. What we are waiting for is for him to substantiate why he is moving this motion; maybe he has the details. If he does not, then you will be free to reject it. You may contradict it if he gives a fact which is not true, for example. I do not know what he has in store so let us wait for him to open it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, when I read through this motion, I notice that the mover is hon. William Okecho and it is seconded by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi. With measured use of words, my quarrel relates to the fact that the Leader of Government Business, who is also the Prime Minister, can second a motion thanking himself. How can we have a motion to thank him?
 
Mr Speaker, you may have to ignore some of these mistakes, but the impetus and impact they make on us in this House, which you are presiding over, is very serious. How is it allowed for the Leader of Government Business to second a motion that he be thanked –(Laughter)– and be praised, and he is not ashamed? It is your turn, Mr Speaker, to save us from this circus; do not take us too far. Are we proceeding in the right way like any other civilized House?

THE SPEAKER: I think this will depend on how you assess this motion. If you think that it has been moved by people with selfish motives, you will say so and therefore you will vote against it. Let us proceed with the motion.

PROF. LATIGO: I think hon. Ssekikubo took note of this in good faith; it would be very unfair if we pre-empt this. Somebody else can actually second it and the Prime Minister withdraws rather than us –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I see that he signed it but also hon. Prof. Kabwegyere supported the motion. Anyway, I think all this comes down to the weight you will give to this motion; it is up to you really to say “no, this is not merited because it is somebody praising himself”. Otherwise, what rule are you going to show me that bars him from supporting a motion?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Under those circumstances, Mr Speaker, am I free to contradict my Leader of Government Business?

THE SPEAKER: You are free.

MR SSEKIKUBO: That is not the way to proceed, Mr Speaker. I can see that you are pressing us to have this motion.

MR SPEAKER: I am not pressing you. I am doing my work.

MR SSEKIKUBO: But are we allowed to disagree with the Leader of Government Business?

THE SPEAKER: Please sit down. I am doing my work. The matter is on the Order Paper; it is up to you to reject or accept it and I will give you time to contribute. Otherwise, you are also pressing me to reject the motion -(Laughter)- and you tried to blackmail me.

MR OKECHO: Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament and honourable members, as my justification for this motion, I have a fairly lengthy document, which for historical purposes you all need to let me read through.

I wish to say that the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and its parallel events were successfully completed in Kampala on Sunday, 25 November 2007. This high level event served to showcase Uganda to the world as a country that is fast emerging towards prosperity and development in consonance with the CHOGM theme, which was very well known as, “Transforming Commonwealth Societies to Achieve Political, Economic and Human Development”.

The importance of CHOGM lies in the fact that the Commonwealth is the largest international organisation in the world after the United Nations. Numbering almost two billion people and bound by one language and history, Commonwealth country citizens make up at least one-third of the world’s population. The Commonwealth as an organisation therefore, has been instrumental in shaping global opinions on a wide range of social, economic and political issues. 

As a developing country, Uganda fully subscribes to the fundamental values and principles of the Commonwealth. These values and principles play an important role in shaping the progress of our nation towards development and democracy –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I was a bit hesitant to interrupt my colleague; allow me to say that hon. Okecho moved his motion and I believe that he is now substantiating. However, under rule 63, a member is not allowed to read from a prepared speech. What hon. Okecho is presenting to us as he labours to substantiate his motion is to read a prepared text, which is against our Rules of Procedure, Mr Speaker. So, may you restrain hon. Okecho – (Laughter) - from reading a prepared text? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, go on to speak to the motion.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, I have a very detailed analysis of the situation, which I am consulting as I go ahead. So, I really do not see any problem.

THE SPEAKER: There is a difference between consulting your notes and reading a statement. Please comply with rule 63.

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much. I will definitely comply with the rules. As I continue, allow me to say that I was going to speak about the organisation of the work which, honourable members, was extremely well done. We had a national taskforce, which was headed by a very competent team of people, many of whom actually presented their plans to us, although there was political oversight during the whole exercise of CHOGM preparations.

The various activities of CHOGM 2007 included, as I already indicated: the Youth Forum, the Commonwealth People’s Forum, the Commonwealth Business Forum, and earlier on in June we had the Commonwealth Women Ministers Conference, generally called the Eighth WAMM. We also had the Finance Minister’s Meeting and finally there was a retreat for the Heads of State.

The Sixth Youth Forum was very well attended. It had a theme, which was very revealing to those who attended. The theme was, “Breaking Barriers: Unleashing Young People’s Potential for Development.” This event was very colourful at the very beginning. It lasted from 14th to 21st November. Out of the 53 Commonwealth countries, a record 48 countries sent in delegates. I have information that they were happy that Uganda was accorded the opportunity to send 25 delegates including many of our youth MPs.

They produced a document, which was presented to the Heads of State and the communiqué – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you have ably guided this House on rule 63, that the member refrains from reading from his prepared text, whether it was prepared by Professor or by him. You decided that he stops and should refrain from reading that text to us. So, is the honourable member in order to proceed reading to us from his text when you have clearly given him guidance? More to that, he is reading a text, which he has not circulated to the House. Again, is he also procedurally right to move on in that manner?

THE SPEAKER: I think you have repeated what I said. Do you want me to repeat it the second time? I said that the rule is very clear and I asked the member to comply with it.
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, allow me seek further guidance. I thank the mover and my Prime Minister. However, judging from the mood in the House, I just want to seek your guidance on whether we can advise the mover and the Prime Minister to move according to our rule 49 and withdraw this motion, so that –(Applause)– at an appropriate time when we have considered the evaluation report, we can, from a point of knowledge, be able to pass this important motion.

I therefore move that we request the mover to proceed under rule 49 and officially withdraw this motion until such a time when we shall all have the information to debate it. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it does not mean that when a member moves a motion, such a motion will be carried. When you start contributing, you can say “this motion should be rejected for these reasons”. So, it will be up to you to say, after he has finished, “We reject it because there is no substance.” However, you cannot ask him to withdraw it unless he wants to. You can only reject it in case he fails to justify it. I think that is the way.

That aside, allow me to remind the mover that rule 63 does not allow you to read. If you think you need time to go and summarise this motion, we can give you that time. (Laughter)

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, if you look at a copy of these notes, you will realise that I have not been reading. 

THE SPEAKER: But from what hon. Baryomunsi was saying, when you start to speak, you should say “we reject this because it is pre-maturely tabled or for this reason”. This is what you should say and then you will be able to persuade other colleagues to agree with you.  

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, thank you very for your ruling. I wish just to summarise and say that of all the various meetings that took place during CHOGM, I think the most successful to all of us, Parliamentarians, was the opening ceremony of the CHOGM event, apart from the one here in Parliament where the Queen and Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, visited us and made a very historic speech. They were accompanied by His Excellency the President and were received by -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Just to put things right; I have heard hon. Okecho say, “Prince Philip”. We did not have Prince Philip in Parliament. So, could he be very clear. I advise you to first comprehend things properly before you present them.  

MR NASASIRA: I hope eventually we will settle down and look at this motion as part of the events and not separate them from preparations because we will be lost. I would like to inform hon. Okupa that actually if you check the Queen’s speech, she always said “Prince Philip and I”, and Prince Philip was sitting next to her here.

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much for the information. Mr Speaker, I had indicated that definitely the visit to Parliament by the Queen and her entourage, which included the Duke of Edinburgh, Prince Philip, was the most significant for us Parliamentarians. She came and emphasised the need for democracy and good governance. His Excellency the President also outlined to her the progress that the country has gone through with respect to creating an enabling environment for good governance through constitutional means.

We also had the Commonwealth Business Forum, which was really a showcase of Uganda. It helped us to come out with very substantial contacts, which many of us have been lacking. A report from the Commonwealth Business Forum was sent to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which took place from 23rd to 25th November.

I wish to conclude by requesting that we recognise the contribution that CHOGM 2007 has made to Uganda. We should realise that from its planning stage to the very end, it gave us an experience in organising such very important meetings as Ugandans. We therefore thank all Ugandans for having been useful, appreciative and helpful in moving this CHOGM 2007 forward. For that matter, I will request the House to hold this motion and support it effectively. Thank you very much.

Mr Speaker, I will also request that I table here the various communiqués that we have managed to run through for the sake of Parliament, so that we are in a position to refer to them in future. We have got “The Kampala Declaration on Transforming Societies to Achieve Political, Economic and Human Development.” We also have the Kampala communiqué as well as the Business Communiqué presented - (Interruption)-

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, hon. Okecho, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee of this House, is proceeding to perform the function of the Executive. With due respect, is the function of laying such official communiqués and documents within the ambit of a backbencher of this House, or at an appropriate time the responsible minister will have the opportunity to lay them on the Table?  Are we co-opting, are we adhoc-ing? What kind of business are we proceeding with? Under what rule has a backbencher turned himself into a member of the Executive? Are we proceeding in the right manner?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, I thought you were going to read the rule which he has offended. I think you should know that official communiqués are public documents and anybody is free, including yourself, to get access to these documents and use them. However, maybe there is a rule which you want to read, which he offended. I will rule on it if you can guide me.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, there is a precedent that was set in this House when I presented a letter which was written to the then Rt hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, who is now seeking for a re-election in his constituency. At that time when I presented the letter that was addressed to him, written by NTV General Manager, that letter was rejected by this House - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, why don’t we dispose of his point of order? His issue was: why is he doing what should be done by the Executive? Why is he tabling the official communiqué, Kampala Declaration and the others? I responded that these declarations, once they are made, become public documents and anybody is free to use them. So you cannot ask, “Why do you quote them?” or “why do you table them?” Unless there is a specific rule, I do not see anything wrong. 

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Mr Speaker, it was in view of the precedent that had been set in this House, and precedents form part of our rules.

THE SPEAKER:  Which rule is that?

MR SSEKIKUBO:  The precedent as a Rule of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: When you raise a point of order, you are required to state the rule which is being breached, and this is what I am asking you for. If you have it, please read it then we shall rule on it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this was in view of the Commonwealth parliamentary practice, in which precedents form part of the rules.

THE SPEAKER: What is the Commonwealth practice you are referring to? Let this not be a seminar my friend.

MR SSEKIKUBO: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I know that you are asking me to clarify - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssekikubo, I have ruled that there is no breach of any rule which you have quoted. (Applause) 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that ruling and I wish to end by laying on table the final communiqué  from the Youth Forum and the communiqué from the People’s Forum, which talks about realising peoples potential. Thank you very much. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.42
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament, hosting CHOGM was a major event in our history - it was! (Applause) Uganda, for example, was wrongly associated with brutality, with AIDS, but when these people came and saw for themselves, our image was greatly improved. (Applause) They came and saw with their eyes, they slept in our hotels, they ate the food we prepared, so they realised that Uganda has the capacity to host many international conferences.

I begin with the issue of image; image is about how we are viewed internally and externally. As you know, I travel a lot. Whenever you would ask some people, “Where is Uganda?” they ask, “Oh is that the country where Amin practiced brutality?” Now that image has been eroded. We have a positive image. That is a major achievement for us and for our children.

The infrastructure was repaired - the roads, we have new hotels and so on. So, again, this is something which is going to benefit us. There is also tourism. 

Our duty is to maintain what we have achieved. It has been said that Ugandans can only maintain bicycles, but we are going beyond maintaining bicycles. Our duty will be to maintain the infrastructure which we have put in place -(Interjections)- the hotels, the State House. (Laughter) So, we have to work out modalities for maintaining this infrastructure. 

Let me also say that when Uganda is confronted by major international opportunities and challenges, all Ugandans, regardless of their political and other differences, must be patriotic. We must work as a team, regardless. This is an international opportunity. (Applause)

I am also delighted to mention that Her Majesty and other dignitaries visited us here and Rt hon. Speaker, you spoke extremely well. I want to congratulate you. (Applause) His Excellency the President spoke very well and of course Her Majesty the Queen of Britain. All these were great achievements. Parliament as an arm of the State was not oblivionised; it was given the significance it requires. 

May I also thank our Creator because of good weather. We were worried that floods might lugubrious us - (Laughter) - but the Almighty, the Creator, enabled us to have good weather and also security. These were major achievements. Currently, there is international terrorism; if anything bad happened to the Queen or to any of us, it would have hit the headlines and our image would have suffered, but God the Creator sustained us, and of course our security arrangements were outstanding.

May I also take this opportunity to thank H.E the President for the effort he made in persuading us to host CHOGM. Above all, he has become chairperson of this body politic and international. I beg to support the motion.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I beg to seek your guidance on our Rules of Procedure. Rule 67 (2), which I will read verbatim, states: “It is out of order to anticipate a motion by discussion of any matter directly relating to the subject matter of the motion prior to the date appointed for the consideration of the motion.” 

Mr Speaker, you have ruled that we await hon. Onyango Kakoba’s report, which we shall fully debate and pass in this House - (Applause) - and yet we seem to be proceeding in anticipation of that report by jumping ahead of it. Are we procedurally in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are mixed up. With due respect, you are mixed up. Proceed.

4.50
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, CHOGM was not a movie; the event actually happened in Uganda and successfully too. (Applause) Can we therefore separate the successful event which took place in Uganda? If you did not seize the opportunity to market this country of yours, what you should note is that CHOGM was a success. Therefore, as an advocate of nation building, I am very concerned and I want to apologise to the taxpayers of this country if this Parliament this afternoon has given an impression that we are not very sure whether we should congratulate ourselves as a country for this successful event.

Honourable colleagues, can we make a separation and disaggregate between issues of national interest and issues of settling scores or disagreements? There were other countries that were interested in hosting CHOGM, but our country - possibly because of our bad history, we have lost love for it - was blessed to host this event. 

I want to repeat that it was an opportunity for Uganda to host this event, and as a country we should be proud. I was beginning to lose hope on whether when we would ever see a Kampala with some good flowers; a city where people know where to cross. At least there is some semblance of beautification in Kampala. The question we should be asking now is, “What do we do to maintain it or even do better?” 

I think we should not be doing this only for CHOGM; actually, we should now be charged to host more events like CHOGM. I am actually looking forward to voting an equivalent amount of funding to sort out some problem like power and land once and for all, in order to outgrow this business of sprinkling our national budget on each and every event without much impact.  

Honourable colleagues, the infrastructure that was put in place for CHOGM did not go with the Queen. I was blessed to go to the airport before the Queen came in and I came back just before the Queen had left - actually I missed CHOGM so much – and I was surprised at the developments at Entebbe like the bridges and so on. For those of you who were here and have not gone out yet, the airport is now new (Applause). There is a lot of modernisation. It has been given a facelift. Those are the things we would like to identify with as a country. My concern, however, is whether we can maintain this. The question now is, “What do we do to make sure that this amount of preparedness, this forward movement, is maintained beyond CHOGM for the good of our people? (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, can the honourable member name at least one or two bridges that he claims to have been constructed under CHOGM?

MR BIRAAHWA: Mr Speaker, I am talking of air bridges; there are passenger air bridges on our terminal. Hon. Ssekikubo, I told you that I was not here when the Queen came in. I went out of the country just before she came in and I returned when she was flying out. So, I had the opportunity to go through the terminals, the VIP lounge and see all these facilities. There is something we call a passenger air bridge, and there are two at the airport. (Interruption)  

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Biraahwa for giving way. I just want him to clarify to me whether he is one of those people who are demystifying the fact that for us to cause all these big changes, we need events such as CHOGM; or is he one of those, like me, who believe that we must do these things all the time? Could you clarify?

MR BIRAAHWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my brother, hon. Otada, for re-echoing what I have already said. It is my prayer that even in the next budget, we vote money not only because the Queen is coming but also for different issues and programmes, which are outstanding, for the good of this country and not just for the sake of CHOGM. I have sighted power, the land question and others. I have also said that it is important to make sure we maintain whatever we put in place.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security for what they have done to upgrade our Police. Our Police have been limping as far as transport is concern. I am happy to see a lot of vehicles now. My prayer is that these vehicles not only be maintained but also be sent to our periphery districts, which do not have these kinds of facilities. When I saw the traffic men dressed in white, I thought that our parliamentary stewards who put on white had gone to the roads. My prayer is for this to be maintained. 

I was dismayed last evening when I saw a lady in front of Tropical Bank losing a bag because the SPCs have already been withdrawn. Can we do something to ensure that these security personnel are not only for foreign dignitaries but also for our people?  

This event also reminded me of when I was a young man and my church was celebrating its centenary; they printed a lot of fabrics. My grandmother still has the centenary fabric. When the Pope came to Uganda, the Catholic Church printed a lot of caps and fabrics. I do not know how we forgot this time round, because that could have been one way of being – (Interjection).

4.58
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I am proceeding under Rule 68, and in view of Rule 67(3) and (4), and based on the fact that the Order Paper has a lot of material today that is of urgent and permanent importance; I move that the debate on this motion be closed and the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read the whole rule?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, the motion I am raising is actually to put the question that debate on this motion be closed. My justification is based on three grounds: One is that there is a committee of this House that is supposed to come and give us a report on CHOGM activities - a comprehensive report - that will deal with issues of accountability and the rest. Secondly, the Order Paper has too much business today, which we need to discuss. In view of that, and since the mover has deliberately refused to stay his motion, I move that the question be put under rule 68 and this current debate be closed.  

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read the whole rule please?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, Mr Speaker. It says: “After a question has been proposed in the House or in a Committee and debated - which has already been done - a Member may move ‘That the question be now put’…”

THE SPEAKER: The Speaker is of the view that that is an abuse of the rule. Having seen so many people wanting to contribute, and some may be rejecting with good reasons, for us to close the debate now would be an abuse of the rule. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier when we were considering the matter of the report of the Committee on CHOGM, issues were raised that in our view necessitated the deferment of this motion. The arguments that were put have been demonstrated in the words of the first speaker and in the words of the person moving the motion. You only debate a motion on which you are informed. 

Government organised CHOGM, and an ordinary backbench Member arrogates the right of Government to report to this House how CHOGM went and tabled documents whose sources we do not know. And a Member then stands up to say, “What now remains is for these roads to be maintained” without knowing how much it cost us. How on earth can we honestly pronounce ourselves on this motion, just on the strength of this? 

Mr Speaker, I do not know what this anxiety is about, because when you hold a wedding, you do not call a meeting to say how the shelter you prepared was so good, let those who attended the wedding tell you that it was a good function. Why are we making ourselves look like there is something fishy? 

So, on the basis of the argument we brought before, there are things that are being said that will pre-empt the work of the committee on CHOGM in giving us an evaluation. Why shouldn’t you allow the ministers who organised the CHOGM to bring to this House a report that tells us about their success, and instead some ordinary backbench Member takes it away from them. It is incredible! We are not going to take it from hon. Okecho, he is not Government, we will wait for Government to give a report on CHOGM and we will debate it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you are not assisting me; under what rule should I stop a Member who has properly moved a motion not to have it debated? This motion was listed on the cause-list. In fact, the select committee had not completed the terms of reference, this is what hon. Alaso told you; the terms of reference were also to assist in making an evaluation, which they have not yet done. So, they were saying that the report was filed prematurely. So, honourable Leader of the Opposition, there is no rule under which I can stop this debate.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, when the preliminary concerns were raised, long before the motion was moved, it would have been possible under your guidance to advise hon. Okecho that in the circumstance, go and consider this. But once it is on the Floor you cannot; under what rule would you stop the debate?

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, are you advising that I should have gone on camera and advised hon. Okecho in view of what has been said? Whatever was said was said in his presence; I would be influencing him. You see, honourable members, if you think that it is not merited, you say so and the motion will be thrown away.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, we are not talking about the merit of the motion; why shouldn’t we thank Government? We are only saying that if we now say things like my honourable colleague was saying, and then the report comes and shows you that for every kilometre of those flowers, they spend Shs 100 million, what are you going to say, that after all they are beautiful?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have heard that this motion was prematurely tabled. So, just debate against it and reject it.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, our request for the debate to be deferred is in good faith. In this House, there is a precedent that once a motion has been moved, the Speaker can use his seat to defer the debate to another time. The reason we are requesting this is that when hon. Onyango Kakoba was presenting this paper, he said that it was the Business Committee which stopped him from making another report. And, Mr Speaker, the Business Committee is chaired by you. I would not like a situation whereby we say that the Speaker did not want the report to be made, yet the House is pushing for another – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ocula, the Business Committee is chaired by the Speaker, but I have not been here for a week, and when that committee sat, I was not available. But the Leader of the Opposition is a Member of the Business Committee, so -(Mr Banyenzaki rose_)– hold on please. Hon. Wopuwa was there and I explained what was decided. But the point is that, this motion is by hon. Okecho who has a right to move a motion, and when he moves a motion, it does not mean that it is going to be carried on. You will be given the opportunity to water it down and then reject it.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, this motion is very important and what we decide as Members of Parliament today will depict the true image of Parliament of Uganda. I have listened carefully, I have seen the presentation of hon. Okecho, he was just reading a prepared text, and now Parliament is being used to append and make a decision on a matter to which we have no clear information –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, a number of issues have been raise in regard to the queries on this motion. On each of all these queries, you have pronounced yourself as the Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to go against your numerous rulings on the matter and take us back? I beg for your ruling, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I have clearly stated that I have not seen any rule which I can use to stop a Member who has properly moved his motion not to continue with it. 

But I give you an opportunity, hon. Okot Ogong, to show that this motion is not substantiated and therefore it should be rejected; besides we shall vote.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, with due respect to you, this matter is on the Order Paper. I believe the Member went to you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To me?

MR OKOT OGONG: To your Office.

THE SPEAKER: No, the Member –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Then he did not give notice. Now the motion is incompetent because the Speaker must have notice that there is going to be a motion. It is incompetent. 

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, hon. Okot Ogong, please. Even if the Member had come to me, could I have rejected his motion to be placed on the Order Paper? On what grounds? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I expect you to guard the image of this Parliament. I expect you and Members of Parliament to do things that will-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, I am asking you to help me. This motion was filed and it was put on the Order Paper. Assuming he had come to me, which he did not do anyway, under what rule should I have rejected his motion? 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for – (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: I am still on the Floor. (Laughter). Mr Speaker, notice of motions, subject to the provisions of Rule 43 – (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, Who is on the Floor? Sit; let me - (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: I am still on the Floor.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, can I be protected?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, under our Rule 43, Notice of Motions, “Subject to the provisions of Rule 44, no motion shall be moved unless the Member moving it has given written notice of the same motion to the Speaker and the Clerk not less than three days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to be moved.”

Mr Speaker, if you are informing us now that you are not aware of the motion, and that the notice was not given to you, then I want to move that this motion is incompetent because it was not moved under Rule 43.

THE SPEAKER: You are a top freight lawyer. I have said there is the Office of the Speaker. I have been in Addis Ababa for a week, but the Office of the Speaker is here. So, whether I am in the office or not, the Office of the Speaker is there. Do you know the date when this motion was drafted? [Mr Banyenzaki: “The motion was drafted today.”] Let us not argue matters that we cannot substantiate. Let us not be emotional on this matter. Let us debate it, reject it or support it.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am only giving what I am entitled to speak. It is my understanding and I think everybody will be entitled to their perception on hon. Okecho’s motion. How I wish the CNN advert that we had done before to market our country had been replayed and re-echoed during the CHOGM visit. 

Let us also use this opportunity to appeal to all the contractors in the CHOGM procurement and logistics, to make sure that much as the Queen has gone, the jobs they were doing before are completed. But also our foreign missions and our ministry and our investment authority should follow up the opportunities which our country did market, because it is not enough to host CHOGM if we cannot make a follow up on these opportunities.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to end by saying that if my son has a wedding and he succeeds in wedding, if my family members mismanage the function, it does not stop me from congratulating my son and my family for having got a wife. Then later, I will go and pursue my brother who brought a bad bull, I will go and pursue my children who drunk all the booze from the store, but I cannot say that I regret why my son ever married. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.15
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to clarify the position that I feel Members have on this motion. No one is opposed to the motion of hon. Okecho, but the good motion is being marred by the suspicions and the bad issues that people want cited before the motion is supported. So, it is not in order for the honourable Member of Parliament, who is presenting the motion, to subject such a good motion to such sentiments which the Members clearly presented before he read the motion. 

As a Member of Parliament for Kampala, I do not want emotions like that to mar the good intention of the mover of the motion. I think we are all debating this but it is the obligation of the Member of Parliament who moved the motion to protect the motion before it is subjected to ridicule. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: I think I had given an opportunity to hon. Omara Atubo.

5.17
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the motion. It is unfortunate, and I want to say this at the beginning, that a motion of this importance has been marred at the outside by some degree of controversy.

This Parliament has an important responsibility to promote the good image of this country. We are part of a global society and in our activity we must try as much as possible to ensure that whatever we do, as an important organ of Government, we do so in the promotion of our foreign relations. 

This motion to me is brought in good faith and it is timely. I say so because the motion is requesting Parliament to pronounce itself immediately, after two things have happened with CHOGM namely; the organising and hosting. Mr Speaker, auditing and evaluation of an activity is a professional act which takes time. What we are doing here now is a political pronouncement. 

I do sympathize and agree with Members who are worried that this motion may prejudice the process of evaluation and auditing mainly of the financial implications of hosting the CHOGM. That to me is a valid criticism; but I also think that what this motion seeks to do is to ask a few basic questions with respect to the organising and hosting of this CHOGM.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is hosting this CHOGM nearly four years after it was first offered to us. It is, therefore, not news that we are hosting this CHOGM. Uganda applied for it, it was accepted in Abuja and it was confirmed in Malta. Therefore, Ugandans and the rest of the world are aware that this CHOGM had to take place, and it has taken place. So, what is this motion seeking to do? This motion is seeking to ask some basic questions: 

•	Did CHOGM physically take place in Uganda? It did. If the answer is yes, the next question is,
•	 Did the important personalities who should attend CHOGM come for the meeting, people like the Queen? Did heads of state come? Did the other conferences associated with CHOGM take place? If the answers are yes, we can go deeper and ask ourselves,
•	Did the CHOGM take place peacefully? Did we have any security problem where possibly the life of the heads of state or any member of delegation was endangered? Did the delegates come to Uganda and leave Uganda safely? If these questions are asked and answered in the affirmative, then the question of organising and hosting the CHOGM, Mr Speaker, did it take place successfully? 

However, I am not blind at all to the concerns the Members as well as people outside this House are raising, including myself - the question of the money spent on CHOGM. Was there corruption? Did the ordinary women who swept Kampala streets get paid? Were the people who provided their vehicles for hire paid? Were there any other hand dealings? Did people benefit in a way which they should not benefit? All these are questions which my colleague, the honourable has said and has compared rightly to a wedding or to a graduation party. We have all been able to -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. It is good you are raising questions that appear on page two of the motion, particularly paragraph two which wants you, a doubting Thomas like me, to confirm the fact that Government spent a substantial amount of money on infrastructure which infrastructure we do not know where it is, or how much was spent, who paid it or who used it. 

On accommodation, it does not show which accommodation, how many people came, how much Government put in and all the like. On beautification, who received that money? Where was the beautification and all the like? So, can you clarify to me, honourable minister, whether you have detailed information on that or you want us to ignore it and proceed? 

MR ATUBO: Thank you very much. In fact, I am happy that you have asked that question. You read it and ask a question: “…Cognisant of the fact that the government spent a substantial amount of money on infrastructural improvements…” even stop there. By passing this motion, you are already putting the government to account. You are saying that the government has spent a lot of money and, therefore, when the report comes again, the government has already put itself in a position where it must account for this money. So, that motion alone is not in favour and does not prejudice. 

It is not the fact that the government now is going to absolve itself of responsibility. Actually, it puts the government in a very dangerous position because the House is saying you have spent a lot of money, we recognize it, “Cognisant of the fact….” Then you will come and say, “Account for that money.”

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. This paragraph two quoted by my colleague and which the minister has also quoted is so important in the preamble, but it has not been captured in the resolutions. Now, therefore, I move an amendment that we have another resolution, number five or four- it could be inserted anywhere there- that the substantial amount of the money spent in preparation of CHOGM 2007 –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: what page is this? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I am referring to page 2, paragraph two, which has been captured by the mover of the motion referred to by my honourable colleague, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and which the minister consents that it is a good observation but which has not been captured within the resolutions. So, I am moving that we amend the motion and have a resolution to read as follows: “That the substantial amount of money spent in preparation of CHOGM 2007 be accounted for at an earliest time possible in line with good governance and accountability.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Seconded? Yes, hon. Okecho, do you have any objection to that?

MR BANYENZAKI: Further amendment before –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any objection to that amendment? 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, we all know that that amount of money was actually voted for here and it was channelled to a substantive ministry in the government of Uganda, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and it is supposed to be accounted for under the normal processes of an annual accounting procedure. So, I did not feel it was necessary for us to dwell on that bit in this particular motion. (Interruption) 

MR SPEAKER: Please, let us be sober; Let us first of all dispose of this amendment. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Can it come after I have concluded?

MR SPEAKER: Yes. You see, what hon. Banyenzaki is saying is that, in this resolution we put the fact that Government has an obligation to account for this money. 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, I am extremely reluctant to say that because my motion is just an appreciation motion. It just appreciates what the government did. I did not want to put myself and the House into a situation where we have to order Government to do what it ought to do. (Interjections)

MR SPEAKER: Order! My understanding is that, you are appreciating, recognising that Government spent a substantial amount of money on this and this, and you are aware that Government is going to account for it. That is what it means. Why do you not leave the owner of the motion to deal with this first? 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, if the House insists that Government must account, I can concur with the –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member of Parliament moving the motion to insist on issues that have shown that they have consensus in the House? Is it in order for him to subject the motion to – (Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question of demanding accountability is not a matter of insisting. It is good governance that we do account. (Applause)

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to substantially – (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, before Mr Okecho ends –(Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: Unfortunately, hon. Banyenzaki did not write it –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: No. Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR OKECHO: I am trying to assist you honourable. Can you please allow me to say what I want to say?

MR SPEAKER: You moved a motion, which you want to place in the –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, this motion has just been circulated and it is substantial that amendments will come on the Floor – (Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: If you say that it has just been circulated, I do not have a copy myself. You should have started with me.

MR BANYENZAKI: Actually this motion has just landed in this Parliament today. As, Mr Speaker, you are aware, as members were saying –(Interjection)– the Hansard has captured my amendment. 

MR SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, what you should do in future, if you have such a written amendment, you forward it to the Speaker so that he reads the amendment to the House. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Guidance, Mr Speaker. You are also receiving this motion here. How could I have written an amendment for a motion, which has just landed in the House a few minutes back? (Applause and Laughter)

MR SPEAKER: My understanding is that, you should propose an amendment. The amendment was made and we are delivering it to the owner of the motion. Now, you are telling me that already copies of this amendment are with the Members. I do not have it! [Mr Okot Ogong: “Procedure”]. Let us first dispose of this issue of the amendment, apparently, which the mover was accepting but we did not have a written text to put it on the Order Paper. That is the only problem.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I can write it in the next five minutes and bring it here now. May I with your permission leave the House, Mr Speaker, to go and write that amendment?

MR SPEAKER: And can I help you maybe. Will this satisfy you? That at the end of this paragraph two, “And aware that Government has a responsibility to account for this money” - (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, for clarity, I am saying that this should be amendment No.4 and amendment No.4 becomes No.5. And the amendment clearly reads that: “The substantial amounts of money spent in preparation of CHOGM 2007 be accounted for at the earliest time possible in line with good governance and accountability.” 

MR SPEAKER: Okay. Is that okay?

MR OKECHO: I think that is fine. I concede that one. But I would just say that in accordance with Government procedure – [Mr Otada: “Clarification”]

MR SPEAKER: Hold on. Let us finish one thing then go to another. Are you through with your amendment?

MR BANYENZAKI: If it has been accepted.

MR SPEAKER: Yes, it has been accepted.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I think we are killing the motion. First of all, I like what hon. Omara Atubo and a few other colleagues said. That we have a duty to do a diplomatic sort of relation, as a Parliament, and it is in the interest of all of us that even in our own cultures, it is only natural and befitting that at the end of the day, somebody must pass a vote of thanks.

Mr Speaker, the Commonwealth definitely will take cognisance of the fact that this Parliament appreciates the fact that CHOGM took place here, and this is a point which is common knowledge to all Members of Parliament. My only point of deviation - maybe let me put it in a different way. There are some people who have actually tried to reconstruct it to befit a local function cum to befit a big function like CHOGM. 

To say that when you host a wedding, it is only right for you to thank the people who turned up; the people who did this and the people who did that and you end there. But the moment you begin venturing into deep waters and in the context of CHOGM, for example, if you begin bringing a fact like that given that we have spent a lot of money, Mr Speaker, that is not befitting for this very motion. For us what we simply want to do in this House is to recognise one, two, three, four, five things which hon. Omara Atubo highlighted very well. But the moment we went into deep waters of talking about roads; talking about all these sorts of things, that is not right for now. Because definitely as you said, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable member, what do you propose as of now?

MR OTADA: I propose that we strike off issues to do with the roads; how you improved your infrastructure, how we did all this. This is now venturing into the Onyango Kakoba report, for example. So, I would want that we should delete all issues that go into the details of what we did while we were preparing for CHOGM and simply recognise the fact that we hosted CHOGM and thank everybody who matters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, but again, hon. Otada, you have not been helpful in the sense that you have not told us the paragraph, which you want to delete. 

MR OTADA: In fact, Mr Speaker, I would think that since there are so many divergent views, and it has always been a good gesture by the Speaker that we could have a meeting of minds, for example, if you could allow two or three or four people to go and redraft because there are so many minds, which are not meeting and then we come back and pass a resolution that has meetings of minds with a common objective.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, can I say something?  

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait we reply to hon. Otada and then you come in? 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, if that is the feeling of the House and a suggestion from hon. Otada - I spent a lot of time thinking about this motion and I feel that we can actually do away with that paragraph two from the top of page 2 and we go straight to appreciating the opening ceremony et cetera. That “Cognizant of the fact that the government spent a substantial amount of money on infrastructural,” - you know, can be deleted. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Can I be protected; hon. Members are making a lot of noise. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, personally, I would not be interested in us really subjecting this debate to even a vote in this House here because that would send different messages outside. I think that the problem was in the framing of the motion because if this motion was to congratulate ourselves on having handled this matter peacefully, having succeeded in promoting tourism, and having succeeded from the outcome of the   communiqué and we stopped there - because if we venture into the areas of say some workers were not paid and work not being completed, that now ventures into the areas of hon. Onyango Kakoba. 

So, I think the mover should have consulted widely and known that such things would come. And that is why I was praying that the mover would have conceded postponing such that these issues are sorted out other than us mixing because Members are failing to differentiate between the issues which we want to applaud the government for having successfully completed. 

So, it was in that spirit that we are appealing that the motion be postponed or withdrawn and then later on, after all these issues have been sorted out, such that we are able to thank ourselves and congratulate Uganda for having held this conference successfully, peacefully, promoted tourism and with the communiqué that came. 

To me that is how I have been looking at it.  But if we subject this motion to the vote and the motion is lost, it is bad. So, that is how I am looking at it. If my advice – because I am pointing at what hon. Otada was putting across; if it was in those areas, I would not have any problem with us thanking the government for having done that. Thank you.   

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL CO-OPERATION) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I want to reiterate in this House that we in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we in the government, are under a constitutional obligation and a good governance obligation to account for all the money that we received to undertake the CHOGM activity. Whether this Parliament adds an amendment or not, we must account. And this House has an obligation to ensure that they perform their oversight role. We know this and we are preparing for it.

However, Sir, the essence of this motion - and that is why in my view I want to support it and thank the mover – is that, at this point we had guests who came and went. The purpose of this motion is that we as a Parliament express ourselves on the event that took place. And anything that either is in this motion which affects this essence, which has international importance, we must get rid of it so that we have a motion that expresses what we want to say. 

To that effect, therefore, without going into the substance of this motion, I want to support the honourable mover who says we can remove the paragraph recognising that Government spent substantial money and we preserve the essence, the pearl within this statement and vote ourselves on it tomorrow or the day after and then we can come back to deal with matters of accountability.

THE SPEAKER: What I have gathered is that, maybe Members would want to look at this motion and improve on it. Would you like to have just sometime, you look at the text – we shall resume the debate so that you take time and tomorrow, we continue with the debate with an improved version. Do you mind? This is not to say that we shall not continue with the debate on the motion but just to improve on the text.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, if the Members feel that they need to look at this motion again and maybe tomorrow we continue with the debate and definitely by that time, it can be passed unanimously – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, please adhere to the rules. 

MR OKECHO: And it can be passed unanimously, I, the mover – (Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I want to implore this House that if it comes out that we again defer this motion, that in itself defeats the very purpose which we are trying to pursue.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, I have said that adjourning today for him to refine does not mean that we have stopped the debate on the motion. It is just to improve his motion. The question of saying that we shelve it because hon. Kakoba has not – that does not arise. You are given time to look at the text and improve on it if it requires so. That is all.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Elijah made a point that it would be a mistake for Uganda to have a division on this motion. I think that is a big point. The point is that we must separate preparations for CHOGM and how the actual event was managed. Then you satisfy the suspicious minds, as my friend said, so that the preparations are assessed, evaluated and a report comes. 

But the point that CHOGM took place and was successful as we have been saying, the whole country should come out and say we succeeded. It is even said in the bars and saloons and wherever you go, people are happy that CHOGM succeeded. Therefore, we should come out as Uganda and “Twekuba mukifuba” as they say and say we had a successful CHOGM. Then we go back and satisfy the suspicious minds about preparations: was there value for money and what not? There is no problem. 

I think it is important that we all come together but we do not leave here today as if this motion was rejected. We leave knowing that the motion was going to be polished up so that we all come together and pronounce ourselves unanimously. I beg to convince the mover of the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my appeal to you is that we should keep the decorum of the House. Shouting as if we are in a bazaar, standing here like that, is not good. Let us be sober in handling our business. But I have seen the actions as if this is a bazaar. It is not a bazaar under a tree. It is a meeting in this august Chamber, presented to us by Her Majesty’s Government, where Her Majesty sat and you behave as if it is a bazaar meeting? Please stop it!

Now our agreement is that the mover, hon. Okecho, with friends – you can choose friends from this side or the other to look at it, bring it tomorrow and we shall finish it tomorrow. 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, that is a good suggestion. I will take some few people, we go through this and tomorrow we shall continue with the debate. Thank you very much.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I agree with hon. Nasasira. The moment we walk out of here to go and redraft, it will look as though we are redrafting a motion that is way out of the expectations of Members of parliament. The only thing that, for example, I see that we can remove is just paragraph two. The moment we remove paragraph two, we can go ahead and debate and if we do not finish debating today, we can continue with the debate tomorrow and eventually pass the thing. But, if we go back, it will send a wrong signal to the public.

THE SPEAKER: We are not going back. We are giving time to the mover with colleagues to improve on the text of the motion but substantially the motion remains debatable. We are going to start with it tomorrow. But, please, let us be sober. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am very sober now. (Laughter) I was not sober because the integrity of Parliament was being attacked and was at stake. For a Member of Parliament to constantly refer to the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you always observe indignity. Your dignity should never be surrendered.

MR OKOT OGONG: That is affecting the image of Parliament, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Your dignity should never be surrendered at all circumstances. I think we have agreed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too have acquired much more sobriety and at the end of the day, it is our duty as Parliament both the back benchers and front benchers to come as a united Parliament and we have to make, especially these matters of national importance; we have them, we receive them –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Allow me to interrupt you because this morning, I was presiding over a function in the Parliamentary Gardens and one Member said when he was coming, he was told not to go to wine and dine. And it happened that at the function, there was opening of the champagne and I wondered whether that was dining and wining and that might have affected us. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, with that philosophical note, I find it really difficult to proceed in my normal flow of ideas. But nonetheless, I would like to thank the mover and the front bench for having conceded and allowed us to move together as a united Parliament and I thank you Members for the spirited show you have put up - (Laughter) - and the entire Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we proceed on another item? So, the agreement is that tomorrow we shall resume the debate on a refined text of this motion.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINES

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. [Honourable members: “Where are copies of the report?”] Copies of the report are being circulated. It is a short report and it talks about two issues that were referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline regarding Rule 25 and the proposal to create a Committee on the East African Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, are Members just getting their copies?

MR KIYINGI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think what we can do is to let you lay the report before the House and after the Members have read it, you will come and make a summary before we debate.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, can that be tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: It could be even tomorrow if they are able to study the report over night.

MR KIYINGI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I, therefore, move to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for Members to consider and debate at an appropriate stage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Tomorrow or the other day we shall debate this report. Do we have any other item?

Okay, I think is the appropriate time to adjourn and House is adjourned until tomorrow to start business at 2.00 p.m. sharp.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 December 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)








