Wednesday, 8 December 2004

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to inform you that we have a bit of trouble with the air conditioning. There was a power circuit that disturbed it. So we have switched it off, but we have opened the windows. We hope that it will not be too uncomfortable, and the weather is reasonably cool.

Secondly, I regret to inform honourable members that Mrs Louise Kato who has been the Manager for the Parliamentary Canteen died this morning in Nairobi Hospital. She has been there after a motor accident in Kenya, which involved other members of her family, but we shall be informed about the burial arrangements. Since she has been a part of us, and feeding us for a long time, let me ask honourable members to stand up to observe a minute of silence in her memory.  

(The Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also I would like to inform Members that hon. Tubwita, the Member for Nakasongola was involved in an accident last Friday together with her two uncles and her driver. She is now out of hospital but she is resting at her home in Kajjansi. I spoke to her today and she thinks that she is out of danger. So, maybe she will be joining us in a short while. 

Then, please let us congratulate Col. Fred Bogere, member of this House, who has completed a one-year course at the National Defence College in Kenya. He now has a Master of Arts, International Studies from the University of Nairobi. (Applause)  Congratulations from all of us. Thank you.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance on two procedural concerns. No. 1, about eight weeks ago, in this august House, in the course of our debate on a number of items specifically on Budget, we raised the issue of the gender, and National Political Commissar rose and promised that within four weeks the government would come up with achievements on the policy on the matter of gender parity. It has been now nine weeks; we are still waiting to hear this particular answer.  

Two, Madam Speaker, once again I arise to raise concern on the security of Members of Parliament and the precincts of Parliament. It is a clear policy and practice in this august House that no other person shall carry a gun or an explosive except those authorized, and specifically members of the Parliamentary Police Force.

I note with great concern that the Minister of Defence moves in the precincts of Parliament with a lorry lot of armed soldiers who are supposed to leave their guns at the gate, the armoury. They have defied our procedure. I have raised it a number of times; they do not do it. To make matters worse, after I had raised this concern, last week the convoy of the Minister of Defence knocked a car of one of our colleagues in the august House. I am glad they have agreed to settle it out of court. (Laughter) Nevertheless it poses a great danger, and my biggest fear is that if they do not obey the authority of the Sergeant-At-Arms and the Parliamentary Police Force, one day there could be a misunderstanding and there would be an exchange of fire with untold consequences.

Madam Speaker, how do you advise me, can you guide me on those two items. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I recall actually I was in the Chair when the National Political Commissar promised a statement. I do not know when it can come because Members required it.

3.03
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTIFOLIO & NATIONAL POLITICAL COMMISSAR (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga):  I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for pursuing this matter. Madam Speaker, the statement is ready, but I do not have it right now. With your permission, I could present the statement on Tuesday or Thursday next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR AWORI: Madam speaker, with your permission, I did not raise this matter as a matter of just calendar time. I am raising specifically with a concern that as a member of the Appointments Committee, I am aware that the government has nominated four persons to seat on the Bench whose names we shall be receiving in due course and none of the four nominees is a woman, and much more so, we have never had a woman Moslem on the bench; we have people.

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam speaker, I think our rules do not allow speculation. The Speaker’s office has not officially received names from the appointing authority. So, can we rely on speculation from my respected colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the matter was raised in good faith, especially the issue of the women.  So, -(Laughter)- I think the Minister of Justice has taken note and will do the necessary to rectify that situation.

3.06
MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for your ruling on the matter of gender. It is good that the information has come to us early, and we hope that something will be done to it. 

As far as the gender issue is concerned, I think we as leaders should consider the issue of quality. So, I am not going to be too restrictive, Madam Speaker, that we go for a particular religious group, but we should go for women who should perform and uplift the standard of women. That is very important.

Madam Speaker, when we struck a deal recently on the issue of letting one of our brothers, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, to remain in the House, I remember the Speaker – you were out of the country at that time. The Speaker proposed that maybe before we leave for Christmas we should have prayers, and now there is more need for prayer. Because, Madam Speaker, the story I read in the papers today has upset me so much. Our Motto is “For God and my country” and we believe in the power of God. Really if Satan is worshiped at the highest level, you can imagine how much this country will bear the wrath of God! So Madam Speaker, I want to urge you, as a matter of urgency, to arrange this prayer so that we can revoke this satanic power from having effect in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your attention.

MR NELSON GAGAWALA: But, Madam Speaker, I was standing up to raise a point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, she has sat.

MR GAGAWALA: That, is hon. Cecil Ogwal really in order to say that all African religions practiced in Uganda are satanic, when she herself is an African and was raised by Africans even before she became Christian? Africans have been here for thousands and thousands of years. Certainly they have been having God; is she really in order to stand up in this House to relegate all Africans that anybody who is actually worshiping in an African way is a satanic force in this world?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know hon. Ogwal is a born again Christian, so what she is asking for is a Christmas service; that is what she was asking for.

MRS OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, yes, I was asking for a Christmas service, but I was also saying that we all swear by either the Koran or the Bible. I have never known anybody swearing by the act of paganism. So, Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for –(Interruption)

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that, when you read the Holy Bible, when Paul went to Antioch, in the Bible we swear by, when he reached there, he got the people worshiping a number of gods and in the centre they had preserved a place for the unknown God and he said that is the God I bring you. In Africa, people also praise other small gods, but amidst us we know we have the great God who presides over all those gods. So, those gods are in existence with the Supreme God, but the Supreme God is Supreme.

MRS OGWAL: Amen.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, on God and Satan?

MAJ. KAZOORA: From hon. Cecilia Ogwal holding the Floor. She is still holding the Floor, Madam Speaker, and she has allowed me to seek this clarification. The point is; I am wondering why she is surprised that the Vice-President can go to a shrine, because it is the trend of things these days. When you find professors putting on dry banana leaves, for what they – this is the trend of events, Madam Speaker. Why should she be surprised? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think just leave the question of Satan and Government; we shall arrange for the Christmas service.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I want to go back to the issue of gender. I believe my colleagues who raised this issue were basing it on our Constitution, and in particular, the objectives and directives of the Constitution No.IV, with regard to gender balance and representation of marginalized groups, and it is very clear.  

“The state shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalized groups on all constitutional and other bodies.” 

I hope that when the Political Commissar reports, he will also report on the representation of other marginalized groups, including the disabled, because as a matter of fact, a lot of commissions and government bodies have not got membership from these marginalized groups as intended by our Constitution. So I pray that, that is also included. Thank you.

3.13
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I am standing here on a matter of public concern related to a fundamental letter from his Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to the Minister of Lands. It has been circulated to all the Members of Parliament, but because of the magnitude of the issues the President raised, it is important, Madam Speaker, that I say something.

The title of that letter was “Emerging Land Crisis in Nakasongola” and being a Member of Parliament who once moved an amendment to the Land Act of 1998, I felt it was prudent for me to raise alarm and seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business for the matters raised by the President.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President stated in that letter that the security services’ reports he is receiving from Nakasongola on the eviction of peasants, using their ignorance, demands for immediate action. One question I would like to put is; why should such reports be based on security personnel other than the RDCs and the political leaders in that area?  

Madam Speaker, the President has also stated that the absent landlords, who happen to be Baganda, are behind those evictions. Madam Speaker, are the Baganda land titles fake? In accordance with Article 29(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, “Everyone is free to live or own property in any part of Uganda.”  Isn’t the President inciting the Baruli to do something harmful to the Baganda landlords when he talks a language like this? The President said, and I quote verbatim:

“We shall stand squarely on the side of the oppressed and liberate them from this colonial nonsense.” 

What an incitement! Suppose anything befell the Baganda landlords, wouldn’t the President be answerable?  

Madam Speaker, don’t non-Baganda including the President own land here in Buganda? Is it only the Baruli who must own land in Nakasongola? Am I not free, as a Ugandan, to own land in Nakasongola? What is the President talking about?

Finally, Madam Speaker, the challenges I am making are scientific and they demand for a scientific answer because I have quoted data from the Constitution –(Interruptions)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Philip Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues. Is the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, a Member of Parliament for Lubaga South, in order to quote an isolated statement from the President’s communication, which was a three-page communication to the Minister of Lands and copied to many leaders, including the Minister of Local Government? Is he in order to just isolate statements or sentences out of that total statement? Why doesn’t he just read the whole communication to the Minister of Lands? Is he in order therefore to attack the President without quoting the whole letter in totality? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I saw a copy of a letter, it had only two pages. It had the top page and the back page. So I do not know whether the one, which came to Local Government is different and the one, which came here is different. It is only one sheet of paper; that is what he is reading. Are there two letters on that matter?

DR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, to be very honest and sincere, let him read the whole letter verbatim. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the letter.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with your permission I could read the President’s letter, but it has been circulated to all the Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I was concluding my remarks.  Can I conclude my questions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You read it and table it because it was circulated but it is not part of the Hansard. You read it and table it here.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The letter is dated 22 November 2004. It is addressed to the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment, Kampala. The subject is: “Emerging land crisis in Nakasongola”

“I am getting reports from Security Services that absentee landlords are evicting peasants using ignorance, and government agents such as RDCs are not intervening to defend the people. Nakasongola is being sited as one example.  

According to the Land Act CAP.227, Section 29(5), ‘No bona fide occupant of land can be possibly evicted except on a willing seller-buyer basis’.  How, then, are tenants being evicted? In this case of Nakasongola, I am informed that the absentee landlords are Baganda, while the squatters are the original owners, the Baruli. We had resolved this on a win-win basis - the tenants are assured of security of tenure and only nominal rent and ownership of the landlords was restored. 

In the case of Nakasongola, 85 percent of the land belongs to absentee landlords, mailo or leasehold; 95 percent of the Baruli/Banyala are squatters. If the landlords do not wish to respect our win-win solution, then as always, we shall stand squarely on the side of the oppressed and liberate them from this colonial nonsense.

Finally, apparently three thousand of the much-trumpeted 9000 square miles by Mengo is in Buruli.  Check the facts quickly. I do not want to hear that peasants are being evicted except if their claims are incompatible with the 2000 Land Act. I demand prompt report.  

Yours Kaguta Museveni, President” 

And the letter, Madam Speaker, is copied to the Vice President, the Prime Minister, the Attorney General, the Ministry of Local Government, all RDCs, all District Chairpersons, all Members of Parliament, Director General of ISO. 

So Madam Speaker, I was concluding my concerns since I have read the contents of His Excellency the President’s letter.

Finally, as I conclude my remarks, -(Interruptions)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have my sympathies to hon. Lukyamuzi. I vividly remember either in the first or second session of this Parliament, hon. Lukyamuzi made an attempt to move a motion in this Parliament because some people in his constituency were being evicted by some landlord. I vividly remember, Madam Speaker, standing up to support hon. Lukyamuzi because he was rightfully trying to protect the oppressed. I am now being surprised that hon. Lukyamuzi, having received my support, he is now turning around.  Hon. Lukyamuzi, who must have read history, knows that Buruli is among the lost counties and he vividly knows that I also represent one of the lost counties and when hon. Lukyamuzi made an attempt to move a motion, I did say that the people of his constituency were very disciplined because if it was in Bugangaizi, we have only had one medicine.  We use our pangas and spears. Actually the people of Buruli should be - I will be there on Friday when they are installing Sabaruli, and I intend to use the same forum to advise them to use spears and pangas to whoever comes to disturb them on their land -(Laughter)- and Madam Speaker, I am being serious. (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the Parliament of Uganda and one of the cardinal duties of this Parliament is to make laws upon which the administration of this country should be based. We make laws for the order as prescribed in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, my honorable colleague is referring to a situation where he, as part of this House, would want to be seen to incite the people of Uganda to use pangas and spears contrary to the provisions of the law. Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Member of Parliament to make a statement bordering on incitement on the Floor of this House, yet its the duty of this House to make good laws for the orderly administration of this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not in order. Hon. Member, I think this is not the right place to advocate for violence.  

DR KASIRIVU: Madam speaker, I wish hon. Dombo had left me to finish my sentence because spears and pangas are weapons for defense. If someone has come to evict you from your piece of land, don’t you defend yourself?

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this House is the epitome of the rule of law and therefore, when we stand here and talk we must try and show the rest of this country that we are in for the rule of the law. Anybody who incites any section or even certain individuals should not be tolerated in this House. All Ugandans who are watching us now want us to say that the rule of law should be advanced. You might have a case in the lost counties that needs to be looked at; we should do that. But we should not advocate for spears, pangas, guns for even beating anybody. Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands, this letter was addressed to you and it was copied to the Members, I think, with the intention that we should also take an interest in what is going on in Nakasongola. Can you let us know – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, can I complete my questions, just one remaining question and I go – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear what the Minister has done, so that we can – (Interjection) 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS & ENVIRONMENT (Col. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you correctly stated, the letter was written to me. I am the steward of the land matters, at the moment, of the Republic of Uganda, with the assistance of the sector Minister. This is a report; a report could be correct or wrong. In order for us to do justice for all those who are concerned, it is prudent of us to take our time, investigate the matter thoroughly, take action where necessary and report to the appointing authority and the inquirer within the law.

As you have seen, the President has said the law was made in order to pursue a win-win situation for the stability of this country. Nobody, absolutely nobody, Munyankore, Rwandese, Muganda, Musoga, has any right at any one time to oppress another citizen.  All we are interested in, in pursuit of this matter, is to do justice to all the landlords and tenants in accordance with the law. I thank you Madam Speaker.

3.29
DR FRANK NABWISO: Madam Speaker, I am getting embarrassed that we are discussing issues which may land this country in more trouble. I would, after listening to the Minister for Lands, move a motion that this matter of the President’s letter be referred to the appropriate committee of this House to investigate and report in due course.  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, I wish colleagues to recall that this House, while passing the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment sectoral budget, recommendation and resolution that the historic Nakasongola land problem be handled like the Kibaale District land problem using the Land Fund. Therefore, the committee, what my colleague, is proposing is not necessary. This House has already directed the Minister to move along that direction and we are proceeding to implement that resolution.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we shall in due course get a report from the Minister.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, although Nakasongola was given by His Excellency as an example, this problem is not limited to Nakasongola.  It is a very big problem, which we are all being engulfed in, and in particular Kiboga and Sembabule districts. So, Madam Speaker, I want to find out from the hon. Minister, when he is investigating this matter, whether he will also cover Kiboga District?  

Madam Speaker, this letter is singling out Baganda; I am a Muganda myself. I would also like to know, who are those people now holding ownership of the land in these areas, who are responsible for the eviction of the indigenous people? In Kiboga district, we have a problem.  This problem is most profound in the so-called public land, which is now managed in the districts by the district land boards. The leaseholders are the ones who are now evicting people en-mass and not the landlords under the 1900 agreement.  

So, Madam Speaker, I was seeking clarification from the minister whether he is going to cover all these areas and tell us by tribe, who are these people holding land now and engaged in the evicting of their fellow Ugandans; so that this question of Baganda are doing this, Baganda are doing that could be confirmed or denied. Otherwise, we may end up looking at these things in a tribalistic manner and may be inviting our colleagues to hate Baganda, that they are the people evicting others. 

COL. OTAFIIRE: Just a minute ago, I said nobody, a Munyankore, a Muganda, a Musoga, an Acholi - may be I should enumerate all the tribes of Uganda; nobody should oppress the other on matters of land. This law was made for a win-win situation. If the President cited absentee landlords in Buruli who happen to be Baganda, there are absentee landlords elsewhere in Kibaale, in Toro, in Busoga who are also conducting themselves exactly the same way.  This is a class question; it has nothing to do with tribe; it is a class question of those who are oppressing those who do not. Study political economy; you will understand the problem much better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us put a close to this.  Can the sector minister tell us whether you have plans to handle Kiboga and Sembabule so that we close. Are you handling Kiboga and Sembabule? I am talking to the hon. Baguma Isoke. Hon. Kiwalabye wanted to know when Kiboga and Sembabule would be handled.

MR ISOKE: Madam Speaker, in addition to what my senior colleague has said, hon. Kiwalabye and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi are Members of the Natural Resources Sectoral Committee for a very long time and they were active participants in the debate concerning land, historic and contemporary problems, and they have helped me in solving most of the problems in their areas. They indeed know what is in the law in form of Section 42, the Land Act, which created the Land Fund and how far Government has gone in paying absentee landlords in Kibaale, Kasese, and West Ankole. As I said earlier, the committee recommended that Nakasongola should quickly be brought on the fold and His Excellency is only telling my Minister to speed up the action of verifying absentee landlords.  

Historically Bwamba and Bukonzo were domineered by Toro Kingdom and Batoro chiefs. The Rwenzururu movement displaced those chiefs and the titleholders became absentees. This is the case of Kibaale regarding the Mubende-Banyoro committee.

In West Ankole, a case was made in the CA and it is being taken up right now. May I report at this stage that two prominent citizens in this country, big landlords in Buhweju, Igara and Ibanda, and in Isingiro - some of them in this House - have peacefully handed over their more than 16 square miles of land to Government in order to liberate the so many thousands of families who were by colonial dictate made subjects of one single individual who is not a producer of wealth but the individuals are the producers of wealth. This mechanism is in place and indeed there is no tribe being condemned. His Excellency is very clear in his letter; he is saying this is a colonial creation which we are redressing in the laws and policies made by this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think all we can do is to ask our committee on Natural Resources to speed up this matter with the minister and report back to this House. We have asked our Committee on Natural Resources to follow up on our behalf.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am putting forward right now is of a different nature but with land. Madam Speaker, the House should be aware that at the moment -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: I am seeking clarification from you, Madam Speaker. Some few days ago, somebody very much known to normally dress smartly was asked to leave this House, and in your wisdom, Madam Speaker, you quoted the rules of this House of which I am seeking clarification. Among the clothes you mentioned, I do not recall mentioning the Kitenge of that nature to be a dressing code of this House. Madam Speaker, is he in order now to address this House when he is dressed like that? Is that a Kaunda suit?  

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular Member has a problem with his neck and has difficulties wearing a tie. Yes, he has -(Interjections)- The hon. Member on a number of occasions has told me that he has a problem with his neck. He has a health problem.

MR OMODI OKOT: Madam Speaker, I am really pleased to welcome my brother, hon. Bakkabulindi, back and say that he is completely well dressed. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that this country through the Parliament –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Omodi Okot for giving way. Madam Speaker, you have just told us that hon. Omodi Okot has a problem with the neck and that is why he does not put on neckties. Now, I just wanted to find out whether hon. Onzima also has the same problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, on a very serious note, this hon. Member has actually talked to me about his health problem. He has a health problem; that one I know but the other one, I do not know. (Laughter)

MR OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying the issue of land is coming at a time when this Parliament and Uganda as a nation are addressing the issue in the White Paper. Indeed, it is unfortunate that there is a lot of misconstruing of the Government intention in the White Paper.  

I have got a case in Kole, Apac District. Sometime back, Madam Speaker, when hon. Muyingo was still Minister of Water, Lands and Environment, he brought before this House a policy statement to the effect that the degraded reserved land was transferred to the districts and subsequently the district put it under the sub-counties. We in Kole took up his guidance to apply for use of this land for tree planting and the district was so kind to allocate it and advise the youths to use the land for tree planting, for timber -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on the matter of the land and you have referred it to the appropriate committee. Now, Madam Speaker, my hon. colleague seems to be reverting again to the same issue. Wouldn’t it be appropriate, Madam Speaker, that we leave the issue of land as you had ruled, and move on to other issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe you could formulate your problem into a question and we present it to the Minister.

MR OKOT: I am concerned about the violence coming right now over this matter. That is why I am concerned about it.

Madam Speaker, right now when the district gave us permission to use this land, we went ahead and contacted the Ministry of Forestry, which cooperated with us, gave us seeds and we started tree planting.  Today as we sit in this House there is the Uganda National Forest Authority (UNFA) that has started going round and telling these youths to get away quickly without even paying attention to what the district has done. The way they are handling these people is so bad that there is a general stampede, people are taking spears and pangas, people are taking this and that and yet we have the matter of land in the White Paper. 

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleague, for giving way. I just want to inform my colleague that this is a problem, which is in many other parts of Uganda. There is a sub-county in Luweero called Kinyogoga and three quarters of this sub-county is almost forest reserve and these people have lived there, some of them even had titles for this land but the Forest Authority is now sending them away. Those who cannot go are being told to pay Shs 200,000 for application and then Shs 90,000 shillings per year for each acre, yet some of them have been on very big pieces of land for many years. So, Madam Speaker, that is only the information I wanted to give my colleague and maybe the Minister to give us a general policy on this. Thank you.  

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had adopted a rule that we should not disrupt the business in the House and if somebody has a business burning, he/she should book it with the Speaker so that it is discussed. But what I am seeing now is total deviation from the Order Paper and the normal practice of Parliament.
  
Madam Speaker, can the honourable members make arrangement and circulate their ideas so that they are booked on the Order Paper so that we can save time and debate matters before the House on the Order Paper. I thank you very much.

MR OKOT: Let me end, Madam Speaker. We are experiencing a similar problem that she has outlined.  Here are people who have lived there for several years. Not only that we have agreed that whatever engagement they were going to put on the land would fulfill the Government policy of tree planting; tree planting for timber, tree planting for firewood, tree planting for building.  Now I do not know, maybe this is an opportune moment where the Minister will guide us about this so that we do not encourage this stampede, this uncertainty, this instability in our respective areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Lands.

COL. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, in the first place people were not supposed to live in the forest.  Anyway there has been massive encroachment on forestland and you very well know, honourable members of Parliament, that the only person who has got a right to de-gazette is Parliament, not even the Minister. So, I am religiously carrying out your orders. That is point number one.

You are the only ones who can de-gazette a forest reserve by law. (Interruption)     

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister whether the Land Act does not apply to Government. I know that there is a provision that if you encroach on somebody’s land and that person does not disturb you or does not warn you, if you are to be removed, you should be compensated or you agree with each whether you are a landlord or not.  So, I would like the Minister to tell me –(Interruption)- Yes, for 12 years if you have been on that land without any disturbance. I would like the Minister to tell us whether this law is applied discriminatively.

COL. OTAFIIRE: No, the law does not apply to Government where forest reserves are concerned. Any way, in the case of hon. Omodi, I think there must be some bit of confusion; I will have to investigate, because we have a programme for giving out forest reserve land to planters. Not only do we encourage planters, but we also help them with seed, we also pay 50 percent of the money they spend on tree planting. I think there must be confusion between either the district authorities and the NFA. Can you, please, come and see me and then we sort out this matter before it flares into a problem. We are very grateful for MPs who encourage tree planting. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I should make a small comment about myself and allegations made by my hon. friend representing Samia Bugwe North. It is true, Madam Speaker, that I move with escort, which I am entitled to, and of course, I am not in charge of the detail of my escort. All I can say is that my escort, like myself, must behave strictly in accordance with the law of this republic and the laws of Parliament are part of the laws of Uganda. 

Secondly, I am hearing for the first time that my escort vehicle was involved in an accident and again I am hearing for the first time today, that this matter was settled out of court. I was hesitant to respond to hon. Aggrey Awori because, he did not mention me by name; he mentioned the title. You know these days there are many men with all sorts of titles, in case he meant me, Madam Speaker, there is nothing like that; there is no truth in it; I am not aware. But my suspicion is that hon. Aggrey Awori was talking about other people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you through? 

MR MBABAZI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says he has finished, but, honourable members, on a serious note really on this question of security; this Parliament is an institution of Government where we have our Parliamentary Police and we expect that those who come here to transact business must operate under the directions of the Sergeant-At-Arms –(Applause)- So, if there are people who are walking around this building with guns when our rules are very clear, I think they should stop and Sergeant-At-Arms is in charge.  That is the person who is in charge of this place. (Interjections)- they said there are some soldiers who walk around, I do not know whose.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I hope what the hon. speaker is saying is not related to me because, as I said, my escorts strictly behave in a disciplined way in accordance with the law and I have not heard, for instance, from the Sergeant-At-Arms that they had had problems with them. Because, if they did and we were informed, we would take  -(Interjection)- We would take appropriate measures. So, all I am saying –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I raised this matter strictly as a matter of principle. You said, Madam Speaker, that this august House has a Parliamentary Police in charge of our security. Therefore, it becomes superfluous for anybody to bring in additional escort and especially bearing arms. 

Madam Speaker, my good friend is beating about the bush by saying I did not refer to him as a person.  There are so many titles, I know you are Attorney General, I know you are a Minister of Internal Affairs, I know you are number 2 or 3 in the queue to State House among other things. But is he in order to continue misleading this august House by diversionary statements knowing very well what we are aiming at? We do not want armed escorts in the precincts of Parliament without the permission of the Sergeant-At-Arms. Is, he in order to indulge in this diversionary tactics to mislead the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already said that the security of this House is in the charge of the Sergeant-At-Arms. So, all those who operate here will operate under the authority of the Sergeant-At-Arms. You have said your people are lawful, so I think it is okay.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, much as I agree with you that the security of Members in the precincts of Parliament is with the Parliamentary Police, it becomes difficult for the Police from Parliament to be in charge of the security details of our big men who have got escorts. I have seen before that when a Minister or Prime Minister is moving ahead the security behind sometimes actually knock people without the boss knowing about it. I was a witness when one of our Friends, a Minister, had moved out of the Parliamentary compound and the bodyguards hit a fellow minister. The Minister had already gone without any escorts. 

So, we are saying that while we are around the precincts of Parliament, we want the escorts to go slow when they are behind their bosses because; sometimes they are over-speeding even within the car park. How does the Sergeant-At- Arms be in control of the security details of the Minister’s bodyguards when they are driving out of the car park? Madam Speaker, I was there; I saw it. Hon. Tim Lwanga was banged by the security of one minister and the minister had already left; he did not know what had happened. So, I think it is very important that somebody must be guarded against these guys who drive very fast, leave alone when you are on streets of Kampala or highway some of the escorts can even come and almost kick you off the road.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. The rules are very clear that when you enter a garrison, which is not yours, the security of the garrison takes charge and you are supposed to hand guns at the quarter-guard and we do it religiously. And since the minister has not really been informed about it –(Interjection)- yes, because this is the first time it is being raised. So, I think we should not waste time. We all agree that the Sergeant-At-Arms will take charge, but I want to raise one simple technicality that is very difficult. There is the other gate, which is manned by different security. So, they must find a way of isolating these two because that is a bit tricky. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is settled. The Sergeant-At-Arms is in charge of security in this area, he can issue necessary directives whether for speed or where these fellows are going to be.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification. As we conclude debate on this issue, I would imagine that there has been exceptional treatment; because under what circumstances, given the current provision, would other bodyguards be stopping at the quarter-guard and others just passing it? We have the rules; why on earth could somebody have been circumventing the rules when they are clear?  

Two, we are making this decision or enforcing it but some of those bodyguards are outside. Under what circumstances is this message going to be portrayed to them so that the authority of the Sergeant is restored?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, you take charge, I think that is all I can say. 

4.04
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity, but I regret to inform you and Parliament that I am not in a position to make this statement this afternoon. I would like to remind this august House that this statement will cover four things:  National Teachers Colleges, Primary Teachers Colleges, Institutions under the department of Business, Technical, Vocational, Education and Training and fourthly, the students riot at Makerere University on the 16th of November this year. I am compiling this statement, but I have had to collect the necessary data from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications and from the Ministry of Local Government. It is a wide-ranging, comprehensive statement but it still has some information gaps, which I hope to fill this afternoon. Barring acts of God or acts of the enemies of the enemies of the Republic of Uganda, I will be in position to make this statement tomorrow afternoon. Madam Speaker, honourable members, I so pray. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand there is a point of order.

MR PATRICK MUSISI: Our rules are very clear on this one. I thought a minister was reading a report to us and I expected us to have copies. Was he in order to read the same without prior circulation –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he was apologizing for not being able to do it today and giving his reasons.  So, when will you be ready, Minister?

DR MAKUBUYA: Tomorrow afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow afternoon.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Clarification, Madam speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why don’t you wait until tomorrow? 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, sometime last week I did ask a question in this House about the school fees of children in IDP camps. The minister did not give us an answer and I am also informed that a question must be put to you to hunt the minister about the IDP students. According to the contents of what the minister is going to bring tomorrow, it isn’t going to cover the issue of these students. Shall I get clarification from you if the minister would also include this so that we are able to answer our voters?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you raise different issues on different days. I am not sure whether the IDP question arose at the same time as the incident of Makerere riots and the NTCs. Did they really arise at the same time?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: This one was much later but since the minister is going to give us an answer and this is a question of importance to our people. (Interjection) I am sorry, Madam Speaker, he has misinterpreted 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is important -(Laughter)

MR MALLINGA JOHNSON: Alright. Shall I request through you, Madam Speaker, that the minister gives us a statement on this issue because the whole of third term – you remember, Madam Speaker, last year we passed some mandate to help the students in IDP camps and some money was paid for second term. But no money sent to the schools the whole of third term until very recently when the ministry was only able to give some advance after the schools had closed. We are now going into the Christmas season and the schools are going to open again when we are not sure whether they are going to receive funds or not. That is why I am requesting, Madam Speaker, that the Minister includes this in the statement that he is going to bring tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, are you in a position to include that and still keep tomorrow’s deadline? If not, can you tell us when you can bring the specific issue of IDP?

DR. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon. Member for raising this issue. But you see, Madam Speaker, the other issues have been outstanding for sometime and the issue of IDPs and school fees for their children is very important, but if I am to include it in the statement tomorrow, then I cannot make that statement, unfortunately. Whereas I have four issues on which I am ready and I am prepared to make a comprehensive statement here tomorrow. Madam Speaker, may I request that I be allowed to cover the ground I have indicated tomorrow because I have been working on it. Now, I would have to go back to the records and to the field in order to cover this new issue, which is being introduced.  I would really appeal to you, Madam Speaker, and to the House that we take this thing piecemeal and that if you give me two weeks from today, I can issue a statement on IDP school fees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, you have now made an undertaking, two weeks for the IDP school fees?  Okay.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2004

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Madam Chairperson, Parliament has very, very high respects for the Rules of Procedure directing us and it is important along those lines to ensure that any activity or action we take is not bad to check ourselves.  So, I am standing here to seek your guidance on a point of procedure related to Rule 7(1) and sub section (3).  My reference to that Rule of Procedure is derived or refers to your ruling yesterday and I am not challenging the ruling. I am only begging to be advised that following the ruling you made yesterday, can I assume with reference to Rule 7 sub section (1) and sub section (3) that the Clerk of Parliament shall thereafter compile the precedent which was created along with other precedents to direct future deliberations of Parliament.  That is, after ignoring Rule 65, we will respect what you resolved.  But can I assume that that precedent which came as a result of your ruling will be part of the precedents which will direct future deliberations of this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Now, hon. Members, the ruling of yesterday was clear and I gave my reasons for it. It was based on misleading information; this House was misled. I was also misled and I took a decision based on that misleading information and therefore, I had to review my own decision to correct the mistake.  Yes, I was reviewing my decision.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, I have great honour for your decision, but my question is not answered still.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I have already answered it.  I am within my rights to review a decision if I am convinced that I have made a mistake.

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and thank my honourable Colleague.  The information I wanted to give is basically in the Rule he has quoted to us.  The Rule is very clear that every ruling of the Speaker forms a precedent; there is no question about that.  It does not require the Speaker to authorize the Clerk to collect the precedent, the issue is that the ruling of the Speaker sets a precedent and it will guide future rulings unless otherwise challenged.  So, what the Speaker decided is a ruling, which is respected by this House and forms a precedent.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Yes, that is the answer I wanted.  Thank you very much. 

MR SABIITI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Your ruling yesterday was to respond to what I had raised on this Floor of Parliament and Madam Speaker, you recall that I was not given a chance to prove beyond reasonable doubt that actually what had been stated on this Floor of Parliament was correct and therefore, I should have been given chance to respond in order for you to arrive at that decision.  You were requested by many Members of this Parliament that time be given after you had ruled so that Parliament comes up with a fair decision on this matter.  

True, you came up with a decision as the Speaker of this Parliament, but some of us also Members of this Parliament still believe that Petition No. 3 of the Constitutional Court, the ruling of that Constitutional Court will certainly have to affect this Referendum Bill.  So, that is why we are requesting you that Rule 65 should be in operation so that you give time to Members of Parliament and we come to debate this issue in detail.  So, may I request, Madam Chairperson, that this matter be postponed and then we debate it next week.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
MR MBABAZI:  Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order, because Rule 65 which the hon. Member is citing is very clear; that any decision by the Speaker or Chairperson of a Committee shall be final.  It will be the final decision and the only way it can be challenged is by a substantive motion.  So, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order, without raising a substantive motion, to rise and challenge the decision of the Speaker made yesterday?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, hon. members, you yourselves have failed to respect our Rules, so if you want really to proceed on this matter, you move a motion, a substantive one, give a notice and we shall determine it.

MR SABIITI:  Well, I am requesting that I move without notice as provided for in these Rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  A substantive motion, written, circulated and made after notice.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Madam Chairperson, this Parliament is not static, we have laws and those laws have allowances to meet emergency circumstances and in this regard hon. Sabiiti is in order to move a motion without notice under Rule 40.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to beg this House that I think we missed the opportunity to discipline hon. Lukyamuzi.  Now he has just said that hon. Sabiiti is right, actually after an order has been put and the Speaker has decided.  So is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to dispute the decision of the Speaker?  Why doesn’t he wait until he becomes the Speaker to set new rules?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have already given you directions on what to do.  Issue a notice, circulate a motion and then it will be debated.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, you seem to have taken a decision on this matter and you seem to be rigid on this matter; you seem not to want to listen to the views of some of us  –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, hon. Jack Sabiiti.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Is the hon. Member in order to impute bad motives on the part of the Chairperson that she is rigid when actually they intend to delay the passage of this bill?  Is he in order, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No he is not, and let me for the record say this, hon. Members.  I do not know whether you are aware of the gravity of what you said last Thursday.  You accused the Executive of being contemptuous of court and you accused Parliament of being an accomplice in that contempt.  You made a very fundamental statement to the effect that Article 74 had been nullified, it was no longer part of the Constitution and you accused us of making a law based on that article.  I was intrigued by why the Government and Parliament had joined hands to do contempt of court.  So, I read the judgements.  That Article has not been adjudicated upon.  That is a fundamental matter; it has not been adjudicated upon.

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, I made it clear that Article 74 only comes into play in order to change the political system.  You change a political system when it is in place.  I looked at the three judgements, that is why I was looking for your guidance.  My interpretation of these three judgements, including the Supreme Court judgement, it was clear that the Movement system is bound by the party law, the Party Act, and therefore I was only seeking your guidance not to move so that tomorrow again we are put into question by people outside Parliament, by taking this Parliament to court and then tomorrow again they say; “You people, what is happening?”  

You remember the background of my request when I was coming from the constituency in three meetings, the same question was raised.  But if it is your ruling, Madam Speaker, let us go by your ruling, but I think it is better always to analyse these issues.  That is why your ruling earlier on that the lawyers in this House and the Committee of Legal Committee discussed this matter.  You may therefore go ahead as you wish.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Sabiiti, I think the matter has been settled.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I really raise on the point of order again.  Is it in order for hon. Sabiiti to continue to exhibit ignorance, because, Madam Speaker, I speak as Attorney General and I would like to make a clear statement for those who are not lawyers that courts of law can invalidate Acts of Parliament against the Constitution, they cannot possibly nullify an Article of the Constitution; they do not have the power to do it.  Therefore, from the beginning to the end, even what you said yesterday, notwithstanding what hon. Sabiiti is saying, is absolutely nonsensical in terms of capacity of court to adjudicate on the matter like that; therefore, it could not have happened.  Our courts are competent, they are manned by very competent people; they cannot make decisions of that kind.  Therefore, is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is out of order.  Let us proceed.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, we take each other in greatest respect when we are addressing each other.  I know our colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi may be upset, but is he in order to use words such as “nonsensical” and “ignorance”?  Is he really using Parliamentary language and therefore, in order to use those terms in reference to another Member of this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us treat each other with respect.  Proceed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have very high respect for you and rest of my colleagues in this House.  The procedural question I want you to assist me understand is as follows.  You have advised hon. Sabiiti that he can give notice of some days before he can make arrangements to move a motion.  Aware of that advice you have given in good faith, why are we in a hurry to pass a law when there are problems we have sensed?  This country is ours; we are not running away from Uganda.  Why don’t we postpone that until an appropriate time comes?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, you have made a ruling, members have persisted on tedious repetitions contrary to Rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure.  Rule 59 reads as follows: “If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words…” and so forth.  I beg to move that hon. Lukyamuzi be heard no more because he is engaging us in tedious repetition.  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that under Rule 59, the hon. Member who has persisted in repetition and tediousness be no longer heard. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR THEMBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to submit that the original Clause 3, sub clause 4 is already being voted on. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 3 sub clause (iv) does anybody wish to – we debated? (Interruption)

MR THEMBO: Madam Chairperson as you may recall we debated this particular sub clause and we slept over it.  We have gone back to the committee, we have consulted within the Committee and we see no reason to change our original position.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that Clause 3, sub clause 4 do stand part of the bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MATEMBE: Ah, Clause 59 -(Interruption)- Shut up you characters – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, do not respond to hecklings, just move on.

MRS MATEMBE: I just kept quiet today; I will leave you like that.  Anyway, Madam Chairperson, the Clause which I had asked to be deleted was not Clause 4; it was Clause 3.  When you go in the report the committee was adding something immediately after sub clause 4.  So, now I do not know what – it is not the one we deleted.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 3(5).

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: As I was explaining, Madam Chairperson, in the same vein the new sub clause 5 is also ready for voting.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read it.

MR THEMBO: Sorry, Madam Chairperson.  It reads: “For the avoidance of doubt, two or more referenda may be held on the same day.  Justification: The amendment to sub clause 2, it will recognise the role of the Commission as the Body responsible for referenda.  The new sub clause 5 is to make clear that two or more referenda can be held together especially to save costs and to enable staff and facilities of the Electoral Commission to be used economically”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Matembe, is that the clause you were interested in?

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, that is the sub clause that I had requested that it be deleted and it was discussed here- is it twice- in detail and that is what we are supposed to make a decision on.  Very many reasons were advanced for this deletion and therefore, we were supposed to sort it out today.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Matembe’s deletion departs farthest from the original. So I beg that the Chair put the question on her amendment and we see how it goes then we go back to the original of the Committee. 

MRS MATEMBE: What is the original?  There is no original.  As you see, it is something which is being inserted.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, according to the record, I am agreeable to the committee report, so the new insertion is the committee insertion.  She wants to depart from the committee. So, I am seeking that the Chair puts the question first on the deletion and we see how it goes then we go back to the committee insertion and then we vote.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are creating a new Clause, then what is there to delete?

MRS MUKWAYA: Honourable Matembe knows best.  She is saying, Madam Chairperson, that we should not insert.  It is therefore that “do not insert” you put the question and then we go back to “insert”.  There are two issues” “do not insert” and we are saying “insert”.  So we vote on “do not insert” and then we go to “insert”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you see when you used the word “deletion” it gave me the impression that something was already there and you want it out. But now what has transpired is that they want to put a new clause and you are saying it is not necessary.  Therefore, there is no need to put two questions; we put one question. 

So, I put the question that the bill be amended as proposed by the committee – (Interjection) – yes, the committee is saying let us put in a new item – (Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: We should be clear on this matter.  We are handling a report on the bill by the committee.  The original bill did not have this provision, the committee decided to put a provision for the avoidance of doubt that two or more referenda maybe held on the same day and I moved here that that provision be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  But you see, honourable member, you cannot delete what is not already in the law.  It is not yet in the law.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, when – (Interjection) – excuse me, I have been here – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MRS MATEMBE: The committee moved that amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, they moved an amendment, which you have not yet voted on.  Therefore, it is not yet part of the bill.

MRS MATEMBE: When they presented this amendment I moved that that clause be deleted. We discussed -(Interjections)- I wish we could have tolerance in this House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Wait, hon. Members.  Hon. Members, you are saying that the committee has made a proposal to insert a new clause, and you have not yet voted on it.  So, it is not in the law, so you cannot delete it.  How can you delete what is not yet in law?

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, when they moved -(Interruption)- of course, I am right- (Laughter)

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Chairperson, you are absolutely right. The Speaker should put the question to the amendment after we have voted.  Hon. Matembe should stand and move her deletion and then we vote on it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Matembe, what you are doing; you are objecting to the proposal.  

MRS MATEMBE:  Madam Chairperson, do we usually amend what has been passed, because I do not understand what this House is saying.  The committee moved that amendment and I objected that it be – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That it should not be inserted.

MRS MATEMBE:  That, that very provision should stand part of the law, okay, and we have been debating, debating and getting postponed, postponed.  Now when members really try to confuse the whole matter, I do not understand. 

LT. KINOBE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Let me use the opportunity to inform hon. Matembe. Hon. Matembe is right in the thinking, she is only wrong in the presentation. Her thinking is that we should not have a clause to provide for one or more referenda.  In the original bill that provision was not there.  But in the course of the presentation before the committee, we got submissions from people indicating that sometimes you can have an election and there is a subject that can be handled concurrently as you handle the general election.  

As you have the general election, the subject matter could even be a regional matter.  The Electoral Commission can go ahead and organise a referenda alongside the election, and the input of that clause is to enable legal framework to do that concurrently.  Now, if you have more than one region that need a referendum but on different subject, that clause can allow the Electoral Commission say to allow one region to handle an issue they consider important and another at the same time.  

Now, hon. Matembe does not want that to be there, in effect she is opposing a proposal by the committee.  So the question is, the committee wants to move that that clause should be put there to enable one or two more issues to be settled through a referenda concurrently as you have either an election or any other means of enabling the voters to access, and hon. Matembe is opposing that.  So, procedurally what she should do is to stand and oppose the committee proposal and not to delete because that clause of hers is not in the law at all.  So, hon. Matembe, what you can do now is to oppose the amendment as presented by the committee to have that provision to allow one or two more referenda to take place.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Matembe, that provision is not yet part of this law, it is a proposal and you are objecting to its inclusion, that is what is the issue.  It is not part of the law, so we cannot delete.

MRS MATEMBE:  But, Madam Chairperson, what is part of the law? We are still making the law and we are making it in these two documents.  One is the original bill, another one is the report. So nothing is yet part of the law.  Now, if I say, “I oppose that provision” and –(Interjections)- but I moved long ago. We have been discussing this bill for two days.  We discussed, all arguments were given for and against and it was slept on twice and this is the third day and now I am saying do not put it there.  Now what is the problem?

MR RUZINDANA:  Madam Chairperson, can I know the difference between Clause 4 and the new Clause 5?

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Chairperson, the original Clause 3 (4), which reads: “In a referendum the voting may be on one question or a series of questions.”  So we are talking about questions which can be many.  I will give you an example. Suppose we want to amend Article 105 (1), we want to amend article 74 and we want to amend- what Clause 5 is talking about is for avoidance of doubt that two or more referenda may be held on the same day.  We are just making sure that nobody could go and petition that a series of questions were put on the same day which are different referenda on the same day.   We are just emphasizing what you have already passed. That is why we are saying for avoidance of doubt this can happen.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, I now put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Long Title

MR THEMBO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On the long title, Madam Chairperson, we have three areas where we are proposing amendments. One on page 3, we propose that we delete “Article 255 and 259 of the Constitution” and insert “Article 255, 259 and 260 of the Constitution.  Justification: The amendment is intended to recognise that amendments can be made to the Constitution under Article 260 of the Constitution by Parliament approving the relevant bill with a support and the Second and Third readings of at least, two thirds of all Members of Parliament and the ratification of the bill by at least two thirds of the members of the District councils in each of at least two thirds of all the districts of Uganda.  

Proposal No.2, page 3, again delete the phrase “to cater for any other referendum required to determine any matter”. Justification: The phrase is redundant because the bill does not provide for any other referendum other than those under Article 74 (1), “Referendum of change of political system”, Article 255, “Right of citizens to demand referenda” and Article 259, “Amendment of the Constitution requiring referendum”. 

Proposal number three, page three, again delete the phrase, “to cater for a change in the political system by petition of District Councils and a resolution of Parliament under Clause (2) of Article 74 of the Constitution,” and insert the phrase, “to cater for a change in the political system by representatives of the people in Parliament and district Councils under Article 74(2) of the Constitution”.  Justification: To bring it in conformity with Article 74(2) of the Constitution as the petition under this Article is not necessarily from a District Council.  I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that the Long Title be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.  If there is no objection, I now put the question that the Long Title be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

The long title as amended agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report to the Committee of the whole House that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 2004” and passed it with amendments to Clause (3), sub-clause (4) and (5) and amendments to the long title.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2004

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled –(Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Kiwalabye.

MR KIWALABYE:  Madam Speaker, there are some sub-clauses, which we thought should be recommitted.  At what stage should we bring this?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now?

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, Madam Speaker, I beg to move that sub-clause (8) of Clause 12(8) be recommitted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are the reasons?

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I remember correctly that sub-clause (6) and sub-clause (7) of the same clause were deleted by the whole Committee of this House, and since Sub-clause (9) is a provision following Sub-clause (6) and (7), which were deleted that Sub-clause should also be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in a way you are saying it is a consequential amendment?  He is saying that you deleted -(Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: It is a consequential amendment, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sub-clause (6), (7) and (8), therefore (9) which was relating to (6), (7) and (8) should consequentially be deleted.

MR KIWALABYE: That is right, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member says, sub-clause 12, (6), (7), and (8) were deleted so sub-clause (9) becomes redundant.  

MR KIWALABYE:  That is right, Madam Speaker.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am seeking your guidance on this.  Since it is a consequential amendment does it need any re-committal?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think it requires debate if the clause to which it relates have been deleted; they are not there, so it is regulating clauses which do not exist.

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to understand his submission.  He is saying that we deleted the original (7) and (8)?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (6), (7) and (8) of Clause 12.

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, so he moved –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, he says Clause (9), which was regulating offences under Clause (6), (7) and (8) is redundant.

MRS MUKWAYA: No, but sub clause (9) does not talk about offences, if the–(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it does.

MRS MUKWAYA JANAT: You are on 12?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Any person who contravenes sub-section (6), (7) and (8) of this section commits an offence and he is reliable on a conviction to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both.” 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I am reminded by my technical person that 12(8) was not deleted, they can check the Hansard.  Yes, 12(8), was not deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So can -(Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: So, Madam Speaker, even if (8) was not deleted -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (6) and (7).

MR KIWALABYE: Clause 12(8) was not deleted, still Clause (9) is redundant in as far as sub-clause (6) and (7) are concerned.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Kiwalabye that when we delete and our Legal draftsman gets the Hansard, those articles that have been deleted when he is preparing the copy for assent they will be no more. He is saying that we agreed that Clause 12 (9) should be adjusted to cover (8).  

We agreed that Clause 12(9) should be adjusted to cover 8, this is a drafting matter unless hon. Kiwalabye wants to draft from here.  If you are retaining one sub section with an offence, we shall redraft it to remove 6 and 7, retain the offence d and then this will not be the assent copy; the Hansard will help us to redraft. 

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I do not know what the Minister means by the “Hansard will help us to redraft”.  This is a substantive sub-clause on which this Parliament must pronounce itself and since the other sub-clauses were deleted, Parliament must pronounce itself on 9. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, if he is not satisfied and he wants a vote let us vote on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I do not think it is –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, this will be like giving out a blank cheque. We are pronouncing ourselves on wordings which we know, because something which is going to come later after we have pronounced ourselves on we have no control over it.  We need the wordings now; we understand it because we should know what is in the law here and now, not tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If Clause 6 and 7 were deleted in the Committee Stage and you voted and deleted them, then they are no longer there. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, if I may speak with my experience sometime back as a legislative draftsperson. Normally, when a bill is passed it is very difficult for Parliament to actually scrutinize in detail where there is supposed to be a comma and then you pronounce yourself on it, where there is supposed to be a full stop and then you pronounce yourself on it.  If a section, for instance, is deleted by the Parliament and another section is affected, the legal drafts persons while putting the whole piece together will try as much as possible for purposes of stylistic consistency to put it in holistic form so that it becomes a legally effective document.  This is why they cannot, for instance, go there and they say, “But we do not see in the Hansard that Parliament pronounced themselves on this comma.” So, that is the position.  

The only thing that I mentioned here one time, we need to amend our Rules of Procedure so that when a bill is passed by Parliament the draftspersons put it together, they prepare assent copies immediately, they take the assent copies to the President.  Sometimes there is a problem, I think the bill after it has been put together, prepared for assent by the President, the Chairperson of the Committee at least if not the entire Committee, should have a look at the responsible bill.  That is an amendment we can always put in our Rules of Procedure.  But, otherwise, I think what hon. Kiwalabye is actually moving is for purpose of form, not substance and more often than not we Members of Parliament pronounce ourselves on substance not so much about form.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, this is not form, this is substance. Why I say so, Madam Speaker, is that when this Parliament sits here to make law, it does not leave it to other people to make the law for them. There is no harm in this Parliament saying this section should not be there as a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I think we are all saying the same thing but using different words. Those two sections were deleted; so they should no longer form part of this bill.  Is that okay, hon. Kiwalabye?

MR MBABAZI: Hon. Kiwalabye is right that in the bill that will have been passed; there will be no sub clause 6, 7 and 9. He is making reference to sub clause 9; there will be no sub clause 9, because the whole thing is going to be renumbered taking into account the deletions.  Therefore, you are right that these have to go but they do not have to go via a recommital.  This is a consequential thing; the House has taken a decision to delete 6 and 8; those are gone, no one else is going to introduce them.  Therefore, what remains is what hon. Ruhindi was saying, a drafting matter to take full cognisance of decisions of this House.  What we need to do is to make sure that the final bill, which goes to assent actually reflects that.  That is all, thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, what I was trying to tell hon. Kiwalabye, this is a copy for the legal draftsman and we had already indicated that 6 and 7 will go, but after agreeing to that amendment we voted on 9 itself so we need not to vote on it, that is why we only remained with a long title and the other two sub articles.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I think we have settled the matter.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2004

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 2004” be read the Third time and do Pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS ACT, 2004

REPORT FOR  THE CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT
OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, last week I had given notice that we should be handling this report, there were some members of this House who were mentioned in the report and they had indicated the wish to say something in response to the findings of the report and also we were expecting a reply from the Attorney General.  So, I do not know whether there are any Members who are ready –(Interjection)- they are not ready?

5.05
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, you know this was a report of two and half years ago and I think many of the members who were named and who would be expected to respond were most probably not aware that it could be on today.  As I had indicated to you earlier, of course, I was not Attorney General then.  So, I have asked that my team and I was talking to the Leader of Government Business to see whether we did not need one or two days to sort this out so that people are all round.  

So, I would like to beg the indulgence of the Chair and the House that this election violence matter be differed until Tuesday so that everybody is given adequate notice and we come back and respond.  Thank you.  

MR SABIITI:  Madam Speaker, you recall this report was debated, a resolution was worked on and actually we were left with just deciding whether to adopt the report or not.  But a question was raised that we should give the named persons a chance to come here and defend themselves and it has taken well over, I think 6 months or 7, if I can remember.  Now, for the ”so called” Learned Attorney General to stand up and say that he needs more time, yes, I am saying the “so-called” because I have already petitioned court that he is not fit to be an Attorney General, that is why I am saying the “so called”.  Now, Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Defence to come here and he say that he needs more time and even next time I am sure he will disappear and then he does not come back here to present.  Should Parliament wait for one person after six months again to delay Parliament?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, the reason why we wanted the Attorney General to respond- you know the Electoral Commission was adversely mentioned in that report and they are not members of this House.  So somebody has got to say something on their behalf.  The President is not a Member of this House; he was also named.  So, someone has got to speak on behalf of the President.  But, hon. Members, what I want to inform you is that there is a feeling that we do not want to finish this report and yet it has implications for the electoral laws; how we are going to conduct elections in the future.  Please let me adjourn this matter for the last time and the ministers who are named, if you are not ready on Tuesday we shall ask the Attorney General in his official capacity to proceed and we close the matter.  Yes, because it was at the request of those members.  

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Speaker, I would not have added something but for the record, I just want to remind hon. Sabiiti that we lost our former Attorney General who was handling this matter and it took us time as the ministry to reorganize.  When my colleague, the new Attorney General was appointed, we have been busy with many things. So, he will be ready at that time. He was out of the country twice and on official matters of this country.  So, it is not that he is lazy or he is going to run away as reflected, I just wanted to make the Hansard record clean that we are responsible people in Ministry of Justice, but because of those things that are beyond our control, with your indulgence, we shall be here on the appointed date.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MALINGA JOHNSON: Madam Speaker, I regard the Attorney General very highly and I have learned that he is a very learned lawyer, I do not know, Madam Speaker, if it is important for hon. Sabiiti to call our Attorney General the “so-called”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think I know the Attorney General as a lawyer, he studied law, and it is not fair describing him by “so-called”.  He actually studied and did law, so he is a lawyer. 

5.10
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker.   I raise to move a motion under Rules 41(b) for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government of Uganda to continue to pursue peaceful initiatives to enhance good relations between Uganda and the two sister neighbouring States of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo and to involve Parliamentarians in regional peace processes.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, move.

MS AMONGI:  Madam Speaker, Whereas by UN Resolution 12191(February 2000) and 1304(June 2000), the UN affirmed the need for an International Conference on the Great lakes Region on Peace, Security, Development and Good governance and;

Whereas the African Union, the UN and the group of friends spearheaded the process;

Noting with appreciation that the preparatory processes involving eleven countries namely: Uganda, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania, Kenya, Sudan, Burundi, Zambia, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo and Angola ended successfully with the Heads of State and Governments Summit in Dar-es-salaam;

Noting that Members of Parliament from Uganda participated actively in the entire processes which culminated into ministerial and Heads of States Summit in Dar-es-salaam;

Appreciating the commitments made by eleven Heads of States and Governments in the presence of inter alia, the Chairman of African Union, the UN Secretary General, the representative of the Pope and many other stakeholders;

Noting that the previous dialogues by the Presidents of Uganda and Rwanda which resulted in tremendous improvement of relations and establishment of Joint Verification Commission;

Concerned that despite these commitments, the relations between the signatories of Dar-es-salaam declarations, notably, Rwanda Uganda and Democratic Republic of Congo has begun to deteriorate over the past few months;

Aware that Parliament under Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution is enjoined to work for peace and stability in the country; 

Now therefore, be it resolved by this august House as follows;

1. This House expresses its full support for the spirit and content of the Dar-es-Salaam Declaration.

2. That this House urges Governments of Rwanda, Uganda and Democratic Republic of Congo to promote peaceful mechanisms enshrined in the various peace accords to which they are signatories like the Lusaka Accord, the Tripartite Agreement and other established mechanisms of resolving the conflict. and 

3. That the parliamentarians in the Great Lakes region be involved fully in peace processes initiated by our governments, the UN and the AU.  

Madam Speaker, and the honourable House, I beg to move and lay on Table the Dar-es-Salaam declaration of peace, security, democracy and development in the Great Lakes region entitled, “International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes region: first summit of heads of state and Governments, Dar-es-Salaam 19 - 20 November 2004.”

5.16
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion because it is well in tandem with the responsibility given to us as Members of Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, particularly that we are supposed to promote and legislate for peace. You are aware of the untold dangerous consequences that can befall the region if there is no peace.

Madam Speaker, diplomacy over the years has undergone serious evolution. In the past, diplomacy was a preserve of ministries of foreign affairs; today, internationally, we talk of parliamentary democracy. I, therefore, support the motion in as far as it states that parliamentarians within the Great Lakes region should be involved in peace processes in the region, because Members of Parliament are representatives of the people and it is the people that we represent who benefit when there is peace and it is them also who suffer when there is conflict. So, as parliaments in the region, we just cannot sit without supporting –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on how to proceed on such motions because, I had thought that after the motion was moved, seconders would be identified, then the mover of the motion would justify the motion. I do not know whether by presenting it that was amounting to justification and then the seconders can then also add on.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the seconder stood up. The honourable member seconded the motion and had to justify.

MR WANDERA: Yes, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, I also would like to express appreciation to our Government, under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni, for continuing to pursue peaceful means towards bringing about peace in the region and it is only proper that these efforts are recorded and appreciated by Parliament.

Finally, Madam Speaker, if parliamentarians in the region are to effectively participate in promotion of peace, the executive branches of government should take parliaments as partners in this endeavour and should as far as it is practicable, share relevant information with Members of Parliament. I also call upon Members of Parliament to handle information so given to them in a very responsible manner, because issues touching relations of two countries, if not properly handled, can end up causing more conflict in endeavours to try and find peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of Government Business has asked me to respond on behalf of Government and I will make a brief response because this is a matter, which has been in this House before. Not long ago, the question of our relations with our neighbours - and I will briefly say, Madam Speaker, that the security situation in the region obviously has been a concern for everyone. But there is no doubt at all that these relations have been improving as we go along, particularly the relations between Uganda and her neighbours. The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs will be addressing the parliamentary committee on this issue tomorrow, Thursday. But as I had occasion to say, when the minister presented a statement to Parliament last time, our relationship with Democratic Republic of Congo has tremendously improved.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that I did travel to Kinshasa last week, as a special envoy of the President. I was received by President Kabila, as the head of the Ugandan delegation and we had very fruitful discussions about the implementation of the mechanisms we have already agreed on. Previous to that, we had held several meetings involving the Government of Rwanda, the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Government of Uganda under the facilitation of the Government of the United States of America. We have held all these meetings in Washington DC, United States of America except one, which was held here. Mainly the relationship that was under focus was between Rwanda and DRC.  

In fact, it is a measure of how improved our relationships are with both Rwanda and DRC that we were able to host the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Rwanda and DRC here to discuss that mechanism, and we did sign eventually what we call the Tripartite Mechanism for resolving security issues in the Great Lakes region, which was signed in Kigali and the Government of Congo was represented by a big delegation led by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Today as we speak, a meeting is being held in Kigali under the facilitation of the Government of the United States of America to put in motion this mechanism. We have sub commissions, which are meeting and we will be having a meeting in January at a ministerial level and we will have a summit. 

So, what I am saying is that relations were bad. You know we went to war, but we have moved a long way, and my own assessment, Madam Speaker, is that all governments are committed to maintaining these initiatives to resolving whatever problems we have between ourselves peacefully.

Therefore, taking that into account - maybe before I say this, I would like to say that the Executive believes that the movers of the motion are well intentioned; that it is an effort on their part to enhance the process of achieving peace and therefore, to that extent we welcome this motion.  

However, when you look at the wording of the motion, it does not reflect that intention nor is it consistent with the improved relations that exist between our three countries. By the way relations are not devoid of hitches. You can have a hitch here and there, but these are mainly isolated incidents, which cannot be a basis for making a generalised conclusion.  

Therefore, we would like to propose an amendment to this motion to read as follows:

“Motion for a resolution of Parliament in support of the Government of Uganda peaceful initiatives to further improve relations between Uganda and two sister-neighbouring states of Rwanda and DRC and to involve parliamentarians in regional peace processes”. We support paragraphs one, two, three, four, five, six but in light of what I have said, we propose that paragraph seven which says “Concerned that despite these commitments relations have began to deteriorate” be deleted because it is not consistent with this effort, and it does not help in this diplomatic work that Parliament is trying to do.

And then in the resolution, we support 1 and propose to amend 2 to read as follows:
“This House urges the governments of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda, to promote the peaceful mechanisms enshrined in the various peace accords to which they are signatory, like the Lusaka Accord, the Tripartite Agreement and other established mechanisms of resolving the conflict.” And we support 3 as it is.  

Having had, Madam Speaker, some consultations with the movers, we do believe that these amendments are acceptable because they bring the motion in line with their intention. I beg to move.

5.27
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the spirit of the motion as presented and as amended by the honourable Minister.  Diplomacy is initiated by the Executive, it is an executive function, but it can be complemented by other players like parliaments and even other non-state actors like even some leading personalities who can be called upon to intervene.  But we should appreciate that, for relations to get to normal or if there have been dynamics that have rendered the relations to be a bit dicey, reaching the compromise of getting them back to normal is not an event; it is a process and I think Government has been engaged in that process over a period of time.  

What may be very useful to this House is for the Executive, once in a while, to keep updating Parliament on the initiatives and the interventions that have been undertaken. But definitely, that is a process that has been on. And maybe because I am a Member of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, this motion would have taken into account the considerations that have been raised on the Floor if it were moved after we had met the Minister, like we are going to meet him tomorrow and these are the issues that were supposed to be raised. Otherwise, the spirit is a very good one and I appreciate the amendments that have been brought on board by the honourable Minister, because it brings every one on board in the whole process of working towards building cordial relations.

But relationships between countries reflect interests of countries and it is unlikely that at every time, you will get your interests harmonized. So, some of these dynamics are expected in diplomacy but at the end of the day, what is important is how you get to work together with each country pursuing their interest and when it comes to security, it even becomes more of a serious bargaining position on either side. But these are interests that we can look at and the spirit of every one going on board because it is in the interest of the country to work towards a common good and we need a secure country, we need good neighbourliness but it must not compromise the interests of our country. 

So, I support the amendment and the spirit that brings all of us on board in appreciating that we need to work in an environment that is secure if we are to enhance our other interests as a country.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.29
THE MINISTER IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also join those who have spoken in support of this motion but after welcoming the initiative by hon. Betty Amongi who proposed the motion and the seconder.

Madam Speaker, the reason why I have stood up to add my voice to that of my colleague hon. Mbabazi, the Minister for Defence, is that there have been some kind of impression created in our politics that Government does not necessarily listen to and accept ideas from the back benchers. The position taken by hon. Mbabazi demonstrates very clearly, and it is supported by every Member of the Executive, that actually the executive arm of Government is ever willing to work together with the backbenchers. Therefore, I would like to appeal to everybody to appreciate this fact and to know that when at times the executive arm of Government disagrees with a position and therefore opposes it, we are not doing it for the sake of opposing, we are doing it for reasons and good ones.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, quite often, the picture is grey, it is not a matter of white and black, and therefore easy to see. So many times the disagreements may not tell clearly who is right and who is wrong which in fact, philosophically, is always a matter of opinion not fact, and it is these opinions that will often cause some differences to arise.  Therefore, I would appeal to everybody to appreciate that these will arise but at the same time when there are positions of confluence, the executive arm of Government will always be willing to listen to back benchers.

I would like to appeal to my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to be good ambassadors of this country. Wherever they go and whatever they do, they must defend and support their country. I have done it before myself, Madam Speaker, in the 1980s when I had to live outside Uganda. I supported my country, I defended my country. We even had some instances where we worked and did work for this country out there. But in the past days, you hear people make statements that make you develop a temptation, those of you who are religious, to believe that someone is not actually for this country. We would like to be disabused of that thing; it is not difficult, it is easy.

Therefore, finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleague, Amama Mbabazi, and the others who have spoken in support of the motion as amended by hon. Amama Mbabazi. I thank you.

5.33
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion as proposed by hon. Amongi but I also have no problem with the motion which hon. Amama Mbabazi has brought to the House. I think it is extremely good that both the mover of the motion and the Government spokesman seem to agree that this motion is necessary. One of the most important messages we want to put across to the parliaments of Rwanda - I am not sure whether there is a good Parliament in Congo, but I suppose it is there – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think try not to pass judgment on our neighbours.

DR NABWISO: I thank you very much for your advice.  We should I be sending out messages to the parliamentarians in these neighbouring countries that we are also interested in the peace process.  

Now, I also want to raise a number of questions:  One question - I do not want to embarrass hon. Mbabazi. I have a lot of respect for him but it seems to me that he is the person who is doing three jobs at a time; Minister of Defence, Attorney General and Minister of Foreign Affairs – (Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: I thank my friend, hon. Nabwiso, for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the Floor. Just information to hon. Nabwiso and the House. Under the Lusaka Accord, each party to that accord was entitled to have two members, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defence. In fact, as everyone knows, I was the Chairman of the Political Committee for the first one and half years and, therefore, steered the process of pacification in the Great Lakes region. 

Subsequently, when hon. Wapakabulo became Minister of Foreign Affairs and was my senior, he became the consistent participant of the meetings of the signatories and subsequently became the Chairman of the Political Committee. We have not wound up officially the activities of the Political Committee under the Lusaka Accord. Unfortunately, hon. Wapakabulo passed away, as we all know, so I remained as the senior member of the Political Committee representing Uganda. Senior not only for Uganda’s participants but also for the entire region because all the others are new. That is why when I invited the Ministers of Foreign Affairs to come here, I did so in my capacity as a member of the Political Committee and everybody responds to that. 

So, I thought I should give you this information. I am simply continuing to do the work I have been doing for the last few days. I am not acting as a Minister of Foreign Affairs I am acting in my capacity as a member of that arrangement. Thank you.

DR NABWISO: Thank you very much for that information. But still I would want to place the point that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as it is today is a low-key ministry. I think we need a more vibrant Ministry of Foreign Affairs – (Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Member for giving way. I would wish to inform this honourable House that Ministry of Foreign Affairs participated actively in the making of this declaration. Hon. Butime and his senior officials were in Dar – es- Salaam, they were in DRC and they were actually very vibrant. Thank you very much.

DR NABWISO: I thank you for that information. If it is true that the participation was active, the House should be informed regularly on how actively the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is participating in these affairs. Because the impression we now have and I have raised this earlier is that there are many questions relating to foreign affairs, which are not being answered in Parliament on regular basis.

So, Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, if it were possible, let it be made clear as to who is the Minister of Foreign Affairs now so that this House has a person to whom some of these questions can be regularly addressed. Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank you, colleague, for giving way. It is on record and it is common knowledge that the Minister of Foreign Affairs is hon. Tom Butime, he is really taking that brief.  The nature of the work of foreign affairs is such that more often you may find the ministers out on duty. But we all know that he is in charge of foreign affairs and indeed very vibrant. Those of us who interact with him in the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs, he is not wanting and he is functionally versatile.

DR NABWISO: I can only say that I also want to feel vibrant, I want that vibrancy and versatility to reach me as a Member of Parliament responsible for Kagoma County. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue I want to raise is that, one of the reasons why His Excellency the President is regarded highly in Africa, was because he was known to be an important or major peace broker in the Great Lakes region and this has induced many American personalities to come to Uganda. We should not lose sight of this. We had President Clinton here, President Bush also passed through here, we have had the ex-President of the United States, Jimmy Carter, and so many personalities. But when we get this situation in East Africa or in Uganda and Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, at least we are not settled that we are not at peace with each other. This undermines not only the President’s achievements in this area but the whole of this country. This is why I am insisting that it is extremely important for us to have somebody. I am not questioning hon. Butime’s ability to handle the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but I would really like to see that this Ministry of Foreign Affairs as it was known under the late hon. Wapakabulo assumes the same importance. 

Now, there used to be somebody in charge, I think was an adviser to the President on Congolese Affairs and the Great Lakes region affairs. This was hon. Kabwegyere who is now the Minister of Local Government. What I wanted to find out is, what he was doing. Has it ceased to be of importance to this country? Is there somebody who is doing that, because we have never received a winding up report of these responsibilities and the question, which remains important, which should be answered is, why do we have problems with DRC Congo and Rwanda and not Kenya and Tanzania? We know that we have an East African Community in which Kenya and Tanzania are involved. We are also supposed to have the Kagera River Basin Authority; I do not know what has happened to that organisation. And we were supposed to have a COMESA in which Rwanda, Burundi and these other countries were supposed to be active participants. What is happening to this?

Whereas it is true that may be our committee on Presidential Affairs is monitoring these issues, but if you want a parliament to be involved, the whole of Parliament including the people of Kagoma whom I represent and the people you chased away from Butamira forest, because even these people understand foreign affairs, they are interested.  It is extremely important that we are kept abreast of what is happening. (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Nabwiso for raising this important issue. The information I want to give him is that, the procedures of Parliament allows the Executive to report to respective sector committees and it is true the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does report to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs and we accordingly report to the House on those issues. In case some of those issues have not been reported and a specific Member may have an interest, he can raise an issue in form of a question to the minister and the minister will be obliged to answer. And at least, as far as I know, we have not received a substantive question or maybe the minister may not have received any substantive question on this. 

The other day, Madam Speaker, when the issues on the report on the East African Legislative Assembly was brought on this Floor, Members wished to know on some of the activities of the East African Community and they ably requested that, let the minister prepare a formal report to this House on the activities of the East African Community organ which include other organs which are outside the mandate of Parliament namely; the Council of Ministers, the summit and the Court of Justice. I wanted just to say that it is true these issues are raised in the committee whenever we have the opportunity to interact with the minister and even, for instance, the effective performance of the ministry and the government with relation to the interaction and relations with our sister countries. So, I just want to assure him that the people of Kagoma can ably get to know what happens if, for instance, their Member of Parliament brings a formal question on this Floor.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  My colleague has raised a number of regional bodies, which Uganda may be a member of and there is a problem of multiple membership, which has rendered some of these regional bodies or organisations not to be able to function properly on a sustainable basis. And for the benefit of my colleague and the people of Kagoma and Butamira, the Kagera River Basin Initiative is one of such organisations that wound up; it could not really survive in a multiple membership and it has wound up. So, you can go and communicate that to Butamira.

DR NABWISO: I think I have raised many questions for the Minister of Foreign Affairs, which have not been answered in Parliament and as you are aware, there are a lot of paining questions, which have not been answered in Parliament. So, I know the method of seeking questions and answers through ministers. What I am saying, if you have this hidden information and it is of vital importance, Prof. Kagonyera was asking us to defend out country at all times, we can only defend it if we are given this information regularly.  

Now, I also want to find out, you see recently one Member of Parliament here from Bulisa was chased away from his constituency - at least that is what news reports suggested - because the people were complaining that many Congolese had invaded his area and that the Government had not taken any action to send those Congolese back. Now, these are the issues which must be addressed when we are debating our relations with Rwanda and DRC and this is why you need parliamentary support. 

I strongly support that element that Members of Parliament here should be very actively involved in the formulation of foreign policy in this country and to this existent, I would say I support this motion as amended by hon. Mbabazi and my request that the President can actually give us now a name of a substantive Minister of Foreign Affairs. Thank you. 

5.53
MR NORBERT MAO  (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief because for me I do not speak because I have to say something, but I speak because I have something to say. Today I have something to say.  

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Norbert Mao, who is rare in this House, to stand up and start in such a very arrogant way against Members who always sit in this Parliament and contribute substantively on the motions of this House? Is hon. Mao in order to impute such improper motives to honourable members who dedicate their time here yet he is perpetually out of this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mao, I think that opening statement is derogatory to Members. So please, withdraw it.  

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, I have something to say today on this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you gave the impression that there others who speak just for the sake of speaking.  

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, if it has injured Members then I withdraw it with apologies to those who it has injured.

I rise to support this motion, Madam Speaker. In particular, I would like to thank the hon. Prof. Kagonyera for the spirit of his speech that Government can embrace positions from the backbench. I think one good turn deserves another and I wish to state here that we as parliamentarians also pledge to be constructive in coming up with proposals.
  
On the second part of the hon. Prof. Kagonyera’s submission about we, needing to stand together, Madam Speaker, the Bible says: “A house divided against itself cannot stand.” If we stand together as Ugandans, parliamentarians, Members of the Executive, civil society no one can defeat us and I think this is something on which we need to reflect as Ugandans.  

I want to state here for the record that it is Prof. Kagonyera who in 1999 came to Fairway Hotel to launch a young organisation then, which we had started together with the late Deputy Speaker, Betty Okwir and other parliamentarians from the region. We formed the Great Lakes Parliamentary Forum on Peace otherwise known as AMANI Forum and the hon. Prof. Kagonyera came and launched it.  This organisation has survived up to today and I am the chairman of the regional organisation.  

Now we have got chapters in Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya Tanzania, Zambia and now we are going to launch a chapter in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  Now, I want to be concrete about what we can do to fulfil our side of the compact that the hon. Prof. Kagonyera is initiating today. Madam Speaker, there is something they call parliamentary diplomacy. It is not only a minister who can promote the image and interest of the country. Parliamentarians can also be effective, because diplomacy sometimes can be about personal relations. Somebody may not like the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Uganda and if so, then the Minister of Foreign Affairs is better off using other channels. I do believe that many of us in this Parliament have made contacts over the years and I invite the Government to use the parliamentarians effectively. That is why point number 3 of this motion is particularly critical.  

I do recall, when Rwanda and Uganda clashed in Kisangani and Members of Parliament travelled from here to Kigali to start talks with fellow parliamentarians in Rwanda and then we brought Rwandese Members of Parliament to visit here under the auspices of AMANI Forum, it helped to thaw the unease in international relations. I do believe that this is something, which should be encouraged.  In fact, when hon. Martin Wandera and myself announced that we were travelling to Kigali, the President was a bit upset, he rang the Speaker and said, “Look for hon. Mao, tell him to come and see me. Why is he interfering in foreign policy?” I told the Speaker, “Mr Speaker, you are the defender of parliamentary privileges, please come with me to meet the President and be there to defend what I am doing, not as interference but as part and parcel of promoting our national diplomacy.” The Speaker came with us and we were able to persuade the President that parliamentarians have an important role to play.  

Now, because of the role we have played through our regional members, Madam Speaker, we were invited as AMANI Forum to be observers at the heads of state summit and we were there in a closed session listening to our leaders. I was very proud of the important role our President was playing and the way his views were being listened to. I can tell you this frankly on the Floor of the House and I do believe that Uganda has played an important role.  We want Uganda to continue playing a constructive role in the region and our Parliament is being appreciated worldwide for our independent turn. 

When I went to Congo in August, I was being attacked; it was as if they were seeing President Museveni. They said, “Go and tell that President of yours to pull out his troops” and I said, “Do you know that the Uganda Parliament is the only Parliament in the region which passed the motion saying that our troops should get out?” I said, “If you want to talk to President Museveni, AMANI Forum can organize the platform then you tell him what you are trying to pass through me yourselves” and we are still committed to arranging that forum, where we shall have the President talk to Members of Parliament because some people are really angry about perceived roles. So, as parliamentarians we are in a good position to pass on information.  

That was the time also when I found the campaign going on for Prof. Omaswa and I think SADCA countries had ganged up. I think, Congo had taken a hard line against Uganda, even Rwanda had decided to vote against the Ugandan candidate and yet the Uganda candidate was the best by far. I remember meeting the Minister of State for Health, hon. Mukula Mike and I told him, “Why do you not use the parliamentary network?” In the Pan African Parliament, Uganda representatives are very highly regarded but I passed on to him the information that we were going to lose the vote because people had ganged up against us, because of some anti-Uganda propaganda.  

I want to assure the House and especially the hon. Prof. Kagonyera that I as hon. Mao, when I am outside Uganda, I stand for Uganda. (Applause)

Those who have followed my tracks I did not allow the Congolese parliamentarians to attack Uganda. I stated clearly that there is no effective government in Congo for which I was almost lynched for saying that –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I wanted to supplement hon. Mao’s statement because I witnessed him participate in some of these conferences and summits which he has ably stated. I witnessed him participate in the closed session in Dar-es-Salaam and I witnessed him saluting His Excellency, the President on his submission mainly on the issues of which are of paramount importance in the Great Lakes region peace and security situation. 

I wanted to supplement that yes, the AMANI Forum has been very instrumental particularly in the parliamentary arenas. Many of the colleagues in the Republic of Kenya have been able to discuss on one to one basis with the colleagues from this Parliament, and we have been able to propose additional measures as to how we can further the processes which Government has instituted. I just wanted to supplement this because when we were in that closed summit in Dar-es-Salaam, which I was also privileged to attend, our President continuously pleaded with his colleagues over the role we do have or the summit has over the peoples of this region. I know definitely our roles do not differ. Even we as representatives in this Parliament, we have a great role to play towards our people. So, I just wanted to supplement that AMANI Forum has played a part and I think we need to be harmonious when we are doing these roles so that we are reflected as Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, I think you wind up.

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, permit me to wind up, I will not yield the Floor anymore except unless someone has a point of order, to which I am not going to make myself vulnerable anymore. The point I am trying to make is that parliamentarians can be constructive; there is no need for us to be treated with suspicion and parliamentarians are men and women of influence.  

Above all, we have networks of which we have become part of and we have become embodiments of specialised skills. There are parliamentarians here that are specialists in matters of water bodies of the region; there are parliamentarians who are specialists in environmental issues; there are parliamentarians who are specialists in military affairs and trade. So, Madam Speaker, like I said, if we pool together, this nation can be a force in this region.

Now, for us as parliamentarians that is our pledge that we shall play a constructive role wherever we go. It does not mean that we agree with the Government all the time, we can even be abroad and criticize a Government policy. But that is us, now if someone else wants to use me to undermine my country, that is then where we part company because he will use you to undermine your country and go behind your back and laugh at you and say, “See how foolish this person is.” I think we must understand that clearly. Wherever I go, even in the United States I say I do not like the policy of this Government in handling the North, I do not like this policy. But anybody who tries to say that why do you not do this, I tell them off because there is a difference between me the Ugandan and me the Ugandan politician. 

There is a time for politicking and then there is a time for standing together. I want to pledge; no one is going to hear me undermining my own country Uganda. (Applause) I am not even saying except. If I criticize a Government policy or if I criticize a government leader I will never equate that with Uganda.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Dar-es-Salaam declaration had everything except the word “Parliamentarians.” They talked about civil society, women, youths; even there is the First Ladies Forum yet there is no word “Parliamentarian.” I do remember literally accosting the Tanzania Foreign Minister, Mr Jakaya Kikwete, and I told him, Who is going to pass your budgets to fight poverty? Who is going to pass those laws to promote peace in the region? Is it the First Ladies Forum, which is going to pass the budget? Is it the civil society?  (Interjection) Madam Speaker, I said I would not yield the Floor anymore, I hope I have not made myself vulnerable.  But anyway, the ministerial committee later pledged to us that they are going to involve parliamentarians in discussing the next agenda up to the Nairobi Summit.
  
What advice do I have to give to our Government in these matters? Madam Speaker, there was a young boy who went goat herding one time and while bored, he started screaming his head off shouting obscenities and the echoes kept coming back to him with the same obscenities. So, he went to his mother and said, “Mother, there is a very obscene boy behind the other hill; he keeps yelling at me” but the mother knew what was happening. So, she told the boy, “Go and shout nice words. Tell him you love him; tell him he is a wonderful boy; tell him to come and visit you.” So, this boy went and started yelling those same nice words and the echoes came back to him. So, the boy went to the mother and said, “Mama, this boy has transformed; he is telling me he loves me, he is telling me nice things, he is saying I should go and visit him.” 

I do believe that some of the utterances our leaders in Uganda make, we get the echoes coming back and I think the only way to get good echoes is for us to also shout good things. The countries that are in distress in this region require nurturing rather than condemnation. Look at Congo!  I was in Congo; Congo is a big market for Uganda. Kinshasa alone, I visited our embassy buildings; the police of Congo have occupied it. Our ambassadors in Congo are literally living like they are in exile; they are pleading because the Congolese Government is jittery about the relations. Congo needs nurturing, even Rwanda need nurturing. 

So, I plead with our Government to play the role of nurturing the neighbouring countries that are in distress. We must try as much as possible not to be perceived as being bullies, we must transform ourselves from that to become nurtures. I beg to support the motion, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.08
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I wish to support the motion as amended by hon. Amama Mbabazi. Perhaps I should start by asking, what are inhibitors and facilitators of good relations between Uganda and her neighbours?  The first facilitator is that you must have a high level of national integration because, if our level of integration is low, then we have problems, which spill over to our neighbours and the same applies to our neighbours. If their levels of integration are low, they have problems, which spill in our country and we have conflicting relationships.  That is why we welcome the three arms of the state to work together and promote good governance. 

When some of our neighbours have had low levels of integration and I refer to territorial integration, this refers to a capacity of the central government to manage subordinate governments, then obviously you are likely to have some degree of anarchy and it spills over to their neighbours. And when some of our neighbours have had low levels of integration, Uganda has had to grapple with that difficult situation and we have used other organs like the UN and so on, to ensure that neighbours who have low levels of integration do not mess us.  So, it is important to have national integration, which includes trans-ethnic integration, territorial integration, value integration and also reduction of the gap between elites and the masses at a vertical level. That is social integration.  And when you have all these levels of integration harmonized, then you have a strong polity; then that polity gets a capacity to lead to a neighbouring polity properly.  

Trade is another facilitator of good relations between Uganda and her neighbours. Even when some times the leaders are deemed to be disagreeing, ordinary people are trading with their neighbours and this is a facilitator of integration. It is durable, it is functionable, it is realisable, it is treasured and therefore sustainable.  

May I finally say that Rwanda and Burundi have requested to join the East African Community; an institutional arrangement, which is also likely to enhance good relationships in the region. I support the motion.

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS)(Mr Felix Okot Ogong): Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully and attentively to the submission presented by my brother hon. Mao and I would like to state here that I am greatly impressed by his submission. It is a clear indication that we are maturing in our politics. (Applause). 

Madam Speaker, I want to submit here very clearly that my brother Mao has exhibited a high degree of political maturity and patriotism. On that note, therefore, bearing the level of maturity, the level of support of the Movement and the President, I would like to move that I would like to encourage Mao and invite him to join the Movement. (Applause and Laughter).  I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  According to the Constitution of 1995, all the people of Uganda belong to the Movement. Is hon. Okot Felix in order to invite a colleague who is already a Member of the Movement to join the Movement? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable Minister is simply excited by hon. Mao. That is all. (Laughter)

Now, honourable members, this motion has been spoken for, there has been nobody against it and the Minister of Defence indicated that the mover and himself had agreed on the amendments. If there is no disagreement, I want to put the question –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I wish to concede to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to put a question that this House do approve a motion for a resolution of Parliament in support of the Government of Uganda peaceful initiative to further improve relations between Uganda and the two sister neighbouring states of Rwanda and Democratic Republic of Congo, and to involve parliamentarians in regional peace processes. 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion as moved and as amended, be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the work; the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)
     


