Friday, 3 December 2010

Parliament met at 11.55 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting. We had indicated yesterday that we would start at 10.30 a.m. but I was monitoring from my office and the situation was not very conducive, but I think now we can start work. Thank you.

11.58
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you. While still enjoying the good offices of Leader of the Opposition, -(Laughter)– I rise on a matter which is of great concern to my people and even to me. 

On Thursday 11 November 2010, His Excellency was passing through my constituency on his campaign trail. I want to believe that he was misquoted, but my constituency is not giving me any sleep over this matter. He said, “Do not ask me for water. Your MP was given Shs 800 million to provide it. Please ask him.” I am at great pains to explain that such money cannot be given to me. 

Madam Speaker, you will appreciate my small position; I cannot exchange notes with His Excellency. There is no other way I can take up this matter except to request the Minister in the Office of the President to clarify this matter; that an ordinary MP like me does not handle funds for provision of services like water, roads or medicine in health facilities. 

If there is any documentary evidence to this effect, I would request that it be availed. In the absence of this, perhaps the learned Attorney-General can also advise me. We are all well aware that that office is above litigation. We cannot engage the Office of the President in matters of litigation, but in the meantime, I am left to pick up the pieces at a great cost. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Leader of Government Business.

12.01
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Arumadri for bringing up this issue. I was not in that meeting so I cannot confirm that he said this. Maybe I will pass this on to my colleague, hon. Wabudeya, to investigate. 

What I know is that Members of Parliament can lobby for services for their areas and of course through the budget, monies are always allocated to the various constituencies and districts. What I am saying is that I was not present at that meeting. We shall take it up and we shall give due explanation or the correct record to hon. Arumadri. I thank you.

12.02
MR OKUPA ELIJAH (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you. I have a similar matter, but I will wait for my own time to bring it here, and I have documentary evidence. I will bring it up when I see the key minister around. 

The main reason why I rose is on the issue of our parking. We are being inconvenienced a lot because of parking. We are only fortunate that we are few these days. Some of us are of the view that, funds permitting, we have always used the National Theatre parking and some of us have talked to the management there and they are more than willing to have us use that place for some time. So, if that can be followed up, we should be able to secure that parking space at the National Theatre. Otherwise, there is a lot of inconvenience to us and the staff of Parliament and even our visitors. 

If it needs a supplementary budget, we have always seen supplementaries come for us to pay for parking space. We got to know that the Parliamentary Commission was trying to secure tickets for parking for Members, but where will you park? You may have the sticker, but where will you park? The security of the vehicle is also not assured. So, if the Commission can take up this matter, under your leadership, Madam Speaker, we would really be very grateful. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I really want to apologise to Members for the inconvenience, but this is because we are trying to improve and increase the facilities at this Parliament. We shall take up your proposal during the course of next week and see how to have both security and safety for your cars and the cars of staff and our guests. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTIONS 19 AND 27 OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS ACT, 2005 (ACT NO.18 OF 2005) TO APPROVE THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (CODE OF CONDUCT) REGULATIONS, 2010

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move a motion for a resolution under sections 19 and 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 (Act No.18 of 2005) to approve the Political Parties and Organisations (Code of Conduct) Regulations, 2010 and thereafter for appropriate making by the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the minister for information.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I believe colleagues have copies of the motion. If they do not, there are other copies still lying on the Floor.

“WHEREAS clause 2 of Article 71 of the Constitution requires Parliament inter alia to prescribe a code of conduct for political parties and organisations;

AND WHEREAS sections 19 and 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 requires the Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in consultation with the Electoral Commission and the political parties and organisations, and with the approval of Parliament, to prescribe, by regulations, a code of conduct for political parties and organisations and also provides that the minister may, for that purpose, provide for any other matter necessary for giving effect to the code of conduct;

AND WHEREAS the minister, after consulting with the Electoral Commission and the political parties and organisations, caused to be prepared the Political Parties and Organisations Code of Conduct Regulations of 2005 and laid the regulations before the Seventh Parliament;

AND WHEREAS the Seventh Parliament, upon laying before it the draft code of conduct regulations, directed on the 28th of December 2005 that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should make further consultations on the regulations and report to Parliament;

AND WHEREAS the Electoral Commission, upon the request of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, consulted the political parties and organisations and other stakeholders on 10 and 11 September 2008, and on the basis of such consultations, I have caused the regulations to be revised;

AND WHEREAS I have caused the Political Parties and Organisations Code of Conduct Regulations, 2010 to  be laid before this Parliament and caused them to be attached to this motion as an appendix;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with sections 19 and 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005, Parliament approves that the Attorney-General and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs makes the Political Parties and Organisations Code of Conduct Regulations, 2010 attached to this resolutions as an appendix.”

I so move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether you have any comments. This is a statutory instrument and should you have some comments, you could make them. Otherwise, he is fulfilling his constitutional obligation to lay these regulations before Parliament. 

12.10
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to ask whether this submission will not require further scrutiny of the appropriate committee before Parliament can consider it.

12.10
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As hon. Arumadri rightly said, I do realise that the code itself is quite a detailed one which needs to be put before the relevant committee for scrutiny and interaction with the minister or the Attorney-General. Eventually, we will need a report and we can debate the report together with the code and then we can approve it. We may have time constraints, but I think it certainly requires our approval. There is no way we can approve it without going to the relevant committee of Parliament.

12.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I want to concur with what my colleagues have said. When I looked at it, on page 12, I see something in bold; that is No.7 and also No. 8. I guess these are some additions that have been put forward and I see it affecting a number of people including some ministers who have decided to stand as independents. So, I think it would be necessary for us to have it go to the committee and let the committee look at it and then get back to the House and we see how best these regulations can be passed here.

Madam Speaker, No. 7 says, “A candidate representing a political party or organisation shall not use for his or her candidature or campaign, a symbol or colour of a political party or organisation rather than his or her own or the symbol or colour allocated by the Electoral Commission to an independent candidate.”

Point No.8 reads, “An independent candidate shall not use for his or candidature or campaign, a symbol or colour of a political party or organisation or the symbol or colour allocated by the Electoral Commission to another independent candidate other than his or her own.”

I see some people already caught up under this; so, I do not know whether we can go ahead without it going to the committee and people make their submissions. It can then come back to the House for us to see how best we can be able to handle. I see hon. Mukisa very interested in this section here. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know this is a new matter touching on contemporary issues; new situations that maybe were not envisaged when we last made the regulations. I think it is only fair that we allow the committee maybe a week to look at them and have a hearing so that all those who are affected may have their views heard before we conclude these regulations. 

I now commit it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. In view of the urgency of the matter, I would appeal to them to handle it expeditiously and report back on Wednesday next week. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 126/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

12.14
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative, Workers): “On 24 March 2010, Parliament pronounced itself on the matter of Buganda Road Flats and resolved that sitting tenants be given first priority to purchase residential units. Following that, on 13 April 2010, His Excellency the President of Uganda also directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to immediately offer the sitting tenants of Buganda Road Flats an opportunity to purchase flats at a reasonable rate just like their counterparts in Bugolobi, Nakasero, Wampewo and Bukoto flats. Can the minister, therefore, explain to the House:

1) 	Why the recommendations of this Parliament to grant the sitting tenants opportunity to purchase their residential units has not been respected and implemented?

2) 	Why the presidential directive to immediately offer to the sitting tenants opportunity to purchase their flats has also not been implemented?

3)	Whether the conduct of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. does not amount to contempt of both the Executive and Parliament.”

12.14
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance received this question and she did prepare to respond. Unfortunately, she has had other state duties and most of her colleagues are also not available. We beg your indulgence so that she responds to this question later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we reflect it again on the Order Paper for Tuesday next week; clerk.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

12.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Speaker, thank you. Since the adjournment yesterday, we have consulted with the various stakeholders and the information is that Parliament has the right to do what we are requesting parliament to do. So, we are just asking Parliament to go ahead and continue from where we stopped.

MR OKUPA: I expected the minister to come up with a solution for the technical issues. What have they come up with? The only way the ministry can collect and remain with the money is through creation of an authority. 

In the meantime, since the minister had genuine reasons for retention, what is the best way to help the fisheries department move forward? We expected an answer from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We had requested that they consult the Attorney-General on whether it is possible for us to create that department, allow it to collect money, and use it before it goes to the Consolidated Fund.

12.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I was consulted on the matter this morning and I asked the acting Solicitor-General, who also happens to be the Director of the First Parliamentary Council in the Ministry of Justice. She has assured me that this matter was consulted on between the Ministry of Justice, the sector ministry and the Secretary to the Treasury. 

It was agreed that the proposed amendment is possible in view of section 9(1) of the Public Finance Act, which allows revenue to be retained by a government department if authorised by law. If Parliament passes a law authorising a department to retain finances, then that is possible. 

The mode of doing so is dependent upon the proposal by the sector ministry to ensure that the monies retained are properly accounted for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our difficulty is that there was no proposal either from the committee or the ministry about how the money would be retained. It was just saying that there is need to provide for the retention, by the Department of Fisheries, of the fees received.

MR KATUNTU: I have immense respect for the learned Attorney-General but the interpretation is problematic. If you are giving the commissioner the right to collect and use it at source as you say, who becomes the accounting officer? Are we talking about two accounting officers within a ministry? This is money that is being collected by an officer below the accounting officer; who does he account to? 

If this matter is not really that urgent, I would suggest that the Attorney-General thinks quite deeply about it. Maybe we might need a written legal opinion on it.

All accounting officers are appointed at the beginning of the financial year. Will this commissioner now become an accounting officer for the revenue that he has collected and utilised at source? The relevant committee together with the Attorney-General should put their heads together and draft it better; otherwise, it might create more problems in interpretation, rights and obligations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What bothered me yesterday is that the report left it hanging; so, our committee also did not take responsibility for anything. 

MR NSUBUGA: I think the problem with our report is that we never came out clearly. The reason for the retention was not to create another accounting officer. The key issue was to secure money collected from the fisheries department to be reinvested in the sector. The accounting officer will remain the PS of Agriculture. 

12.24
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Yesterday when I was following the discussions on this matter, the committee had a good report, but the point where clarification needed to be given was on the modality of retaining this money. The committee did not also properly present the challenges which were experienced earlier. It is estimated that Ugshs 15 billion will be collected, but how will this money be managed? What are the other challenges that come with that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We want to know the legal status of that fund where we were going to put that money.  I want to help hon. Mukisa, but I need to know how I can assist him legally.

MS MATSIKO: I do not think this is the first department or authority that has kept money at source. We have got areas in this country - authorities that get money and use it. So, I imagine that modalities of how money is going to be got and used should not be a strange issue.

When it comes to fisheries, we need to be proactive as a country. This is a sector from which we are getting a lot of resources. We also have a lot of potentialities, especially as far as the fresh waters are concerned. We have a lot of fresh lake waters which can yield much more fish than we have at the moment. But I think the hindrance that the ministry has had is not to have enough resource to restock most of these lakes. We also have no ability to reduce on the pollution.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the levels of pollution, especially on Lake Victoria, you will realise that if we are not careful, in ten years to come, we might have no living organism that will be of use to us, still surviving in that lake. Pollution has now reached very high levels that we now need many authorities to come in and help – (Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have been forced to stand on a point of procedure because the issue we are discussing is about the modalities of the accountability; it is not about the justification. We all discussed the justification and agreed that it is correct. So, we should not be talking about the authority. I think it is not procedurally right for us to discuss justification when the matter at hand now is about how best we can handle this resource. Should it be the commissioner to handle it or the permanent secretary or we need to create a fisheries authority to help the department of fisheries? It is not about the justification because we are all well versed with that, and all of us appreciate the problems that that ministry has been facing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Winnie Matsiko, the authorities you are talking about are things like the Coffee Development Authority established by an Act of Parliament, the Tea Authority – all these are established by an Act of Parliament, but we are saying how do we transform this department into an authority without creating a legal entity? Yes, hon. Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I do not know where the contradiction is. When the sector minister consulted me this morning, I was emphatic on two things: First, that for as long as the Bill indicates that the money retained by the department is for the purposes of taking care of the expenses of the department and for the effective management of the fisheries resources, that in itself is good enough.

In terms of accountability, I emphasized to him that certainly, the accountability of those funds remains in the purview of the permanent secretary of the ministry.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday we ended at the lacuna of the accounting officer. If the minister can tell us that the accounting officer – and they are ready to adjust – should be the permanent secretary instead of a commissioner and secondly, promise that in the near future – because we do not want them to experience the Auditor-General’s queries – that should be upgraded to an authority, a proper accounting code should be allocated to them to enable them manage these funds. This is intended to save them from having problems with finances just immediately after we pass this Bill. I thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that sometime back, we had a problem of the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU), which was not a legal entity, but this Parliament decided that – because the donors thought that before we got to a road authority, we needed to start with a Road Agency Formation Unit under the Ministry of Works and Transport. This was done with a director responsible for the accountability of the funds. It was only later that we got to the Uganda National Roads Authority, which is now in existence. 

Madam Speaker, if you recall properly, we actually gave RAFU funds; it operated by working on some of the roads, but was handling a lot of money, and eventually, we ensured that the Uganda National Roads Authority was put in place. 

In the same vein, I would like to think that the sector minister can also move stage by stage by first having a fisheries agency and later an authority. To avoid the issue of having the minister with hands tied up – there is a lot of money in fisheries - we could move a step forward at least. Thank you.

MS MATSIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  As I was saying, I think when you have a good justification you can treat an issue differently. I imagine that what we need to look at or the important issue is to ensure that whoever gets resources or monies, they account for it properly. So, where there is an issue of urgency – and this issue is really urgent, but that does not mean that when that money is received, it should be put under people’s beds. It should be properly utilised with the system used clearly stipulated.

I am saying that because if we keep thinking that we shall suffocate this particular sector, we shall be doing ourselves a disservice. And as it has already been pointed out, an authority certainly would be the best self-accounting institution. But since we have not got to that level, why not to have this as a provisional body before we get to that self-accounting body?

I think we should not refuse to pass this Bill – it is upon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that all the money that will be secured is properly accounted for. This is intended to improve the services in the fisheries sector.

12.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At first, I just wanted to seek some clarification from the Attorney-General, but now I pray that you give me a little time to debate this issue.

It looks like the modalities have not been worked out and so the worst you can do is to entrust people with money without such modalities being in place. What we are going to see is confusion, financial mismanagement – because we are talking about a lot of resources. So, if we are talking about planning, I do not think we will just have a department planning for the entire sector. These people get revenue and use it as they wish because of lack of proper planning.

This country has got a system in place; if we think that the fisheries sector is important and so needs more resources, we have two options, in my view: One, is to allocate it more resources from the central pool. If we cannot do that, then we go to the next option, which is about having it as an authority. There is no need for us to become ad hoc. The minister should think about it; work out a paper and bring it here so that we can establish a fisheries authority that will be self-accounting. That authority will be able to plan for its activities and improve on the services offered by the sector. But to just have a department of Government and a commissioner collect over Shs 15 to 20 billion and so use it at source - and there is one thing which I need to emphasise here: Fisheries is not a small department; it is also interconnected. It is interconnected to the Ministry of Works, Ministry of Water and so on. So, the planning by just a department and giving it resources without recourse to other Government ministries and departments, is disastrous. Fisheries cannot be planned for by just a department. 

So, the minister should go back to the drawing board on this; go to Cabinet and convince your colleagues that you need to establish this authority. Thereafter, come back to us and we will give you the law so that you manage your department as a statutory body. It is very easy in terms of accountability and also efficiency in running this particular authority.

You might need, for example, recruitment of personnel; if you are an authority, you will recruit your own personnel. Today you cannot do that because you have to refer to Public Service, and once you do that they will have their own constraints. So, I think we are rushing this. I know it is important and we need money to revamp the sector, but we are rushing. Just get the two options that are available to you and you will have your department blossom.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the minister give me an example of a ministry where this arrangement is working so that we can find a way forward.

12.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Speaker, like you have been told, it has worked in the Ministry of Water. But I would like to inform hon. Katuntu that the modalities for collection and management of this money have been worked out in detail. This is not something we have just woken up and – in fact, the statutory instruments regarding this have all been worked out and approved. Now, what we are looking for is the authority to operationalise this thing and we move on. [Mr Katuntu: “Did the committee look at it?”] All these were looked at by the committee, but one thing I want to add is that this has been around for quite sometime, and the issue of the authority is going to be worked on together with the new Fisheries Act. Because Cabinet has in the meantime allowed us to move in this direction, but demanded that a new Fisheries Act be put in place soon. When that happens, then we will work on all these other things. But for now, we need what we are asking for. And if you have a copy of the Bill, it is just that; and if you could allow us to move towards what you want.

One thing that I can concede to is having the PS remain as the accounting officer in charge of these monies. That, I think, will satisfy this House. 

I would also think that in a given time, we will move towards an authority. But for now, please, the fisheries department must move and it is only when we do this that we shall save the stocks that we are talking about. The stocks are almost zero in the lake. We are doing all this to save the water bodies that we have. It is urgent and we would not have moved in this direction if it was not urgent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, would you go farther to propose that this money is kept in a specific fund which can be identified because if it goes to the common pool, it will go again. Would you go ahead to make an amendment to say that it will be kept in a particular fund so that we know that it is in bank X or something like that. That way we know it is on its own, without mixing with the rest; although it is under the accounting officer, it can be identified and tracked.
 
MR MUKISA: Madam Speaker, I would have no objection to that. [Mr Katuntu: “You could call it ‘Engeeni Fund’.”] You can name it “Engeeni Fund” or “Fisheries Fund” or whatever you choose. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Something that makes it distinct from the other monies.

MR MUKISA: It is okay, I think I would accept that and we could make an amendment to that effect.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your suggestion that we create a specialized, ring-fenced fund and also we want as Parliament that you give a timeframe for an authority to be created. We want to hear it from you. We have all along been saying it, but you are not responding.

12.42
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you read our report on page 5: General Observations and Recommendations; actually, as a committee, we envisaged this. But I should confess that we were not helped by the minister. Even the Bill they presented that we are planning to pass is extremely shallow and does not solve most of the problems. Our view was, Government could expedite the process of overhauling the whole Fisheries Act to conform to those of our counterparts within the East African Community. Actually, both Kenya and Tanzania are far ahead.

We, in fact, proposed the establishment of the Fisheries Development Fund to promote the development of the fisheries sector. So, if this Parliament can adopt this proposal as part of the amendment, I think it would be the best. [Hon. Members: “That is ad hoc.”] No, it is not ad hoc because we have it in our report. If we had not put it as part of the amendment - I think it is upon this House to amend our report such that this amendment is included. That way, the fund will be protected. 

Hon. Katuntu talked about the modalities of using this money; I think that will come under the regulations, after the Bill is passed.

12.44
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the problem that the minister has is lack of resources to streamline this department, and the best way to solve this is to capture it through the budgeting process. Otherwise, how are you going to monitor these resources? It is always a good accounting standard to put money in the Consolidated Fund. One of the reasons we do that is because we are monitoring the budgeted for items such that at the end of the year, we are able to trace what we budgeted for, what we spent and what was reserved.

If you say that we create a fund, which is probably a better cross than what we already have, then we shall need to create regulations on how that fund is going to be operated. It will need us to again look at that. But if that is just for the ministry’s convenience – to have this money spent at source, we can do that. But I can assure you that it will create accounting problems. We can have that done, but it might not solve the problem that we have now, which is scarcity of resources to streamline the department.

If we create the fund, which I think is a better version of this, it will need us to have specific regulations on how that fund is going to be monitored and operated. We can look at this in the short-term; you might think it will solve a problem, but in the long-run it will create problems if we pass it the way it is at the moment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not really reinventing the wheel; there must be regulations that govern these activities. I think the important thing is to secure the money, and then they can use the ordinary regulations of the Public Finance Act to manage in the mean time, while he is working on the other one. The important thing is to secure the money and get it somewhere, where it can be identified and then maybe reinvested.

12.46
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I think there is a bigger problem. We are just trying to treat the symptoms, but there is a bigger managerial problem in this ministry; because surely, how can this department be treated the way it is? Yesterday, the minister tried to hint here that when the money comes, the PS does not give them money. So, I think there is a bigger problem than what we are trying to solve and to me this is not the best way. 

I think this Parliament must put its feet down and we agree that this money be collected by the ministry and the PS is the accounting officer, but this money must be directed to the Fisheries department. I think that is the position on which we need to make a resolution. In the meantime, we give the minister six months to prepare for the establishment of the Fisheries Authority. You said you have been working on this – maybe one year – that is my proposal; you can give your proposal, but personally, I see that as a problem. 

The minister is being diplomatic and does not want to state the problem, but he has a problem. The problem could even be the senior minister and the Permanent Secretary conniving to suffocate the Fisheries department. Those are my words not yours; but that is what I am reading because of the way I see you labouring and trying to do this, but not reaching there; I read that, that could be the problem in the ministry. There is no way we can budget money here for the ministry and it is given to the Animal Industry, and the Fisheries department is suffocated. I think we can agree to let the Fisheries department collect this money instead of the local government.

However, it should be accounted for by the permanent secretary and this money must be channelled to Fisheries activities - that is all the money. They can do the appropriation-in-aid. That way, we will be able to move, but not the way it is being proposed here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want us to look at this as a process in the long struggle to liberate the Fisheries Sector. So, I think we should give the minister the resources because he has identified the licences and registers which have been going somewhere else. Let that money go to that common pool and be used for the Fisheries Sector then he can sort himself out because he has now identified the sources for the money, which he has not been getting. 

Hon. Members, I put the question that this Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITEE STAGE

THE FISH AMENDMENT BILL, 2010

12.49
Clause 1

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee recommends inserting some new clauses. The principal Act is amended in Section 2 by inserting immediately after sub-section (h) the following new sub-section h(a). “Currency points means the value of a currency point specified in Schedule 1”. The justification is to provide meaning to the word as proposed herein.

(b) Amendment of Section 13. The principal Act is amended in sub-section 4 by deleting the words “And the decision of the minister shall be final”. The justification is that an aggrieved person should have the right to appeal the decision of the minister.

(c) Amendment of the principal Act to convert shillings into currency points. The principal Act is amended as follows: 

In sub-section 13(5) by substituting for the words “one thousand shillings” the words “twelve currency points”. 

In sub-section 16(3) by substituting for the words “one thousand shillings” the words “twelve currency points”.

In sub-section 17(3), by substituting for the words “one thousand shillings” the words “twelve currency points”.

In Section 18, by substituting for the words “one thousand shillings” the words “twelve currency points”.

In sub-section 21(2) by substituting for the words “one thousand shillings” the words “twelve currency points”.

In Section 22, by substituting for the words “ten thousand shillings” the words “forty eight currency points”.

In Section 33, by substituting for the words “ten thousand shillings” the words “forty eight currency points”.

The justification is to bring the provisions in line with the Law Revision (Fine and Other Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008 which converts fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters into currency points, and further standardises the relationship between fines and terms of imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I have an amendment. I would like to be advised because we just have clause 1. From there we go to 22(a) and we want to bring an amendment, which will cover what we have been discussing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is in clause 2.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: But it has no clause 2. It has one clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now you have to move that we create a new clause, before you can move your amendment.

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We have another clause so I do not know whether this will help hon. Nsubuga.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I am at a loss because the way we always proceed, according to our rules, is that the members of the committee agree with their report. If there are any amendments, which they have thought of afterwards like hon. Nsubuga here, the chairperson should be able to move this amendment, but now I see the committee of the member and the chairperson all struggling to make amendments to their own report without consulting the members of the committee. I think they should harmonise if there is anything. I would agree, like Madam Chairperson you had guided, that let them wait; if there is a new clause they want to introduce, let it be moved and we do not even know where we are in this amendment Bill. Where are we? (Laughter) The Chairperson should be able to - I know she has just come in here, but let her guide us and if we need to insert from what we have been debating, let her be able to insert what they have come up with.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know we were amending clause 1 and then we are moving to the insertion of new clauses. So, I want you to move for the insertion of the new clauses.

MS KABONESA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. With the advice of the Government Chief Whip, I am reliably informed that the members would like to move a new clause which initially was not agreed on in our report because of the discussions that have taken place in this plenary.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, I want to move a new clause immediately after clause 1, to establish a Fisheries Development Fund to promote the development of the fisheries sector whose resources may include:

(a) 	any sum appropriated by Parliament; 
(b) 	any sum or property which may in any manner become payable;
(c) 	any income generated by any fisheries related project; and 
(d) 	grants and donations.

You will agree that after a long debate, we all agree that there is need to boost the fisheries sector by ring-fencing all the revenues accrued from the sector. So, by establishing the Fisheries Department Fund, all the revenues will go to that fund. Actually, we agreed that this is like an interim; in future, the minister is going to think of creating an authority -(Interjections)- we cannot put a time limit.

MR BAHATI: I seek clarification about where we are. Is it on retention of fees? That clause 1. It has been passed but this is the same clause we had some issues with and I thought we would - the proposal by hon. William Nsubuga would fit well if we amended this current clause of retention of fees by, for example, suggesting that, “Any fees received by the chief fisheries officer or an authorised licensing officer from licences and permits and other fisheries activities under this Act shall be retained by..” First of all, we need I think to state that it is going to be the ministry retaining this not the department, so that we solve the issue of the accounting officer who will be the PS. So, shall be retained -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether you read the report. Under Article 153 of the Constitution, by an Act of Parliament, a department may retain.

MR BAHATI: Okay, “…shall be retained in a fisheries fund” so, we can insert that one - the fund in this clause rather than creating a new clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what I was talking about.

MR BAHATI: I can rephrase it in a minute.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: While the Member is rephrasing the statement, I think the lacuna of the accounting officer being the PS - when we specifically say a department, will the PS be in charge of the department? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: All of them will be under the PS until we create the authority.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: We do not want departments to start fighting with the PS.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, until we create the authority that is when we shall liberate them from the PS.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the time being, they stay there. We are waiting for hon. Bahati’s redraft. Can somebody move it?

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chair, I think hon. Bahati simplified everything and the sentence or the words he wanted us to insert were, “In a fisheries fund” if I got him correctly. So, this could come after “The fisheries resources”. Can I read the whole bit?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, read it all.

MS KABAKUMBA: “Any fees received by the chief fisheries officer or any authorised licensing officer from the issue of licences and permits and other fisheries activities under this Act, shall be retained by the department of fisheries resources in a fisheries fund...” then we continue, “...in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is already there.

MS KABAKUMBA: A fisheries fund is not there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the Public Finance and Accountability Act is there already, but we add there, “...in a fisheries fund”.

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will solve the problem. So, we add there, “In the fisheries fund”. We add to the 22(a) retention of fees; after the provision we add there, “In a fisheries fund”.

Okay, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

MS KABAKUMBA: The last line, “For purposes of defraying the expenses of the department and for the effective management of the fisheries resources”. What is here is management and we think development is broader than management.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want to remove “management” -

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, and this was after consultation.

MR OKUPA: Possibly we can do it that way because the way I understood the word “management” was about managing the resources, not developing; but we can have both.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The ultimate strategy is to boost that sector.

MS KABAKUMBA: I concede that we can say, “For the development and management of the fisheries resources”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIREPERSON: Development of fisheries resources or the sector? Development of the sector. So, we amend clause 1 and instead of “Fisheries resources” we say, “Fisheries sector”. Effective development and management of the fisheries sector?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIREPRSON: I think that is better. Let us finish with this.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chair, do we have to specifically mention that the PS will be the accounting officer, because I think it will come here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us say for the avoidance of doubt that the accounting officer shall be the Permanent Secretary.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESON: Just for emphasis so that nobody is tempted to put their fingers in it. So, hon. Members, we add the clause that, “For the avoidance of doubt, the accounting officer of the Fisheries Fund shall be the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries until he liberates them”.

Okay, I put the question. (Ms Kabonesa rose_) Is there another amendment? 

MS KABONESA: Another clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Another clause? Okay, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 1, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR RUHINDI: We have a small problem, in that particular clause where we said that money shall be put in a Fisheries Fund; we do not seem to have any specific provision anywhere where we are saying that it shall be there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Pardon?

MR RUHINDI: It is as if we are assuming that there is already a Fisheries Fund, which is really not the case. Maybe we could say, “Established for the purpose.” Somewhere we say, “Established for the purpose” so that we are really – the law commands that there shall be that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It will be in the Fisheries Fund established for that purpose.

MR RUHINDI: For that purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because that is what we are looking for.

MR RUHINDI: So that there is no doubt whatsoever, because they may say, “Where is the Fisheries Fund?”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so we add the clause, “To establish for that purpose.”

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A Fisheries Fund established for that purpose [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes”]. Okay. I now put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR ARUMADRI: The long-term objective of Parliament is the creation of an authority. We have amended the principal Act as a stop-gap provision to enable the Minister to proceed the way he wants to. All departments of Government, if they had their chance, would want this kind of arrangement. Departments want to spend money as appropriation-in-aid. 

Now what guarantees can we get from the Minister that he is not going to sit back and say, “What we wanted was this funding. We have now got it and we are comfortable. The issue of creating an authority can be put on hold.” How do we get this assurance from the Minister that he is not going to say, “We have arrived”?  

MR MUKISA: It has been proposed here that the process of forming an authority should be started. I think we just need a timeframe; otherwise it is agreeable to us and the department that we need an authority together with the overhaul of the Fish Act as we have been directed by Cabinet. So, if Parliament wants to be sure, it can give a timeframe and we shall abide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Nsubuga.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: I think they have said that it can be in the law and there is no problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No; you can propose a timeframe for the Hansard.

MR MB NSUBUGA: For the Hansard, one year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: One year? [HON. MEMBERS: “No”.] I was looking at six months.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Okay, two years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Two! I was proposing six months.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: You are proposing six months?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This sector has been - yes, we need –

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Now that we are under directions, I think one year would be prudent because six months would be - one year would be prudent enough after the new government has come in for six months and Parliament will keep demanding. One year will be prudent enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. But there is a branch that does not go on recess and that is the Civil Service. Can they not start working on this now? Can they show instruction? You say you have been doing work on this for a long time. Why do you want two years? The Civil Service should act now. They should start tomorrow - 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Yes, six months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because they are there.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Minister concede to six months.

MR MUKISA: This sector needs a lot of consultation, especially when it comes to the authority, and consultation will mean the fisher folk, the fish processors - because now the farmers have to be brought on board. 

The previous authority had disregarded fish farming. So, we would beg that for purposes of proper consultation, we be allowed at least a year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we give you one year after giving you this lease of life. (Laughter) Yes, hon. Chair.

MS KABONESA: The committee further recommends that the following new clauses are inserted immediately after clause 1:

Insertion of new clause 36; the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after clause 35 the following new clause, “clause 36 - Power of the Minister to amend the Schedule: The Minister may by statutory instrument amend Schedule 1.”

(B) Insertion of A Schedule to the principal Act. The principal Act is amended by inserting the following Schedule, “Schedule 1 – Currency point.” “A currency point is equivalent to Ug shs 20,000.” The justification is to provide for the value of the currency point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause – yes?

MR OKUPA: This issue of the power of the Minister to amend the Schedule and Schedule 1 here is about the currency points. I thought this is a standard measure, and so, with which amendment would the Minister want to amend the currency point again?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing this year it is five currency points and he wants to amend it to 10 currency points, should he really come back to Parliament? Can he not say that, “Now, I am amending to 10 currency points?”

MR OKUPA: The currency point here is about the equivalent of one currency point and not the number of currency points, because Schedule 1 is about the value of one currency point and that is what Schedule 1 is all about. It is not about the number of currency points. If that is what they wanted to - which I think is what they wanted, then it should not be under this one because this one is just about the value of one currency point; what is the value of one currency point. That is what Schedule 1 is all about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification, chairperson?

MS KABONESA: According to the principal Act, the language that has always been used has been shillings and we want to standardise the new Act by using currency points.

MR OKUPA: I do not know whether you have got me. It is not about the unit of account, but here it is about the value, and you have already done it; and so, you cannot again amend it because it is the shilling which we use. You have already done it and to me it is redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The power of the Minister to amend?

MR OKUPA: To amend because it is already a standard thing. To me I think what you wanted is to change the currency points that are going to be charged. That is what I think you wanted to give the Minister; the powers, because if today it is five and tomorrow you feel it should be eight, then he should be at liberty to change; but it cannot come under this one. It should be under a different thing. 

I think that is what you wanted to mean -[HON. MATHIUS NSUBUGA: “You mean the same thing?”]– No! This is about the unit value of a currency point. What does a currency point mean? You see, it is equivalent to Shs 20,000.  It is here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Sebunya?

MR SEBUNYA: I think I will concur with hon. Okupa. The power to change the unit lies with Ministry of Finance. The Minister of Agriculture can only vary - either to increase the units or to decrease them, or to stay them - and would make this adjustment redundant. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chair, in almost all the laws we have made, this statement is included. Unless I am assured that once the Minister of Finance altered the value of the currency point, then in all the laws it is automatically varied. But otherwise, in all the laws we have been passing, this statement has always been there.  And maybe -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: No, I am not against the statement; what I am against is about giving the Minister powers to amend that Schedule. But that statement appears in all laws, save that here they have just said, “The Minister should have the powers to amend Schedule 1.” But Schedule 1 is a standard thing in all the Bills and Acts that we have here, but he cannot amend it because it is set by the Ministry of Finance.  

MS KABAKUMBA: In my understanding, the purpose is once the Minister of Finance amends, the respective ministers will also amend their schedules. This means that the minister will also amend the Schedule accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t he required to issue a statutory instrument under his hand? Doesn’t he adjust his Acts?

MR OKUPA: Once the Minister of Finance does this by gazette, automatically it changes. It does not call for the other ministers to respectively do the amendments. The Attorney-General can help us here.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I would like to give, Madam Chair, is that what hon. Okupa is saying is right because the moment we start defining and according different values to a currency point, we are going to have problems. Even in the Penal Code that was amended, we standardised the currency point to the equivalent of Shs 20,000. So, it becomes very dangerous in this particular law to say that Shs 1,000 is equivalent to 12 currency points. 

The discretion we leave to the Minister is just to say, “Pay 10 currency points.” The unit of currency points is known by everyone; it applies across the board, even in the Penal Code or in any other law; it is only the amount. If the minister says, “100 currency points,” everyone knows one currency point is 20,000. So, let us avoid saying in this particular case, “One currency point would be equivalent to Shs 12.” It is like having two Shs 1,000 notes, where one is Shs 1,000 and then the other is Shs 10,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t there a possibility that the Minister may want to include something else in Schedule 1? This Schedule is not static. Suppose you want to do something else and it is put in Schedule 1, can’t you amend it? He may want to do something else in Schedule 1 in addition to the currency points. Why should we take away that power? He may want to do something else.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Okupa is quite correct. Shs 20,000 is the standard measure that you use and it is applied practically in all our legislation. So, you can imagine the discrepancy that you would create if you were to say that a currency point is 40,000. It may be the only one among all that we have and of course to the audience that is reading the laws, that may be confusing.  

The crux of the matter is that the amendment is required in the actual text of the legislation, giving powers to the minister and it should not be the Minister of Finance; it should be the sector minister in consultation with the Minister of Finance. That is much better; in consultation with the Minister of Finance amend the currency points in any one provision that we are actually talking about.

And there we also have to be very careful because some of these provisions create penalties. They go to the core of a person’s human rights, and normally there is a serious argument that such provisions should always come to Parliament for revision like we did. 

We passed a law revising the fines to standardise them against the penalties; we did that. There is a law, which was mentioned by the Chairperson. So, really, my advice would be to tactfully withdraw from that position because, in my opinion, these provisions really touch on the penalties awarded under the law and should always be revised by Parliament. That is my view. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Attorney-General, are you suggesting that Schedule 1 will only be ten currency points and he can never add anything else to Schedule 1? So, we leave it; there is no amendment. 

MS KABAKUMBA: No, what the Attorney-General is saying is that we leave out the power of the minister to amend the Schedule. But Madam Speaker, in the Parent Act, there is no Schedule. So, the committee is trying to introduce a Schedule 1 - because the Parent Act is very old - to define the currency point, this one is standard. 

But my point was that in all the Bills we have passed, this currency point is always defined as Shs 20,000. I think it will do no harm to amend to include this particular Schedule, especially now that it has been referred to in the text. We can leave out the power of the Minister, but we should include this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Insertion of Schedule to the principal Act.  Yeah, if we insert the Schedule because it was not there that is okay. Is there any problem with that? So, we forget about 36 and deal with: “b) Insertion of the Schedule,” because the Schedule was not there. Okay, I put the question that a new clause “b” be inserted as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Chair, I do propose that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa):  Rt hon. Speaker, the committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Fish Amendment Bill, 2010” and made some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

1.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for this work – a lot of work on a short Bill, but it has been very intense. So, I want to adjourn the House to 10.00 O’clock on Tuesday. 

(House rose at 1.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 December 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 

