Parliament met at 11.07 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we go to item three, I understand there should have been a ministerial statement on a matter, which had been agreed upon. Maybe because of lack of co-ordination, it has not appeared on the Order Paper. If the Minister responsible is ready with it, I would suggest that we amend the Order Paper accordingly and allow the hon. Minister responsible to give the ministerial statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN CHARGE OF LUWERO (Mrs. Nankabirwa Sentamu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the House that on 21st September 2000, the Parliamentary group chairpersons from the districts of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole forwarded a request to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, for a special programme for the Rwenzori region.

As a background to their request, the group chairpersons highlighted various problems that their region has so far experienced, and which they maintain have consequently left their people poorer and the area neglected. The group chairpersons particularly highlighted the following issues:
    1. The persistent earthquakes, which have left many people homeless and many structures destroyed. 
 
    2. The civil strive, which has resulted into many deaths and injuries and displacement of part of their population. It has also rendered some outstanding revenue sources, such as national parks, almost redundant. 

    3. Persistent drought for almost three consecutive years since 1997. This has hit the region, inspite of the permanent streams from the Rwenzori Mountains, which the chairpersons suggest could be utilised for irrigation to increase production in the low land.

    4. General backwardness due to communication difficulties in the mountains.

It is in light of the above problems that the three Parliamentary group chairpersons went ahead to request for a special programme for the Rwenzori region, which would cover the following eleven areas:

    1. The agricultural programmes to boost production of special crops;
    2. establishment of irrigation schemes in the low land;
    3. Vacation education;
    4. provision of roads in the mountains to improve communication and security;
    5. rehabilitation of the railway line to Kasese;
    6. television transmission to the region;
    7. establishment of higher education institutions, including provision of a university;
    8. construction of hydropower stations;
    9. environmental management;
    10. rehabilitation or up-grading of Kasese Airfield;
    11. food production for export. And any other programmes that would add to those already in place.

I would like to thank the hon. Members and the group chairpersons for their concerns. I also wish to assure them that Government is committed to uplifting the peoples’ welfare through some programmes, which I would like to point out. The various programmes that are going on in the Rwenzori region are complimentary, and they are geared towards addressing the very problems highlighted by the parliamentary group chairpersons, which I pointed out earlier on. Some of the sectoral programmes that operate in the region include:

    • Prevention of food loses. This programme started in 1996, and it is programmed to go up to 2000. The objective is to meet the post harvest needs of small farmers for major staple crops. Also, to increase incentives for farmers to produce high quality crops for sell and for home consumption.  The project was estimated to cost 2.11 million US dollars.

    • The delivery of improved services for health (DISH) between 1994 and year 2000. The objectives were to contribute the reduction of Uganda's population growth rate by increasing accessibility to modern contraception from 2.5 percent to 10 percent.  Secondly, to contribute to the reduction rate of HIV transmission by increasing and improving diagnosis and treatment of STDs and expanding HIV testing and counselling services. The project funding is $ 21.55 million.

    • The third programme is support to earthquake victims. This project is intended to cover the districts of Kabarole, Kasese, and Bundibugyo. Objectives are to carry out comprehensive and detailed studies to facilitate preparation of manuals to provide guidelines on the design, construction standards, building materials and building technologies in earthquake prone regions. 

The second objective is to sensitise the communities about the appropriate construction technologies and standards which should be adopted for house construction

The third objective was to provide communities in the affected regions with necessary assistance to enable them to carry out rehabilitation work on their housing and infrastructure services. The project funding is still being sought, but the plan is in place.

- There is also Kampala-Busega-Fort Portal road corridor.  This was planned for 1994 to 2003. The objective was to improve on the Kampala-Fort Portal road corridor. I think this one was started and it is going on. The project funding was US$ 30.8 million.

    • There is also the Southwest road maintenance programme covering Kabarole and Kasese Districts. The objective was to maintain and prepare capital investments in the northern corridor route and in other main and secondary roads in the region. The project funding was US$ 53.58million. 
 
    • There is also the maintenance of gravel roads in western Uganda. The objectives were to up-grade and maintain gravel roads in the districts of Masindi, Hoima, Kabale and Kabarole to all weather standards.  The project funding is US$ 19.59 million.

    • The district development for classroom construction from 1999 up to 2003. The objectives are to increase access to learning opportunities, to expand the provisions of quality education, and to build capacity at the district and local levels to sustain and maintain school facilities. The project funding is US $59.92 million.  

    • The agricultural sector support programme from 1998 to 2003. Among other districts, it covers Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole. The objective is to increase and sustain agricultural production and productivity as a means to improve the livelihood of small-scale farmers.  The project funding is US $43.98 million.

    • The Power III Programme from 1993 to 2000. The operating area is countrywide. The total planned expenditure is US $106.15 million. The objective is to enable U.E.B. meet demands for electricity and to provide reliable power to its customers at the lowest costs. Although this programme is countrywide, as a Minister in charge of Luwero Triangle, and Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kabarole are part of Luwero Triangle, it is my duty to lobby and make sure that I convince the Minister that there are areas that need special attention. I want the hon. Members to note that. 

    • Biogas energy for industrial development programme from 1993 to 2000. This one is also a nation-wide programme. Its objective is to increase biogas use by the year 2010. The other objective is also to improve the efficiency and quantity of charcoal production and also to improve the efficiency of the use of wood in small industries. The total budget is US $0.56 million.

    • The Uganda photovoltaic project for rural electrification from 1998 to 2001.  This is also a countrywide programme. Funding is US $0.6 million.  

    • The programme for sustainable energy use in households and industries from 1998 to 2000. It is also countrywide and the budget is US $0.02 million. 

    • There is the re-stocking project, which is going on. It is supposed to take six years, between 2000 and 2006.  The objectives are to address the income needs of marginalised members of society, to increase the agricultural productivity of the poor by increasing the cultivatable acreage and provision of animal manure. It is also to increase nutritional standards of the poor, especially children, by provision of milk. The project covers Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole, on top of other districts of the Triangle. Funding to-date is 173.66 million US dollars. Bundibugyo has $53.67 million and Kasese $59.08 million. This was already released to the three districts in October this year.  More funds were released in November. 

    • There is the Kibale, Semliki conservation and development project. This covers Kibale and Semliki National Parks. The objectives are to conserve and improve the two national parks in order to attract tourism. Funding is from the Netherlands under the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).  Phase I was carried out. Studies were carried out in phase II, which was between early 1996 up to December 1997. The money provided for phase II was 1,765,333 Swiss Francs. In Phase III, that is between 1998 to July year 2000, the money budgeted for is 4,356,894 Swiss Francs.

    • There is yet another project, and this is support to rapid multiplication and distribution of resistant, high yielding, virus-free cassava cuttings, and biological control against cassava mealybug in Kasese and in Kabarole. It started in February this year and will continue through 2001. It is supported by the Belgian Government through Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO). The total budget is US $580,000.  

    • There is a programme for the emergency provision of essential agricultural inputs like seeds and tools to drought and strife-torn households in Kasese and Kabarole Districts.  It started in April 2000 and will continue through 8,040 households of internally displaced persons, returnees, and drought affected families. It is supported by the Swedish Government, and the total budget is US $345,000.  

    • Turning specifically to a special programme in these three districts, I would like to inform my Colleagues that the initial arrangements between the Ministry of Local Government and the Belgian Government were to extend the Belgian support to cover all the three districts. This was however reviewed in light of the security situation that was prevailing in Bundibugyo in particular, as you are all aware, and in the region in general. It was finally agreed, through intensive negotiations by the Government, that Kasese District becomes the entry point for the Belgian support, hence the Kasese District Rural Community Development Programme 2000 to 2001, and 2002 up to 2003. I would like to inform the House that this project was well written. The document was given to me by a Member of Parliament from Kasese District. 

Its priority components cover the following: rural water development, rural network improvement, agriculture extension, improvement of health services and service delivery, support to primary education and enterprises. The entire budget here is 7.9 billion shillings. 

Other complimentary components under the programme aim at capacity building, they include: district housing development, district land use and planning, gender awareness and functional adult literacy. Others include district governance systems management and co-ordination, human resource management, community mobilisation, capacity building for district auditing, district financial information system development, district financial resource mobilisation and monitoring, district development planning and creation of sub-county development funds in support of sub-county community projects.  

Money has been allocated to all the above projects and you can find that in this document. These are crosscutting components that are fundamental for the effective contribution of the priority component. 

While I appreciate the request by three group chairpersons, I wish to appeal to them to note that the several projects, which I have outlined, are intended to meet the needs of the people of the region. It is therefore our responsibility as Members of Parliament, together with the district authorities, to inform our people of the existence of the projects in the districts, and to call on them to take advantage of the supportive environment to fight poverty and backwardness.  

As for the creation of a special programme for the region, I request my Colleagues from the region to appreciate the Government’s approach of gradual extension to the other two districts. It is in this regard that I wish to request my Colleagues to be patient. It is my conviction that the Ministry of Local Government and other relevant arms of Government will be able to successfully negotiate for the extension of the Belgian support to cover Bundibugyo and Kabarole in the near future. Isha Allah!  

I wish to finally reiterate that the Rwenzori region is not neglected. Inspite of several incidences of insecurity, civil Government programmes and projects are ongoing and this is not in anyway a sign of negligence.  I thank you for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, before you finally resume your seat, you made reference to a document, which you also read, are you going to lay it on the Table?

MRS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Although I borrowed it from the Member of Parliament representing Kasese, I wish to take this opportunity to lay it on the Table. She will find a way of getting her copy back.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Minister for this comprehensive information, which was extracted because of a request from the region of Kasese and the vicinity.  

It surprises me that such a request still comes when we have such a vast array of projects aimed at improving the lifestyle of people in that region. Is it possible, therefore, that these projects, which have been read out here, are not actually being seen on the ground and that is why there is still a complaint in spite of the fact that these are there? Are these projects really being effective? Are they being seen on the ground or are people there aware? I know that the Minister did appeal to the Members of Parliament who come from there to inform the people about these projects. But do we have to wait for this request for information in order to go to the people to ensure that they know that these projects are there and that they can see them on the ground?

Secondly, there are one or two projects, which were included in the request, and which the Minister did not refer to. One is the rehabilitation of the Kasese railway line, which I think is a very important economic lifeline there. There seems to have been no reference to that.  Could these particular ones be singled out and acted on to improve the area?

There was also reference to an irrigation scheme. I think this area lends itself very readily to some kind of irrigation scheme. Again, I am not sure whether all these projects that were read included this. Will the Minister comment on this?

MR. KULE MURANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the elaborate write-up she has given to us. However, I would like to inquire from her about some of the things that she has told us have taken place. For example, on transport, we were promised that there would be security roads. I remember the President and Minister for Works and Transport promised us that they would help us and construct security roads in the mountains. Even the wanainchi have gone ahead to use their hoes and simple implements to make some roads, but they cannot even get culverts, they cannot even be helped with some materials to make bridges. 

So, I would like to know whether these problems, which we are facing, coupled with insecurity, could be addressed in some of the projects she has read out? PAP, for example, is not in Kasese, although I know it is in Bundibugyo and it may be in Kabarole, but we do not have it in Kasese. Then we have had problems with earthquakes (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just seek clarification from the Minister. You seem to be debating.

MR. KULE MURANGA: Mr. Speaker, you will excuse me, I am still seeking clarification as to whether the project she has enumerated involves all those problems. For example, we have only one irrigation scheme and yet we have so many rivers. So, I would like her to clarify to me how she is going to help us with all these numerous problems.  How are people going to benefit? How are those who have been suffering because of earthquakes going to gain from some of these projects she has enumerated? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving an elaborate answer to the issues raised by hon. Members from the areas mentioned. The issues, which have been raised, really refer to the need for the Office of the Prime Minister to come up with a programme to ensure that development programmes, which are so many, are known. Indeed there are so many development programmes, for example programmes for poverty alleviation, for infrastructural development, which cover the whole country. 

The hon. Minister, particularly in her role as somebody from the office of the Prime Minister, should tell us what effort the office of the Prime Minister is making to publicise all development programmes other than what we have in these books covering poverty alleviation and other known programmes. What effort is the office of the Prime Minister making to come up with a process of sensitisation, so that our constituents and we Members of Parliament are aware of Government programmes?  

The second clarification I seek is with regard to the issue of communication. The Members of Parliament from Kasese raised the issue of the railway line. We people from the East and the North also raised the issue regarding the railway line from Tororo to Pakwach. If it is within her parameters, she could also comment on that, because we need to revive rail communication. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Nankabirwa for her presentation. But what is the working relation between the Luwero Triangle Ministry and the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness? What has been given here as one of the key reasons as to why the people from Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole gave in their complaint was the problem of earthquakes, drought and insecurity, which are unpredictable. I would have expected a very close working relation between the Luwero Triangle department and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness.  They should be the ones to go in first to assist, and there will be complementary assistance.  

The Minister in Charge of Luwero Triangle is the one pushing for development, when the actual people who should be on the ground are not. That is why we are not feeling the impact on the ground. The Ministry concerned with disaster preparedness is perhaps not putting in as much effort as may be required. Could I get clarification from the Minister? Thank you.

MS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank Members who have raised these pertinent questions. Hon. Ongom was wondering why there was such a request and yet from what I have read there is so much that Government has done. He wondered whether these projects were effective. 

Some projects are already on the ground and some are plans, which Government is trying to get funding for. I also identified a problem of publicising what we are doing. There are a lot of programs that are going on in our districts, but the district councils are not co-operating or they are not working with the Members of Parliament. And Members of the Parliament do not sit in district council meetings. We are not members, not even ex-officio members. 

I advise my Colleagues, the Ministers, who take these projects to the districts, to try as much as possible to give copies of correspondences to Members of Parliament so that they are aware. When they go for recess, they can be able to follow up the programmes that are going on in their constituencies.

I really agree that the rehabilitation of the Kasese railway line is very important. I was assured from the Ministry of Works that this is one of the programmes, which will be worked on. I wish to also remind Members that the questions raised were multi-sectoral, they cut across all Ministries. I contacted all the Ministries and asked for the programmes that were going on in the districts. That is why I came up with all these programmes, but from the Ministry of Works, I was assured that this has not been scrapped off from the programme. Kasese railway line will be worked on. It is a pending programme.

The irrigation scheme was also mentioned by hon. Ongom.  I am carrying out advocacy for my special programme for my special region, and Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole are part of Luwero Triangle. I will work very closely with the Ministry in charge, the Ministry of Agriculture, so that we can really consider these areas bearing in mind the problem they have been facing. They have been facing a problem of insecurity, and where there is insecurity you cannot be sure that there will be any progress (Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Dr. Byaruhanga Fabius): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Concerning irrigation, the Mubuku Irrigation Scheme is going to be rehabilitated using EU funds, to the tune of two million dollars. The rehabilitation has delayed because the scheme actually now belongs to the community, but EU is willing to fund the community with this money. 

Under the programme for the modernisation of agriculture, a document has already been worked out to address the area of capacity building for small-scale irrigation. The programme for modernisation of agriculture addresses irrigation for the entire country.

The IFAD project is already active in Kabarole and is also addressing agriculture, but us as a Ministry, we are working out an emergency programme for Bundibugyo. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Hon. Kule Muranga was also concerned about the security roads. I have the same answer. I was assured that Government has thought of constructing these security roads as one of the ways to wipe out insurgency in these areas. Therefore, Government cannot run away from working on these roads. Maybe we will intensify our lobbying so that these roads are really worked on. 

He also said that PAP is not in Kasese. The information I have is that PAP is now going to cover the entire country. All the districts of Uganda are going to benefit. I got this assurance from hon. Mondo Kagonyera, who is in charge of PAP.

He asked how the Minister of State for Luwero is going to help this region. As I told you earlier on, my role is to make sure that I look for programmes that are going on in my region. I have been advising my Colleagues, Members of Parliament, who have been writing letters to Ministers demanding or requesting for programmes. I have been advising them to write those letters through Minister of State for Luwero Triangle, so that I can also put up a strong recommendation or a letter of reminder, so that things can move on. In instances where we have worked like that, things have somehow moved on (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that when the issue of security roads was raised to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, money was requisitioned and the money was released. The first security roads were worked on, and I am sure the Member of Parliament is aware of that. More money is needed to work on more roads, but the first request was provided for by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.   

MS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Hon. Okumu Ringa wanted to know what efforts the Office of the Prime Minister has put in place to make sure that we sensitise the people about these programmes. I would like to inform Members that the Office of the Prime Minister has got a unit, which deals with co-ordination and monitoring. I am happy to report that now we have got computers, and we have got at least enough staff to make the unit really co-ordinate the programmes. 

The office of the Prime Minister has also put in place a monthly bulletin, and each department under the Office of the Prime Minister is expected to write down what programmes they have put in place in that month, and these are publicised. But I would also like to agree with him when he says that we need to intensify our sensitisation programmes. It is correct that there is a lot of work on which Government has spent money and the people are not aware. So, this should be the collective responsibility of legislators and members of the Executive.

He also mentioned the railway line. I would like to inform you, as I informed hon. Kule Muranga and hon. Ongom, I was assured that this line is going to be worked on.

I thank Prof. Mwaka for her question. I would like to inform you that the Department for Disaster Preparedness is in the office of the Prime Minister. They are supposed to come up and give relief aid. They are supposed to come up immediately and save the people. What the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle is supposed to do is to put her ears on the ground. 

When there is such a calamity, even before I get somebody from the ground to come to my office, I am supposed to liase with the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and ask him or her what arrangements they have. It is my concern to make sure that people are saved. It is not the budget from the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle that caters for disaster preparedness or relief aid. The phase for relief aid for the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle has passed. The second phase is rehabilitation and development. So, hon. Mwaka, my role here is to advocate and to make the concerned Ministers and Ministries aware of such a problem once it has happened within the districts under Luwero Triangle. 

I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity and I thank the hon. Members for listening to me.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NPART STATUTE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: That becomes item No. 4. Hon. Members, this is not a new matter. It was here, and the Committee had wanted more information from the Minister before the House could proceed with the debate. I therefore call upon the Chairperson of the Committee to present the Committee’s final report, as you call it.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (Ms. Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When this issue came before this House, there were some questions that were raised and which this House thought should be taken on by the Committee and the Ministry. The Committee met with the Minister, members of management of NPART and representatives of the Uganda Commercial Farmer’s Association, who came to present their views on this issue.  

The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust was initially specifically set up to manage Uganda Commercial Bank’s non-performing loans in 1994. It was given an extension of two years in 1997 and another one in 1999 by this Parliament. We thought this Parliament would benefit from the performance date of the Trust. 

At that time, a total of 65 billion shillings was referred to NPART. To-date, Shs. 25, 434,510,938 has been recovered by the Trust. Out of this, 6.4 billion shillings has been spent on the administration or the operations of the Trust, giving a cost efficiency ratio of 25 per cent. The cumulative transfers to the Consolidated Fund so far stand at 13,000, 616,000/=.  The outstanding debt book value is 37,511,074,863/=, out of which 16.5 billion shillings is locked up at various levels of the judicial system. The recovery, therefore, stands at 38 per cent.  

On Uganda Commercial Bank, the Committee observed that this was the only institution that provided long and medium term loan facilities. It further noted that Uganda being a largely agricultural country, long term financing was crucial to our development. The Committee was informed that such an institution required a substantial amount of money in order to meet the demands of the economy, especially as far as the small and medium enterprises were concerned.  

The issues pertaining to UDB that had earlier on not been sufficiently addressed have now been addressed. These issues included whether UDB needed a core investor. The Committee was informed that the idea of a core investor was one of the primary concerns of the restructuring committee of UDB. As part of the process, the idea of bringing in a core investor would enable the institution to function firmly, since this core investor will inject in more capital and will also take over the management of this institution.  

The Committee noted that there is need to look for the money in order to help in propelling the economy forward, especially in promoting agricultural exports in addition to what the core investor will have put in.  

The Committee also urged Government to come up with a clear policy on how to inject resources in the economy in order to foster growth and development.  

The Minister informed the Committee that he was trying to get a reputable international financial partner as a core investor to invest in Uganda Development Bank. It was realised, however, that the core investor would need a clean UDB hence the need to transfer the bad loans of UDB to NPART.  This is aimed at cleaning the institution and making it attractive to the core investor.  

On the policy on UDB, the Committee was informed that Government took a major decision not to close UDB at the time when it became known that it was insolvent. This was because of the need for an institution to provide the medium and long-term financial facilities, which I have already talked about. The Committee was further informed that in order to achieve success in the UDB business, Government adopted a policy to divest it.

The House wanted to know the UDB defaulters. A comprehensive list has been availed to the Committee, and these loans were categorised under the following four categories:  
Those directly under UDB portfolio;
Those administered by the Government Trust Fund Loan;
Those which were facilities under IDB; and 
The STYER Bus Loans.

We have not photocopied the list of these loan defaulters, but for Members who might be interested in looking at them, I will lay the lists on the Table.

The Committee held a meeting with the Uganda Commercial Farmers’ Association and was informed of the various reasons that could have led to the non-payment of loans of UDB. It was reported that due to poor administration, some input never arrived, while others delays and others came but were not compatible with the Ugandan sales.  

The Committee further observed that the interest charged was very high, and coupled with the depreciation of the shilling, payments of the loans became a very big problem. The Committee was further informed that 70 per cent of the outstanding amount is interest. We were also informed that some farmers had managed to pay, while others had not, and that there was a category of those who are thought not to want to pay.

The Committee was informed that there is a categorisation of debtors at NPART, taking into consideration the various reasons or complaints from the defaulters, and that a new payment schedule would be devised for the agricultural loan defaulters. This schedule spells out the concessions offered to defaulters to enable them pay the outstanding loans.

The Committee would like to recommend that concessions be given to farmers who did not get their inputs in time, and to defaulters who have covered a good part of their loan portfolio. The Committee also recommends that interest rates should be charged up to a period when a loan is declared bad as per Bank of Uganda Regulations.  Therefore, accumulation of interest should be revisited and a new payment schedule should be made.

In conclusion, the Committee has got an amendment to the principle statute, which I will request to move at an appropriate time. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion, which requires the Non-performing Asset Recovery Trust Statute (Amendment) Bill, 2000 to be approved. This is in order to move loans, which have become non-performing, from Uganda Development Bank to NPART. This is to give a clean balance sheet for Uganda Development Bank, in order for it to be re-capitalised and for it to perform the functions for which it was established. This motion was in the House, and it was referred back to the Committee. So, my points will mainly refer to the brief and concise report given by the Committee.

Looking at the role Uganda Development Bank is supposed to play, I would like to support this motion, and also to urge the Minister responsible for Finance to look at the current functions of the department of Development Finance in Bank of Uganda. Currently, the department of Development Finance of Bank of Uganda is performing the functions of Uganda Development Bank. This is erroneous!  This cannot help propel development. The development of industry, the development of agriculture, long term investment in this country can only be supported when we have an indigenous development bank which is tailored to support locals who will work for the long-term development of this country.

Allow me to read from page 4 of the Committee report. It says: “The Committee was further informed that in order to achieve success in UDB business, Government adopted the policy of divestiture”. 

In my view, divestiture here should have been clarified. Is this divestiture in terms of upright sale of equity? Is it divestiture in terms of partial sale of equity? Is it divestiture, which will take into account the national interest?  

My concern is that if a foreign investor comes and takes over UDB and runs it as a private entity, it may adopt a policy that may be similar to the commercial banks. And as you know, commercial banks do not lend for long-term development. So, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson and the Minister on the policy Government will adopt.

My last point is again from page 4 of the Committee’s report. The list of UDB loan defaulters and the loans are categorised, and the total amount of the loans, which will be transferred to NPART, will be 65.8 billion shillings. This is a lot of money! It is a lot of money, so Government should develop a policy, which should be across the board.  

When you borrow from UCB or UDB, you are treated with leniency. But if you borrow from other banks like Barclays, Standard Chartered or Bank of Uganda, you are literally auctioned and you lose everything. So, if the economy should be able to perform in a liberalised market, whereby liberalisation propels the policy of efficient allocation of resources, it would be good that the policy, which we have adopted, to transfer back loans to NPART, should also be enforced. This should be the case so that some people are not treated with kid gloves. They borrowed a lot of money, they have squandered it, and they are not allowed to pay, while others who left their properties auctioned look for money to pay in order to be free. This is a double standard policy, which should be rectified.

I would like to note, with appreciation that the list is here. We would like to have a copy of the list as part of this report, so that the report is complete. Otherwise, I thank the chairperson and the Committee for their report, and I support the motion.  Thank you.

DR. KINYATA STANLEY (Kinkizi East, Rukungiri): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have looked through the report, but I do not know whether the Committee is recommending that we approve this report, which unfortunately does not mention that the Bill seeks to transfer the non-performing assets of UDB to NPART. This report does not recommend that. It does not say so anywhere in the report. I do not know whether they are making assumptions that we have read the original Bill and therefore we accept that. 

I would have wanted to know whether NPART now has the capacity to handle the 105.9 billion shillings that they are supposed to recover. The money remaining to be recovered from UCB is now about 40 billion shillings, and when you add the 65 billion shillings, it comes to around that figure I have mentioned. So, I would have loved the report to establish the fact that the NPART now has the capacity to recover that money, and within what period.  

You remember that we extended the lifespan of NPART for another two years. Now they are remaining with less than a year. I do not know whether they will come back to ask us for a further extension for the third time. So, I would like that explanation to be given to us.  

It is true that most of the monies that are being claimed here were due to inflation, the interest rate and so on.  So, in the recommendations of the Members of the Committee, I would have wanted them to go further and say that all the money accumulated through interest should be waived. Uganda borrows from abroad and up to now they are talking of debt relief. Everyday we write that Uganda is going to Paris to seek debt relief. Why don’t we also give the farmers debt relief on these loans so that the farmers are able to perform? If Uganda can get debt relief from the international community, why doesn’t Uganda Government also give their farmers debt relief so that they can improve on their farming activities?  

The recommendation of the Committee falls short of the facts, which I have just mentioned. They are not telling us whether we should authorise the transfer of these assets to NPART or not. Secondly, they are not talking about the plight of the farmers and their ability to pay this money. We may be approving this, and we may be extending the lifespan of the NPART, but we may never get this money. Although they have now so far recovered 38 percent, I do not know how long it will take for them to recover another 105.9 billion shillings? If I can get those explanations from the Committee and the Minister of Finance, then I shall approve the report. I thank you.

MR. BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the concise report it has presented to this House and for having clarified the issues, which were not clear, when we discussed the Bill before. 

I support the request by the Minister to transfer the non-performing assets of UDB to the NPART and also the proposal to re-vitalise UDB by investing in it. I also share the concerns, which have been expressed by hon. Okumu Ringa, to make it clear to us whether divestiture of this bank would complete withdrawal of Government from supporting the bank. I think a development bank is so crucial to the economic development of any country that it would be unwise for the Government to completely pull out of the bank. So, my proposal would be, as there is need to divest some shares, the Government should still hold some shares so that it participates in the planning and promotion of development in this country.  

As has been noted by the Committee, our economy is substantially based on agriculture. For a long time, this House has been calling on Government to set up an agricultural bank to support agricultural development.  But with the re-vitalisation of Uganda Development Bank and with the objectives of giving medium and long-term loans, I think there will be no need to really establish a specialised agricultural bank. UDB could substitute for an agricultural bank if it is re-vitalised and properly capitalised and focused on promoting agriculture. And this comes in handy with the plan for the modernisation of agriculture. 

One of the most important components of the plan for modernisation of agriculture is commercialisation of agriculture or promoting commercial agriculture. And commercial agriculture cannot be meaningfully promoted unless there is a fund from which the farmers can borrow and engage in meaningful commercial agriculture.

I also support the recommendations of the Committee in relation to giving concessions to farmers. A problem of this economy is that we have been having very high fluctuations in the terms of the Uganda currency as opposed to the other hard currencies. So, a lot of farmers have got accumulated debts not because they failed to pay, but also because of the variations in the exchange rates, which have made their burden more difficult than if the currencies were stable. So, I support the recommendation to give them some debt relief because of the problem of our economy. 

I would like to end by saying I support this motion and I also support the report of the Committee. I thank you.

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, my concerns are similar to those of Dr. Kinyata. First of all, I support the motion, and I also agree with the Committee that we adopt their report and incorporate the amendment into the principle law, which I think is really a recommendation that we should transfer the debt to NPART.  

The concern I would like to express is about the ability of NPART to collect this money. The UCB debt was 65 billion shillings. According to the Committee, in more than five years they have collected only 30 per cent.  They have only one year remaining. We do not know how far or how long it will take them to collect the reminder of the UCB loan. Now we are adding yet another 65 billion shillings in debt for them to collect. Really, the question Dr. Kinyata asked is quite appropriate. Do they have the capacity to really perform this duty properly? 

I know that in the same amendment we are also being asked to add to their number by one more person. I am not sure that this in itself will really improve the capacity. What is being added is only a member to the trust, but what about the other supporting staff? 

I also would have liked to know what problems NPART has so that they are not able to collect as much as they should have done. In five years they have collected only 25 per cent really effectively. What is their problem?  Is it the one member that we are going to add? Can the Committee or the Ministry tell us why they have not been unable to perform? We may be giving them this work and yet at the end of it all very little will be done if we do not know their problems and if these problems are not solved. I think this is a very important question, and I would like to have an answer to that.  

I also would like to comment on this area of interest. We are told that 70 per cent of the debt is actually accumulated interest. That is a very high percentage indeed. Since it has been so difficult to collect, why don’t we write off the debt on the interest bit? Or if we do not write it off completely, why shouldn’t we restrict it to that interest rate that the Government is actually paying for the foreign money that we borrow? I know that the majority of the money was actually borrowed by the Government and on lent to UDB to lend to farmers and other people. Those rates at which the Government borrowed are very concessionary. Why don’t we restrict ourselves to that, for the purposes of recovering this debt, so that we write off the excess interest? 

Let the people pay up only that money which the Government will be obliged to pass on. That may ease the burden. If we do not do this, we shall be wasting our time, because it will not be possible for NPART to collect this accumulated interest. Where will the people get it? Even some of the farms or properties that are likely to be mortgaged may not realise that. So, I strongly recommend that we write off the excess interest. We should only ask on that interest, which is going to be paid by the Government, in cases where the Government borrowed the money and passed it on.

I also would like to recommend, and I agree with the two previous speakers, that UDB should not be fully divested.  If we are looking for a co-investor, we should only sell that interest which will still leave Uganda Government in control of the bank. This is a development bank, and a purely private company may not act in the interest of the people who are likely to borrow for development purposes. I think Government should support development with development finance by actually controlling the means by which they will extend this money to the people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to seek a few clarifications, because at the moment I find it difficult to support anything, which Government is trying to do, in relation to both UDB and to NPART. 

The report is very well written, and I commend the Committee for it. The first issue which alarms me, however, is on page five. The second last paragraph says: “The Committee was informed that some farmers had managed to pay while others had not and that there was a category of those who did not want to pay.”  

Who are these farmers who do not want to pay! What kind of people are they? What kind of metal are they made of? Is it because of their political background that they cannot be touched? Are they untouchable? Before I start agreeing that interest rates be cut off because we have divested and at times reduced the value of our assets, and Government has said several times that you could give away Uganda Airlines for one shilling, but who are these who do not want to pay? And Government machinery is incapable of compelling them to pay! That is alarming!  

Secondly, on page two, although I am not very good at mathematics, the figures there do not add up. On page two we see that a total of 65 billion shillings was given to NPART to recover. To-date, they have recovered 25.4 billion. Of this, 6.4 billion was spent on administrative costs. The cumulative transfers to the Consolidated Fund are 13.6 billion. When I add 13.6 billion shillings to 6.4 billion shillings, which is the administrative cost, I come to 20 billion shillings. There is an outstanding figure of 5 billion shillings, which was collected and is unaccounted for in this report. Where has the 5 billion shillings gone? We should first investigate that. If NPART’s accounting system is leaking, then it would be a very bad thing to give more things to them to collect.  

Thirdly, if NPART started with 65 billion shillings to be collected, and in five years they have only collected 35 per cent, and we want to give them another 65 billion shillings to collect, it beats reason. I plead with the Minister for Finance to first study the shortfalls in NPART and learn from those lessons. Maybe he would start a parallel body to handle the loans from UDB. I do not believe in overloading a horse which is already about to collapse. It makes us not very clever, and I believe we will not do well for this country unless we put these things properly.  

It is true that agriculture is our backbone. We need the agricultural loans, and I would prefer the Minister to address himself seriously to the issue of starting an agricultural finance bank. If he wants to turn the present UDB into a finance bank, I would gladly support him. But minus these explanations and minus any explanation as to who these farmers who do not want to pay are, I find myself unable to support the motion. I wait for the explanation, and I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I agree with my Colleague on long-term investment, but when you look at this report, we are talking about a core-investor who will take only some shares of the bank. This means the others will be left with the Government. We did not say it because that is what it means, and actually in one of the paragraphs, we even say that when this core-investor puts in the money, Government should also inject in some money in UDB.  

The concern that we do not recommend should not arise, because we had already presented another report to this House. This one just addresses those few points, which Members raised at that time, and which we were required to revisit with the Ministry. 

The double standards on the policy of writing off some money, I think, was raised by hon. Okumu Ringa. These banks, which have been Government banks, undertook some deliberate programmes to assist people, especially farmers, and I think they also had the responsibility to see these programmes through. Because they did not see the programmes through to their logical conclusion, I believe that they also should take part of the blame.  That is why hon. Okumu Ringa should know that the defaulters of UCB and the defaulters of Uganda Development Bank are being treated differently from the defaulters of private banks. Even the terms on which they got these monies was different.  

As for the capacity of NPART, one of the amendments is to increase the membership of the tribunal. Whether the increased number of the tribunal also means increased competence or not can only be debated. But I would like to say that there is a limit to how much money can be recovered. There is a limit because if your loan is already bad and you are not in position to pay, even if they squeeze your head and pull off your ears, this money will not be realised. So, we have also got to bear with NPART. And out of the 37.5 billion shillings, when we say that 16.5 billion is already at various levels of legal resolution or pending legal resolution, then we can as well reduce that portfolio to 21 because 16.5 billion shillings is now not in their charge. It is in the courts of law.  

We were told that four billion shillings was waived off as concessions, which we have already talked about. This reduces it further to 17 billion shillings and 16.2 billion shillings is already on the market. These are assets, which are on the market for sale. Whether this 6.2 billion shillings will be realised or not is another issue. But when you remove the 6.2 billion shillings, then it actually reduces it even further to 11.2 billion shillings.  

If need arises after the two years are over, then I think this House will have to reconsider another extension, because we are now giving a further mandate to NPART. We are giving them another job to do. Do we need a body to recover these loans at all? If so, who should do it? And if there is a body, which we have already put in place to do that job, I personally do not see any problem with extending its life if it can recover some of that money.  But for anybody to imagine that loans will be recovered 100 percent, they should know that it is not possible.  

Hon. Baku voiced the same concern as to whether it is a complete withdrawal. We have been convinced by the Ministry, on behalf of Government, that the core investor will only take some shares. I think some of the issues that were raised are a duplication so I will not talk about them again. 

On the problems at NPART that do not enable them to collect all the loans but only this small percentage, I think those are technical problems. They highlighted to the Committee that they could not collect these loans 100 percent because when some people are told to pay, they run to the courts of law. They know that the cases will delay there forever and then when this money goes to the courts, it is no longer under NPART. 

The Committee pointed out the issue of accumulation of interest. If 70 percent of this loan portfolio is out of interest, if I have failed to pay the principle, what makes you think that if you continue adding on the interest then I will pay? That is why we have recommended that there should be a cut off period beyond which the interest, which has accumulated, should really be waived off or should be left alone. 

‘Who are the willing defaulters?’ There are people who are categorised as being in position to pay and those who cannot pay. It is for that reason that we do not recommend a blanket waiver of interest or even blanket debt relief as Dr. Kinyata suggested. If you do recommend blanket debt relief, then it will also benefit people who took money and are able to pay back but have not put in anything. How about somebody who has gone out of his way and serviced his loan but failed at some level? That is why we want NPART to take an administrative decision, categorise these people, and then decide who should qualify for a waiver and who qualifies for a concession and who should not -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI: I would like to seek some small clarification about the waiver of the loan. I was wondering whether the chairperson and the Committee have found out what the differential would be if all loan beneficiaries were asked to return the principle sum as a benchmark. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, the answer to hon. Dick Nyai’s question is no. We thought this was an administrative detail. But if this House so recommends, I do not see anything wrong with the Ministry, the Government or NPART adopting that kind of system. I think the Minister will react to that.  

On the five billion shillings, which is the difference between what is on the consolidated fund and what has been collected, I do not think I am competent enough to talk about it. The Minister will talk about that. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the chairperson for having answered most of the questions. I am left with just a few.  

The first one, which the chairperson did not answer, was asked by hon. Okumu-Ringa. It was about the moving of development funds from the Development Finance Department of the Central Bank. I would like to say here that this is in the process. Once we make UDB operational, this should be done. 

First of all, the Central Bank does not really have the culture of doing business. It is not their job and, therefore, this is actually misplaced.  

Secondly, having the Central Bank as one of the institutions in the processing of the loans actually raises the cost of capital because it will also add some charges. They take into account the cost of managing the portfolio. So, what hon. Okumu-Ringa has said is part of Government policy to move that money from the Central Bank to UDB once it becomes operational.

Another question, which the hon. chairperson did not answer, was the question of the difference between what was spent and what was sent to the consolidated fund. I would like to say that the Statute provides that some money should be put in the sinking fund. So, the difference is the money, which is in the sinking fund as provided by the Statute.  

Hon. Ongom raised questions on whether we have problems.  Some of the problems have been listed by the chairperson.  I would just like to add one, and that is insecurity in some of the areas where borrowers are supposed to pay.  We know it is impossible to actually force the borrowers who borrowed money in good faith but because of the insecurity in the area, they cannot pay. So, we are not actually moving in those areas until the security improves. I am sure this was also referred to by the chairperson.  

The other issue is the creation of another layer in the Judicial system. We could go to the tribunal and then from there to the Supreme Court. Now, you also have to go to the Court of Appeal, and borrowers would like to exhaust all avenues until they can actually pay. If they have some doubt, and they know they can actually hold on, they will hold on. So, the addition of one layer in the court system has also made it difficult for the money to be collected.  

The Land Act has also made it difficult, because you now have to go through so many stages to make sure that you establish who the owner is. It has made it difficult for us to move as fast as we were moving. Some of the land boards have been decentralised, so you find that there are many layers to go through. These are some of the reasons why we have not moved as fast. 

As the chairperson said, most of the money borrowed is at different stages. In fact, by the time we wrote this report, only eight per cent of the loans were not in court but most of the loans are at various stages of the Courts of Appeal. So, that actually answers the question as to whether NPART will actually manage. You can see that now NPART has handled almost all the loans (92 percent) and they cannot move any further, because they are in the hands of the courts. So, they actually have only eight per cent, where they have to move. For the others, they only have to attend as defendants in courts. So, they are doing very well.  

The chairperson wondered whether the increase of members from three to five would make the tribunal more effective. Actually, this has been a problem, because when you have only three persons sitting, when one falls sick, you know you have only two remaining. It becomes difficult to actually continue with the tribunal. So, moving to five is to help us to have these meetings continue, even if one or two of the members of the tribunal falls sick.  

Those are the questions, which the chairperson did not answer. She responded to the issue on whether the divestiture will make Government withdraw from Uganda Development Bank. The core investor may have up to 15 or 30 per cent, according to the definition of ‘core investor’. The rest could be owned by individual Ugandans plus the Government so that we are sure that we are not going to let you down. The Minister in charge of Privatisation and Government as a whole will have to listen to what Parliament will advise us at that time.  

With those remarks, I recommend that we pass this Bill as quickly as possible, so as to move and get this money from people who have not been paying and yet they have the means. For those who do not have the means, we shall discuss, as the chairperson has said, about debt relief. Hon. Kinyata said that since we have been benefiting from debt relief, we should also provide debt relief to some of the borrowers. By the time the Government obtained this debt relief, we had gone through a process. It was not just announced over the radio that Uganda is going to get debt relief. We had to accept certain ways of doing business. So, what we are going to do is to discuss these matters with various borrowers and see those who actually deserve debt relief. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is a convenient time to adjourn. We shall take the vote next Tuesday.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 12.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12th December 2000 at 10.00 a.m)

