	
Wednesday 1st December, 1999

Parliament met at 2.30p.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE AMNESTY BILL, 1999
 
MR. ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me a chance to talk on this Bill which I totally support.  Mr. Speaker, if you remember, in 1997 this very House did pass a Resolution urging Government to bring such an Amnesty Bill, and the Resolution, as far as I can remember, was very popularly supported.  I really think, therefore, that that is a matter of going into details because we have already in principle supported the introduction of this Bill.  

This is a big step towards the realisation of peace, but the introduction of this Bill will not automatically, in my view, lead to the end of armed conflict.  It is, however, a big step forward.  It is a demonstration of goodwill and a strong desire to attain peace by all those who are of goodwill, including the Government. And here I would like to thank the Government for at last coming up with this Bill which, as you remember, we wanted in 1997. So I commend the Government for this.

As I said, this Bill may not necessarily induce those who are in the bush to come out immediately if we think that just by merely passing it, they will embrace it.  It will, therefore, in my view, require a vigorous marketing programme so that those for whom the Bill is meant are made to realise the benefits of this Law when the Bill is finally passed into an Act. We have got to go out and convince them that we have passed this Act with good intentions, with the aim of absorbing them, for those who will agree, so that we also portray to them that it was not just merely to ask them to stop fighting, but to come back and participate in the development of the country.  I am sure even those who are fighting the Government know that the wars have destroyed the country in very many ways.

Mr. Speaker, I think we have got to be very genuine in our approach, and we have got to be serious.  I do not go by what my friend, hon. Ruhemba, yesterday was saying that this will be something for testing the water.  If we regard this Bill or this Act as just for testing the water, it may portray to whoever is listening to us that really we are not being very serious in our attempt to persuade other Ugandans who are fighting the Government to come back, that we are merely testing to see whether this will or will not work. 

I realise that it is just one of the steps that we should take besides the other things that we have been doing before to bring about peace.  Passing of the Amnesty Bill is just one of the processes; it is not by itself a complete step that will bring peace, but it is a major step forward but we must be seen to be very serious about it and honest about it.  This goes together with the forgiveness and reconciliation that many people have already talked about.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, the question of honesty on the part of the Movement and the Government is not questionable.  Yesterday I was at pains to explain how the Government came in, what it did and when it did it.  All of those steps demonstrate that the Government was honest and when I said What has to be tested, it also had a context because I also believe I said that this man, Kony, for instance if we are talking about the North, has no political programme, and somebody who has no political programme, you cannot tempt him to come.  At best, he may prefer to go to America or stay in Sudan, but I doubt his coming back.  You are right, passing the Bill today does not mean these people are reporting tomorrow; they may never come.  I thank you.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you for the clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I have not forgotten the history of your revolution which the Minister tried to explain to us yesterday.  It is, of course, as Henry Kissinger said in one of his books, that the victor writes the history, and history may not be exactly what is written by the victor.

I was coming to the idea or the notion of forgiveness. As hon. Owiny Dolo hinted yesterday, we in the Acholi Parliamentary Group have been working on this programme already for the last three years, trying to convince our people that even when you want the Amnesty Bill passed, it will be useless if you do not forgive, and we have been working on this, and there is a general feeling of forgiveness now.  We cannot, of course say that everybody feels the same way, no!  In any society, there will be people who will differ but in general, as far as the area we have been covering in the last three years is concerned, people are willing to forgive.  It is this forgiveness which must be portrayed, particularly to those who are forced to enter into this rebellion. They were forced to commit atrocities which they did not want to commit but because they created this animosity between the population and them, they will definitely be nervous about responding to this amnesty thing unless we go out there, sell it to them.  Let them know that definitely, they are going to be forgiven, and that when they come back they will be allowed to live well with the people, provided of course they live within the law. And this is one of the things which I think is very important.  

A notion was floated around by hon. Kule Muranga that it will be useless to stop using the gun just because we have passed an amnesty Act allowing people to come out freely.  We must continue to use the gun simply to show that we are not defeated.  Mr. Speaker, I think this is one of the things that we should really look at very carefully.  You know we have used the gun for all this time but it has not brought us the total peace that we have been looking for.  

I am not saying that we should stop using the gun if it is necessary, but I think we should put out this olive branch forward properly. Let us dangle it properly and sincerely so that the people on the other side know that this time we are serious. That is the only way we can really convince them that we are genuine.  If we continue fighting and do not show that actually we are accompanying this forgiveness with cessation of hostility, we are not likely to convince many of them to come back.  

I do not think it is correct for us to imagine that we are passing this law because we have been defeated. No, that is not the idea.  We have not been defeated. I know that the government is capable of carrying on even if they may not win so easily like it has been the last many years. They are capable of carrying on armed conflict but where does it take us?  Where has it taken us?  It has not taken us very far although occasionally we are told that the general peace that we are enjoying now is a result of force.  I think we should now completely turn another leaf and put up an olive branch to the people over there.  

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this Bill should really have no problem in passing through the House because we were the very people who asked for it. At the beginning, in 1997 we passed a whole resolution asking the government to bring this Amnesty Bill, and I do not see how we can oppose it now.  I would urge everybody now to merely confirm, and if our problem now is going into the details to make sure that it is a workable law that we are passing, and that it will be implementable, as far as I am concerned, this is really where our emphasis should lie.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion. Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by saying that at an appropriate moment, I will propose a number of amendments, including one on the Title.  Mr. Speaker, I would like the Title to include the words "peace and reconciliation" because I think these are the major targets. Amnesty alone without peace and reconciliation will not help us.  

I feel a bit reluctant to support clause 4(1)(b) as proposed to be amended by the committee, to include the army in the areas where the reporters should report or the intending reporters should report.  Mr. Speaker, if yesterday you and I were fighting and today somebody asks me to come and report to you, psychologically I would not feel very comfortable.  So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that we delete the army from that list.  There is a lot of fear of the army by the rebels because they are combatants; they are fighting one another.  So it is really inappropriate to say that one side should now report to the other one it was fighting.  I think we should look at this very closely and delete the army. 

I have seen the committee has left out the magistrates. Mr. Speaker,in some districts there are quite a number of magistrates and people have confidence in them.  So, I really think the word magistrate should not be dropped, instead we should drop the army.  

In Clause 17 within six months the law is expires.  Mr. Speaker, I feel this is too short a period, considering that we have two important bodies to set up.  Even the appointment of the members of these bodies will not have been completed within the next three months.  So, Mr. Speaker, my view is that, the law for the first time should be valid for at least one year, then the renewals can be after six months because if we count the six months from the date of signing, it will definitely be too short to get in place the preparations that should be made.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Ongom talked about marketing this law but how do we go about it?  Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that on coming into effect, Radio Uganda and UTV should deliberately be deployed to disseminate information about this law so that those who are supposed to benefit know about it.  I would also like to suggest to the Minister responsible to immediately convene a workshop here in Kampala so that all those mentioned in Clause (4) are called here and told exactly what is expected of them  so that when they go back to receive whoever will report, they know exactly what they should do with them.  

Some resettlement package is mentioned in the law  but, Mr. Speaker, the amount is not spelt out, and who will determine it is not said.  Who will determine this amount of money?  Is it not better to decide it here and will it be a uniform figure?  If somebody calls himself or herself a Lieutenant Colonel, are you going to give him the same package as a Private reporting with him?  Who will decide all this?  Mr. Speaker, I think the package should be fairly attractive so that we get these people out of the bush to come and join us in developing our country. 

My next point is about the funding.  Mr. Speaker, we are now five months inside a financial year and I wonder whether the implementation of this law was budgeted for.  Mr. Speaker, it is not enough to merely say that it will be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  Whatever is charged there should be budgeted for!  If we pass this law today, will there be money tomorrow to implement it?  It would be unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, to pass the law, put it on the shelves because there is no money to implement it.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a piece of legislation that could be sold to donors.  At least I am sure they would be more keen to buy this one than they were to buy the valley dams because this one concerns the lives of human beings, unlike the other one which had to do with animals.  So, I would suggest that we sell this law to the donors and get some assistance from them.  

I have seen an omission in this law.  It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of our people are willing to forgive and forget but, Mr. Speaker, you cannot rule out exceptions.  Exceptions are always there.  I would have liked to see in this law a provision making it an offence to mistreat a reporter.  Mr. Speaker, death is a very bad thing.  In Acholi we say, "too wange col". It means death has got black eyes, it does not see.  You may report to an elder whose son was killed because of your activities.  Mr. Speaker, the temptation to revenge is very great and I would like to see in this law a provision that is going to curb this kind of tendency.  I think we should provide for it so that whoever will be tempted to mistreat a reporter should do so well knowing that the consequences will be taken care of by the law.  

I have also failed to see the relationship between the DRT and the Commission.  I do not know at what stage a reporter gets from one body to another.  Is there any relationship between the two bodies?  How will they relate to one another?  I think this should come out clearly to avoid confusion and fighting for power in future because it would appear that they are operating in isolation of each other.  

There is a provision in clause 13(c) for re-training.  Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about this.  What kind of re-training are we talking about and, re-training where and retraining in what?  Mr. Speaker, in the past, some soldiers who reported were taken to various centres for re-training.  I am sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, some died during that training. So, who is going to do the training?  We are re-training them for what purpose?  I think the kind of re-training we are talking about should be spelt out clearly so that there is no fear.  When they come and they are told, "you are going for re-training", they know exactly what they are going to do rather than take somebody and dump him in Kiburara or in Luwero and for the next two years, the relatives and parents do not know where that person is.  

As I conclude, I would like to re-echo what one of the hon. Members said yesterday.  If or when the rebels come out, they will not come to the law; they will come to us, we the people.  Mr. Speaker, if we are to attract these people to come out of the bush and join us, we have to change our attitude, we have to change our utterances towards the rebels.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I sincerely thank the Members who drafted this Bill and the recommendations thereof.  For the first time, we have had the State accepting to forgive.  All along and throughout our four years in the past, we have talked and talked and debated for these things but they were not forthcoming.  To me, it looks like the first step towards the end of fighting in Uganda but we cannot reach that end unless some of these forces happen. One, we must advise all the guerillas in this country to go back to their original places.  As long as they remain here, we shall remain fighting -(Laughter).  This has been a ground for training guerillas.  Please, fellow Ugandans, this habit must stop.  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Nsambu. The NRA started as guerillas,  some are now in key positions in this country.  I wonder where the hon. Member is telling us to ask them to go.  Or, could he define the guerillas he is talking about?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  The time for seeking important places must stop;  the time for seeking important places either in government or in parastatal bodies must stop with the last guerrillas we have seen.  Secondly, we must stop looking for places of war.  When you take the countries which are surrounding our country; we have fought in Rwanda, we are now in Congo and we have been in Sudan - what is wrong with us?  So, to me hon. Members, I hate these wars and we must find a way of stopping these wars and call back our people to protect us but not to look for other guerrillas about 3,000 miles away. That is really too much!  

Secondly, this country must stop being the training ground of people who want to invade neighbouring countries. It is surprising to hear that a meeting of guerrillas is going to sit in Kampala to discuss further progresses of their guerilla activities. We should remain neutral because we are almost in the centre of Africa, we are land-locked and we cannot afford to be looked at as a college of guerrillas -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Nsambu for giving way.  The point which is advanced by hon. Nsambu in regard to making Uganda a breeding ground for militarism is very important, and the information I want to give him is that in the recent past, two very prominent guerrillas namely;  Garang and Prof. Wamba were harboured in Nile Hotel here in Kampala. 

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I am raising a point of order in regard to the malicious utterances just advanced by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. Is it in order for him to make grave allegations without substantiating the date and time and manner in which these people, the so-called guerrillas he alluded to, were in this country and how he interacted with them?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, there is a doubt that what you said ever happened.  Can you substantiate?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, what I spoke was reported very well in the local newspapers, namely The Monitor. With reference to Prof. Wamba, he was here to attend the funeral service of the late Ikondere and the other guerilla, Garang, attended one Liberation Day. I think during that time he was around in Nile Hotel and the records are there if you want to check.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.  On the point of order, I think that is how he has substantiated.  

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that Prof. Wamba and Garang are not guerrillas;  they are wagging a straight war against their governments.  Guerrilla warfare is a different type of struggle. So, these are not guerrillas but they are people who are wagging war against their governments for their own liberation.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Lukyamuzi to call Prof. Wamba dia Wamba and Mr. Garang guerrillas when they are not guerrillas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, this is really a question of  assessing a situation. as far as he is concerned, he thinks they are.  So, there is no way one can say accept my view of them and your view is wrong.  

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to impute that our very close allies in the struggle for the liberation of other areas of Africa are guerrillas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, it depends on which side he is on. If he is on the other side, maybe he can call them so. 

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  Thank you very much for all the information you have given and the points of order which have elaborated the points which I am talking about.  

Mr. Speaker, my last point:  There are sad statements which are made by some of our high ranking government officers, and some of us who have never been at war feel very much embarrassed.  A statement like "I love fighting and crushing because when I fight, sometimes I come out with an agreement which will help me"  from an official of government, particularly when he is above the rank of a Minister, that becomes a policy that Uganda remains a country which is always sort of looking for places where it is going to fight.  We must fight where there is a good reason;  say, when we are attacked, but this lavish fighting where we have lost very important and gallant soldiers must end  -(Interruption).

MR. LOKERIS:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to be clarified as to who started war with Zaire.  I remember one time the enemies passed through Bwera and came and surprised us at that place at Mpondwe, killed very many of our people and we responded by chasing them away. Also, the Kony group came and started abducting our people and we also responded. I want to be clarified as to whether we did a right thing or we should have left them move up to Kampala and eject us from this Parliament.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  Brother, hon. Minister from Karamoja, I thought you had seen more deaths than I have! I want to tell you that I mean that word alone to be the answer to whatever you have said because, at the moment you are sitting there with over 600 dead bodies of your own people in your home area, and it is not pleasant. Those who want to fight lavish wars, wherever the hear the gun, they go and fight and kill people -(Laughter). 

MR. LOKERIS: I am rising on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Member holding the Floor seems to impute that the deaths in Karamoja were caused by Government.  They were caused by their own confusion and the Government does not have any hand in it.  So, if they are trying to fight on their own, you only go and rescue them, and that is what the Government has gone to do.  Is  he in order to impute that this was an act of Government to make many Karamajong die? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think he brought that case as an example of lavish fighting, of course not attributed to Government but lavish fighting within the area.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  Mr. Speaker, some of the big officers above the Ministers have stated they love to go on fighting and that is really lavish fighting. They are careless, they are like men who go on shooting spray. They meet a ngaanga - I do not know how it is called in English - and shoot it but they do not eat it, just for pleasure to show that they can shoot.  So, I am praying that the people in our society who have such lavish fighting should bring it to an end. People want to remain in peace.  

We speak of peace in Kampala but for the last thirteen years, there are  people who have not tasted that peace and I feel very  sorry for those people. I believe the hon. Minister concerned with this Bill will assist me to see that what he has actually brought before us will come out with some hope of lasting peace.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has finished.

PROF. KAGONYERA: He must clarify, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification from the hon. Member who was on the Floor.  Hon. Nsambu is a leader as any one of us, he alleges that there are some leaders who love fighting that is why they engage in lavish wars.  I am seeking clarification from him as a leader and others like him, what contribution they have made to attain the peace in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see, you will be giving the Floor to a Member who has actually finished. I think you just take his contribution like that because he has finished.

MR. KARUHANGA: I would like to get your guidance on this. If an hon. Member in his last sentence makes statements which require clarification, does it mean that he is the only one who is going to get the answer right and then we have no chance to correct that? What do we do to ask for clarification from him so that in his last sentence we know what he means?  Because, Mr. Speaker, if he is saying that there was lavish fighting by soldiers above a Minister, I do not know which these soldiers above Ministers are. Maybe he means the President. And if he means the President, then I want to know, is fighting Itongwa lavish, is fighting Lakwena lavish, is fighting ADF lavish, is fighting people who are intimidating Uganda and taking over our country lavish? When does fighting become lavish and when does it not become lavish? I think it is important that the hon. Member clarifies this to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what should have been done is for you to have sought this clarification when he was still on the Floor because he made that statement some five minutes ago. It should have been done then.  In any case, what other answer would you expect from him, because for him that is what he has said?   

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY ( Mrs. Matembe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, I am standing here, I think, to re-confirm my support of this Motion otherwise, I have already supported it in Cabinet.  I would like to inform the hon. Members that some of us actually had some doubts as to whether a Blanket Amnesty was good because we were thinking of violation of the human rights of other people. We were thinking of international laws to which we are parties and we were quite sceptical but when Cabinet decided to carry out a survey and went around and got the people's views, we all bowed to the people's wishes, and therefore we did bring this law and I wholly support it here. 

I would like to use this opportunity to tell the hon. Members once again what I one time said in the CA that, actually, war has a more disastrous impact on women; the suffer most. Particularly,  when men go to fight and die, many women have been condemned to widowhood right from a young age; 18 years, 20 and so on. For instance, in the culture where I come from, for a widow to get another husband is not yet possible. Therefore, whereas you men can always re-marry even at the age of 80 years, for us it is quite difficult - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is information for you from hon. Pajobo and hon. Karuhanga.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, I have stood here because I really want to articulate on serious matters. I would only entertain information which is advancing this articulation. As for information which is just for fun and laughter, I would like the hon. members to save me from those because my time will be going.  So, if your information is really serious and advancing my arguments, I will take it -(Interruption).

MR. PAJOBO:  Clarification, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. MATEMBE: I was concluding my point to take the information. May I be allowed to proceed in an orderly manner? (Interruption).

MR. PAJOBO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving me way to give this information to you. The information is simple. In yesterday's paper, we saw a woman marrying at the age of 68 a boy of 28 years. So, I do not know whether that was a man.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. speaker, I am grateful to the hon. Minister for giving way.  Only that, as she knows, I have been a student of gender issues and I have been using her as an example of people who have enlighten me and who are very enlighten in gender matters.  I would think that her statement, in as far as it is attacking one side of the gender against the other, would be a good aid if she could resist from making that type of statements.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, I am not taking that clarification, I am only responding to this information.  The information raised from this end is the type of information I was talking of which does not advance my cause at all which is generally for fun because it is known, and I said in Ankole where I come from. You go and find out how many widows are there whose husbands died when they were 18, 24. They are still widows up to now! Exceptions do happen; like this woman of yesterday is just an exception.  

As for hon. Karuhanga, this is not sexist, this is factual;  there is data. If hon. Mukwaya could stand up, she would give you data on these matters I am talking about and, in fact, I was about to advance another point that not only do they remain widows, but if they have had children, their capacity to have children ends at a certain age. So once these children are killed and finished, she remains with no child and yet you men are known to even father children in your 80s!  

These are facts which I am talking about, Mr. Speaker, and I am talking about them in all seriousness in trying to explain the impact of wars, mainly on the women.  Of course it is bad on the men also.  Therefore, it is very important, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, that we try to stop wars. I am glad that this law is coming here, and I only hope and pray that it will have positive results on stopping wars.  

Now, having said that, you know I did not want to speak here but one thing provoked me to stand here and speak. I want to say that peace and reconciliation can neither be found in the law nor can they be brought about by law.  Peace and reconciliation can be found in our hearts and it can be brought by love. I want to tell you that standing here and discussing this law like this when we are not prepared to have peace in our hearts, to have love and have an attitude of reconciliation in hearts, this law will just be like any other paper.  Why am I talking about this?  

I want to say that, as leaders, we have a lot of influence on the people we lead.  For me, I know this, I know it clearly.  I have an influence on these women. Like the women in Mbarara, they will tell you, yes, Matembe said it, and they will follow it.  Even the men in Mbarara will say, our Matembe has said it and there it is.  Therefore, what we say and do influences the people.  Therefore, if we are here discussing the language of peace and reconciliation at a time when we are trying to pass this law to bring people from the bush so that we can live together as leaders, we should be careful of the statements we make outside there because it seems while we are here talking about peace and reconciliation, when we get out of this House, in our own addresses over there, we are talking a different language.  Why am I saying this?  

Yesterday I read something in The Monitor, and it really provoked me.  I would have not stood here to talk.  If what I read in The Monitor is true - I only hope it is not because if it is true, I would say that really, when we are trying to debate peace and reconciliation to attract people from the bush, for an hon. Member of this House to be heard saying "beware of dealing with the enemies" -  now who are these enemies?  Who are these enemies whom the hon. Member was warning his constituency about? And he talked in parables.  I have to have this Monitor of yesterday where this hon. Member was warning the Langi against enemies.  

I was saying, who are the enemies now?  And then it went on to say how the hon. Member used parables; and he talked of a parable where a father monkey had told the other children not to get out of the trees but they were stubborn and they got out and they were killed.  Surely, for us to be discussing issues of inviting people from the bush and an hon. Member makes a speech like that and says those who have ears  should hear, what message is the hon. Member giving to the people who are in the bush?  That if they come out, they will be killed,  therefore, they would rather stay there!  

Please, hon. Members, in this House let us mean what we talk, enough is enough, we are not eating these bodies! And you know what is sad, We the hon. Members are here enjoying life, driving vehicles, enjoying life completely.  Those people are there suffering, and we are not suffering, we are only suffering -(Interruption)

MR. WACHA  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member has read something in the paper which she call a parable and she is giving an interpretation to a parable which she does not know.  Is she in order to keep on elaborating things she actually does not know?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I think what she eventually what she said is that the parables and statement which was made was not to invite people to come but rather to keep them away when we are trying to persuade them to come.  I think that is her interpretation.

MR. WACHA:  Sir, can I continue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, hon. Ben Wacha.

MR. WACHA:  Sir, if that is her interpretation, is it in order for her to make an interpretation of something which could have meant another thing altogether?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I do not know because, for instance, personally what I thought might not have been in order was for her to say we people who are here are enjoying life while others are suffering.  I think we are working rather than enjoying life.  That is the only problem which I saw in her contribution.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling because I agree I was not there, that proverb could have been made in the local language but -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I thank her for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, the Member of Parliament holding the Floor is a whole Minister of Ethics and Integrity, and that is a very important position which should be distanced from perceptions by speculation.  So, is it in order for her, having quoted a perception, to make the perception a basis for judgement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is this really?  I think the Member is just - you know, this is her view about the matter.  You just either accept it or not. Maybe that is her way of expressing the matter.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, without prejudice, I would have expected her to quote what was written in The Monitor paper, but not to quote us perceptions which can be misinterpreted in any form. And, that being made the basis of judgement in a very respected House like this, is, to me, disastrous.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, what you mean is, you want her to read what she read?  Fine, it is perfectly okay so that Members are informed. Maybe they did not read the Paper.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on page (3) of The Monitor of yesterday - actually the article begins on page (1). It says: "Eat like Baganda, MP tells Langi."  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, this is what it says and then it goes on and goes on, and my concern is here. Earlier, the Member for Kioga, Lira, Ojok B'Leo used parables to warn the Langi against the enemies.  He told of a mother-monkey that warned its offsprings of an on going big storm that had killed their father.  He said the obstinate young monkeys did not take heed and climbed down from the trees and perished.  Now, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, what more do you want me to say?  All I am saying here, Mr. Speaker, is look, when we are here talking of peace and reconciliation, discussing a law which we hope will bring peace and we are here in this House crying for this law - (Interruption) 

MAJ. OTOA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank hon. Matembe for giving way.  I was one of those who attended that meeting and I think when hon. B' Leo talked about the parable of the monkeys and he mentioned the enemies, he was not talking about human enemies, he was talking about poverty as the enemy of the local people within that particular area.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, unfortunately the problem we have is that hon. B'Leo is not here.  Maybe he could have elaborated more about this but we are going to get different interpretations of this matter.

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Mr. Speaker,  as somebody who led a Committee of the Executive to move around Buganda and to convince my people that this Amnesty Bill is really in everybody's interest, I am really at a loss. How long will the Baganda continue to be called "a good Muganda is a dead one?"  Now, how can we reconcile with the Langi if they still consider us as enemies?  Really, that statement, if it is true, then - (Interruption) -

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker, I want it put on record that me, as Ben Wacha, I am a Langi, I have no problem with the Baganda.  I am married to a Muganda, so my children have Baganda blood and I read whatever appeared in that newspaper.  If anything, it was praising the Baganda, that was my interpretation.  My only quarrel is the interpretation being given by the hon. Minister to a parable which she does not know.  As far as I am concerned, Madam, I am with you and I am married to you -  (Laughter).

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Mr. Speaker, I have been married for 27 years to a Ugandan called Hajji Mukwaya Abbey from Busiro.  Unless hon. Ben Wacha is talking about a tribe, but my husband is not Ben Wacha.  So, is he in order?

MR. WACHA:  Sir, to put the record right, I thought that aspect of it was known to the hon. Member that I was not married to her.  I meant I am married to one of them as a Muganda. 

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker, it is good that we sit and laugh and enjoy our debate in this manner and I only pray that when we go out into our constituencies, we communicate the same message in the same spirit, with love, with peace at heart so that we can win our people and show them that we are all Ugandans and should love one another.  

Before I referred to this statement, I said, I hope and sincerely believe that this is not correct because for sure, hon. Members, if we go out there and our hearts are filled with hatred, with envy, with jealousy and they are not peaceful, then the laws which we are making are not going to bring reconciliation, love and peace. I want to challenge every one of us here to say in our hearts that enough of dying has been enough, and for sure, let us start afresh; as we come to the new millennium, let us start afresh.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.

MR. KIRENGA (Mityana North, Mityana):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I support this Bill.  I think the intentions behind the Bill are good.  It is intended to bring reconciliation and if it can achieve its objectives, everybody will be happy;  if war can come to an end, everybody will be happy but having said that, I think my concern here is about the Bill itself.  

If the Bill is trying to achieve its objectives, will it do so in the way it is drafted? For instance, it says that it is applying to people who are waging war against the Republic of Uganda, is the aim of the Bill to apply to people who are waging war anywhere in all the parts of Uganda or, as it says in its Preamble, is it going to apply to only those areas which are affected by the war?  Let me bring an example:  If somebody wants to benefit by this Bill and he is somewhere where there is no war, let us say in some parts of Busoga or in some parts of Kabale, will this Bill apply? Because, Mr. Speaker, in the Preamble it is stated that it is intended to solve those problems of people waging war in some areas of Uganda and when it comes to Section (3), it says that all Ugandans who are waging war against the Republic of Uganda will benefit by this Bill.  

Why I am saying this is because it is likely to bring confusion and it is going to be difficult to separate between those people who are waging war and the ordinary criminals.  I am thinking of highway robbers who have got guns who might come and say they have been waging war. If they have been sighted somewhere and they are likely to be arrested, they might come and report and say they have been waging war against the Republic of Uganda.  Are they going to be pardoned?  I think the intention is that this Act should apply to those areas which are affected by war, and not the other peaceful areas, otherwise, there is going to be a confusion.  

Also, speaking about confusion, I think somebody yesterday was saying that the people who are to benefit should not only be the fighters, but also those who have committed crimes during the war so that it is a blanket amnesty.  But how will you differentiate between an act of war and an ordinary crime?  Let us look at the areas which are affected by war like Gulu, Kitgum, Lira or Kasese.  If somebody has committed other crimes which are not war crimes such as forgery or rape, should he just benefit because we are saying all the crimes committed in those areas should be forgiven?  I think we should define war crimes so that they are different from other crimes so that, for instance, they are different from highway robberies otherwise, we are going to have robbers coming to seek to benefit from this Act.  

Then another thing which has bothered me a bit is, when is amnesty effective?  The Bill simply says that anybody who wants to benefit under the Act called "a reporter" will just go and report to the LC I or to a Police Officer or to an Army Officer, and then that Army Officer will take him to a Chief Administrative Officer and then that Chief Administrative Officer will take that person to DRT.  DRT is defined.  There is nowhere in the Bill where they say, "as soon as this is done, there is amnesty".  I think we should establish an act which constitutes an amnesty.  

For example, when he reports and he is registered, then there is an amnesty given.  What does he do, just mere reporting between different stages?  Where is the amnesty?  Supposing we want to charge him with treason, then when can we say at this stage he is not chargeable because there is amnesty?  Is it when he first reports to the Army or to the Police Officer or, is it when he is transferred to the CAO or is it when he is transferred to the DRT, or is it when he is registered that he is regarded as having been pardoned? There is nothing in the Bill to indicate when the amnesty is effective. There is nowhere it says in the Bill that after this or the other incident, amnesty is assumed to have been effective so that you cannot charge that man with the crime of treason. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am grateful to hon. Kirenga for giving way.  As a way of making further clarification, would the Member not consider seriously mentioning the type of organisations that are waging war against Uganda so that one has to belong to those organisations?  Otherwise, a criminal who is just a highway robber in Mpigi will just stand up and say I want to enjoy the amnesty when in fact we know it is the ADF, it is Kony, it is some others. I think the Government should indicate that these are the groups that are enjoying amnesty.

MR. KIRENGA:  Thank you very much for that clarification.  That is a very good point.  I think the Minister and the chairman of the Committee should think of that seriously.  

Another thing which has disturbed me a bit concerns the weapons. The "reporter" may have weapons and he is supposed to surrender them to the LC I or to a Police Officer.  My problem here is the confusion it can bring. If somebody has got a hand grenade or another dangerous weapon, how does he take it to the LC I, and how does the LC I store that weapon safely?  It can bring problems.  I would have preferred that these weapons be surrendered to those who know how to handle them.  I would hate the idea of anybody who is, lets say, an LC I or a magistrate receiving weapons when he is not trained to handle them.  They can explode and create problems.  

Then another thing, this process can be abused.  Supposing we do not limit it to those areas where there is war and it applies to all areas in Uganda, and a robber comes and surrenders weapons to a chief?  There is a possibility that the chief might use those weapons for some other purposes. Also, is there a means of making sure that all the weapons possesses by the reporters are surrendered before a pardon is exercised? By the way, I think earlier there was a confusion between a gorilla and a guerrilla fighter.  I think here we are thinking about a guerrilla fighter, not a gorilla which is an ape or a monkey.  Do you not think that it is possible that somebody who is seeking to benefit by this amnesty might bring only a few of the weapons and keep others before he is pardoned?  Is there a means of making sure that he has surrendered all the weapons so that he is a safe man?  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to repeat that I support the Bill, subject to those small points I have made. Thank you very much.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think as hon. Members of this House who are charged with a very important responsibility of being an organ of the State, we should bear one important point in mind that human beings are created or born to live in peace.  Human beings are born or created to live in peace and to enjoy life until such a time that he has to leave this world.  However, because of human weakness, because of our sins and so on, we have these problems of wars, of conflicts and so on, but I thank this House for debating this issue of amnesty which has given us an opportunity to address the issue of peace and stability of this country in a very substantive manner.  

Mr. Speaker, this is the second time that this House is debating an Amnesty law and, Mr. Speaker, this is also the second time that I am privileged to be party to the debate on the Amnesty Law.  I was here in 1987 with some of you to pass an Amnesty Law.  At that time, a substantial part of this country - in terms of percentage we could say 40 percent of this country was destabilised or seriously in a state of war.  You can draw the line of geography right from north of Pallisa, a bit of southern Karamoja, include Teso, go to Lango, the whole of Lango, the whole of Acholi and most parts of West Nile. 

At that time when we made this Law - and I am on record for that - we had in mind that the government was extending a hand of peace and reconciliation, and indeed it did and that Amnesty Law of 1987 played a very important part to pacify parts like Lango which immediately after the Amnesty law in 1987 and 1988 was totally pacified.  However, problems continued in other parts of Uganda like Teso, but again because of examples of what happened in Lango and of what the amnesty laid down, and because of the continuation of the presidential pardon and so on, there was peace realised in Teso, and we now remain mainly with parts of Acholi which now, despite the absence of the Amnesty Law, is basically beginning to realise peace but we believe that the Amnesty law will be an important straw in ensuring that there is a consolidation of this peace everywhere in Uganda.  However, despite the existence of this Amnesty Law in 1987, we had a problem which came up in the western part of Uganda, we had the problem of Itongwa here in Buganda which was handled speedily. 

As my hon. friend Toskin said, why is it that the Amnesty law of 1987 did not bring in total peace? Twelve years since that law was passed, we are again passing another Amnesty Law.  One may be a little bit disillusioned and say, if the 1987 Amnesty Law did not possibly realise its main purpose, why bother?  Mr. Speaker, I think the 1987 Amnesty Law did realise a large part of its purpose, and we should not be discouraged to pass this Law because I believe that what the 1987 Amnesty law possibly could not realise as the firstborn, the second Amnesty Law is likely to realise and make sure that there is total peace in this country but we may ask one question; why is it that 12 years after the first Amnesty Law is passed, we still do not have total peace in this country?  

I will not labour this point too much because my Colleagues before me very ably answered this point but I only want to say this that, in order to have what we call sustainable peace, there are three components, there are three aspects which we must realise and implement:  The first one is that there is what we call peace keeping. Peace keeping is basically what you see our security forces doing; maintaining law and order and having an effective and efficient army, police and so on.  This is peace keeping. 

The second one is peace keeping by United Nations where people are surrendering or they are supposed to surrender and we go into what we call peace making. What we are doing in Uganda now and what the Amnesty Law is doing is basically what we call peace making.  We are trying to extend a hand to our brothers, to those with whom we have conflict and say; "let us reconcile, let us come together, let us make peace" and as hon. Matembe told us "let us make love and not war!" Love in a sense of - not in the immoral sense, not in the other sense.  

Mr. Speaker, I think that the third aspect which has eluded this country is really what I want to remind this House about, and that is what we call peace building: building peace because sustainable peace is based on peace building.  Are we laying the foundation for sustainable peace by building peace?  How do you build peace? You build peace by using bricks such as reconciliation, such as forgiveness and, but most important of all - (Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Omara Atubo for giving way.  As an environmentalist, I get interested in the neotenous call for sustainable peace because when you talk about sustainable peace, you are inevitably talking about the future.  How shall we achieve sustainable peace when the fundamental rights of Ugandans to contest government are not guaranteed?

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, my Colleague hon. Ken Lukyamuzi made this point yesterday, and I think I agree with him.  I was going to say that there are many, many bricks by which we can use for building sustainable peace but I only want to mention three of these bricks for purpose of this Debate. One of them is what I call the political, the second one is economic and the third is non militarism.  

Mr. Speaker, by political I mean exactly what my Learned Friend was about to mention that most wars are fought over human rights issues, over violations of minority rights, over blocking of people from participating in governance.  This is the area of  politics we are talking about that, we must have one of the bricks - the political brick - firmly in place.  Are we ready, for example, to ensure that if somebody wants to rule this country and he wins power in this country, he can compete in such a manner that he does not believe that he is blocked and therefore that he has no other alternative except to go to the bush and to use arms?  I think most of the western countries that we have today have learned to allow this freedom to flourish. while of course respecting the freedom of others, you yourself should allow the freedom of those who are under you to flourish and I do not have to emphasise this point too much. 

As I speak today, we multi partyists are very aggrieved, we are very aggrieved.  We think that those in power, maybe the Movementists are using constitutional and legal means to block the multi-partyists from the peaceful achievement of state power.  Mr. Speaker, this to me is a source of grievance which may boil subsequently into war. In other words, are we creating conditions where Ken Lukyamuzi, Mayanja Nkangi, Nobel Mayombe and all those who want to lead this country can be free to organize themselves in such a way that they go to the people on a level playing  ground and it is the people to decide? 

Peace to me is a very important political brick which this country must be realistic about.  We do not have to block our eyes about it and I am being very honest about it because I am one of those who do not believe in warfare; I do not believe in violence and I will never support a person who does that - (Interruption).             

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way for my point of information.  The point hon. Omara Atubo is advancing is so important that I thought I would give him some continental information.  During my participation in a recent Global Coalition for Africa meeting in Dakar when all countries in Africa were talking about how democracy can sustainable be achieved, we learnt that Uganda and Libya are the only countries which have not created an enabling opportunity for citizens to compete for government openly.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, the second brick -(Interruptions)

MS. NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and  I thank hon. Omara Atubo for giving way. Mr. Speaker, I have listened to hon. Omara Atubo and he said that he is very honest and that the Multi-partyists are very very much aggrieved and he believes that this could be one of the causes of the insecurity in the country and may be the insurgencies existing in Uganda.   I want to clear my mind whether that is what you really implied or I have got you wrong.  You said that you the Multi-partyists in Uganda are very very much aggrieved by Government because it is blocking you. And when you are articulating, the way I understood you is as if you meant that because you are aggrieved, this could be one of the causes of insecurity in the Country.  That is the clarification I am seeking from you.  Thank you very much.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, let me confirm to this House in a very honest manner that, if you block somebody from a democratic competition for power, you are laying a foundation for war.  

Mr. Speaker, the second brick I want this House to realise for sustainable peace is economic.  Mr. Speaker, you may not realise that economic deprivation can actually lead people to war, and you know very many wars which have been fought internationally: The Second World War, the Third World War has not come but it is being fought in small bits among various nationalities.  Mr. Speaker, particularly for Uganda, I want to emphasize the imbalances in the economic development of the country where you see beautiful industries and buildings in Kampala and so on but as you go further and further away into the countryside, you get suffering, you get poverty!  

You go to an area like Karamoja which has been historically neglected since the British time, you go to West Nile where you do not have access roads, where you do not have electricity, where you do not have industries for people to work in, Mr. Speaker, with this concentration of imbalances and the continuation of consolidating the imbalances in our economy, we are creating inequality among the human beings and in the relationships among human beings and, at the end of it all, Mr. Speaker, may be war between those who have and those who are totally deprived.  I think the time has come for us to realise this.

MRS. MUKWAYA: Really, hon. Omara Atubo, I would not want to have disturbed you, but I want to seek clarification on what you have just stated that when you are blocked, you have a right to fight to unblock.  So, are you initially saying that NRM and those who fought were legitimate; they had a cause to fight because they were blocked? Secondly, on the issue of the economy, we are consolidating what we found other people doing because many people are investing here. Why do they not invest outside because all of us do not come from here?  So, what are we trying to talk about here?

MS. AKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to get further clarification. Maybe hon. Omara Atubo can clarify to me something on the economic front. He says distortions - because that is what they were - are historical. How would he respond to this, that these distortions are not a creation of Ugandans? In fact the Ugandans, as my Minister has said, inherited them and the governments which came to power immediately after independence had the opportunity to undo the distortions but this did not happen. In fact there was more consolidation of the centres of economic growth where the colonial powers had left off, to the detriment of those areas which now we are talking about as war centres.  So, I just wanted your reaction on that.

Secondly, I also wanted to inform him that because Government is aware of these economic distortions, that is why there are such programmes as the one which I am trying to run, the Poverty Alleviation Project in the Prime Minister's Office, as the various micro-finance programmes which are supposed to empower the people at the grassroots to generate income for themselves and raise themselves out of poverty.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I also want to give further information to hon. Omara Atubo. Although hon. Omara Atubo studied Law, he ought to have picked out some elementary economics and known the determinants of the location of industries. There is no way you can wish that an industry in cotton products be set up on Rubabo; it will not! But on the other hand, it is easy to have a cotton based industry in parts of Uganda including the North, and that is why, if he cared to find out he would know that because of our policy of liberalisation, many people are working very hard.  For example, the House of Dawda, go out there and see what they are able to do with the people, as long as we, political leaders do not interfere with the people. 

I know for sure there are people out there who call themselves leaders, Mr. Speaker, they go about de-campaigning the Poverty Alleviation Programme that it is a programme being used by this Government to bribe the people, and this, we have been told by the beneficiaries themselves. So, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we ought to lead our people correctly and give them a chance to perform rather than mislead them and continue to complain. I would also like to ask, for example, Mr. Speaker. Those of us who have been able to put up houses or constructed buildings, how many of them have been in our constituencies instead of Kampala?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AKIIKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to give the House information about the point hon. Omara Atubo is trying to make. I happen to have been among those who were deployed in the most seriously affected areas by war - that is in the Districts of Moyo, Adjumani, Arua and Nebbi - to gather the views of the people there - and what hon. Omara Atubo is saying now, those bricks of his featured in the report that we came back with from the field very very prominently. 

I reported this matter also in Cabinet, and I remember being very bitter with the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister when he tried to give some of those bricks that hon. Omara Atubo is giving now as recipes for waging war against this Government. But perhaps besides that information, what he is saying is what was actually being said, at least in West Nile where I visited. Maybe the most important thing now is to amalgamate those points that hon. Omara Atubo is stating because we have the recorded tapes, both video and audio tapes, that we came back with from the field, and people were saying that even lack of jobs was part of the reasons for their being disgruntled and thus waging war.  So, we amalgamate those bricks and incorporate them by way of formulating a proper amnesty for these people who are waging war  against the NRM government.  

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: I would like to know from hon. Omara Atubo whether the fact that Lira has more than doubled its size since 1986, and that so many trading centres have sprung up between Kamdini Corner and Lira is part of the economic imbalance he is talking about.    Thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank everybody who has given very useful information, particularly hon. Akika who has assisted me to answer some of these points.  However, I am disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that three Colleagues from the Cabinet  are looking at my contribution as possibly a criticism of the NRM Government.  I find it shocking and close to narrow mindedness, Mr. Speaker- (Laughter and Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, that is not our language, hon. Omara Atubo.  It is not our language.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I beg to withdraw but I want be very broad-minded on this issue.  The issue is not what or who has done what; whether the colonial government or which government has done what.  The issue is what is existing in Uganda today which is contributing to non-sustainable peace.  Can we address our minds to that and say that we want peace in this country? The imbalances must be corrected, and that there are three bricks which we must have. These are; the political issue,  the issue of social economics and the issue of non militarism.

MRS. MUKWAYA:  As a victim of war, and coming from where I come from, I find it unacceptable, first of all, when a colleague says that our views are narrow minded, when  government has actually put aside 18 billion shillings on top of the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation programme for the north.  What are we talking about here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think I ruled the Member out of order.

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Mr. Speaker, is hon. Atubo in order, when we are really trying to do our best to rehabilitate the north against other areas; we had Luwero, for example, we had Iganga which suffered, we had Masaka which has not been rehabilitated and Mbarara also?  These  are the views which really irritate some of us, to really not appreciate. What shall we do for the people in the north in order for them to appreciate what we are doing as government?  Is he in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, as you remember, when he said the Cabinet seems to be narrow minded, I ruled him out of order, and the hon. Member withdrew.  I think that is the position we have. So he can not refer to you as narrow minded.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, on the  question of information  -(Interruption)

MAJ. OTOA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the speaker who has just sat down that of the 18 billion shillings she is talking about, 6 billion went to Luwero, and I do not know when Luwero became part of the northern districts.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I will not accept any more information. Let me conclude my remarks.  Mr. Speaker, this question of the socio-economic problem is very fundamental as a brick for laying a foundation for sustainable peace.  Mr. Speaker, I have talked of the imbalances in the economy, but Members of this House should also realize the imbalances in areas like education where you are beginning to have children, including our children who are in good schools from here, who are going for higher and higher education but children deep from Otuke, deep from Katakwi are not able to have access because of this socio-economic problem.  This is a very important aspect for non sustainable peace, Mr. Speaker.  And while our children from here are beginning to use computers in their primary and their secondary schools because of the facilities which are there and the donations which are there, some of our children from outside, far away from Kampala do not even know what a computer looks like.  What Uganda are we building?
 
Finally, just let me finish this point.  The third and last brick which is going to assist us in the question of sustainable peace is the question of non militarism, and when I talk of non militarism, I do not want eyebrows suddenly raised, thinking that we are looking at the present situation, no.  I am talking of the situation which has possibly  been obtaining in Uganda since 1964 where those who want to lead this country either are civilian politicians who must use armed people to sustain themselves in power, or, if you want power you must be an armed politician and either sit this Parliament, put on your ranks talk, and so on.  

This type of militarism dilutes the concept of democracy and the concept of civility in the struggle for power.  Therefore, it compels people to say that "after all, if I can not achieve power by peaceful means, I must first get the gun and fight for it. And when I am in power, I must pretend to be a democrat and to be seen giving other people democracy."  Mr. Speaker, this militarism is a serious source of attitudes and a mentality which has penetrated this country - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you should wind up.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: As we move towards greater and greater understanding of what democracy is and as we look more and more towards realising our lies and our deceptions - because sometimes you may lie and you think that people are not discovering your lies but as time goes on, your own lies and deceptions catch up with you.  So, you move towards more and more democratisation and as our own lies on what democracy is catch up with us, we must bear one point in mind that sustainable peace will come by us going through a healing process, healing this nation Uganda.  We have wounds everywhere on the body politic of Uganda and unless we heal these wounds, sustainable peace will be impossible.  Mr. Speaker, with these remarks, I support the Amnesty Bill as a way of achieving sustainable peace, together with those three bricks I have mentioned namely; political, socio-economic and non-militarism. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, so far we have had 20 Members of Parliament contributing to this debate.  I will give just three more Members to contribute and then I will call the Minister to wind up.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand here to celebrate  one fact, namely that there is consensus that we should have the Amnesty Bill.  It has been a long journey full of intricacies but at least today we are all agreed in this Chamber that we need the Bill in order to facilitate peace.  What is the way forward?  First of all, we must give correct and persistent signals to all the people of Uganda and the people outside Uganda because, if during the day we give one signal and at night we give another, then we simply confuse the ranks and the file, the peasant and the people who do not have access to information in order to capture what should be done.  So, we are enjoined from today to give the same and correct signals to all parts of Uganda and outside Uganda.  

Finally, let me say that the question of imbalances was grasped even by our very Constitution.  For example, Objective XII is concerned with balanced and equitable development: 
(i) "The State shall adopt an integrated and co-ordinated  planning approach.
(ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda, and between the rural and urban areas.  
(iii)The State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas."  And let me say that steps have been taken to address this question, for example, the adoption of Universal Primary Education since 1997. That is a very important measure of enabling people to have access to information, for people to count, for people to communicate.  

The equalisation grants under Article 193 of our Constitution is addressing nothing but imbalances;  The proposed university in Gulu which we are going to launch as soon as the Bill now with Parliament is finalised , for example, is addressing some of the concerns mentioned.  But let me say that; even the question of leadership is vital and when we speak of leadership, we are not only thinking of the people at the centre, but we are thinking of the people from the kindergarten, people in the civil institutions, the civil society, the religious leaders, Members of Parliament, Cabinet Members, our development partners.  

Can we have leaders who harness the resources of their areas and they assist people who are having it rough to be uplifted?  That, to me, is critical because the type of leadership we have will determine whether  or not we shall get out of our problems or whether we shall have national integration or not.  So, we do not only need deliberate but accountable, democratic and enterprising leaders who will use power not to strangle their opponents into submission, but for leadership and those who use power to uplift the rank and file.  I beg to support the bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, I think we should wind up this debate by giving a chance to hon. Col. Omaria and hon. Ali Gabe who was chairman of the committee which recommended this Bill.

MR. GOBBA:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday when you were about to adjourn the House to today, we were about three Members who had wanted to contribute.  It was hon. Ongom, hon. Okello-Okello and me and you mentioned our names.  When I came today, I have been standing all along.  Unfortunately I have not caught your eye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, I see your point but I must say that actually my list is not correct, you have given me the right one.  It was hon. Ongom and hon. Amasi but hon. Amasi was not here to make his contribution.  But for you, I think I will definitely give you opportunity to contribute.  

COL. OMARIA (Soroti county, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me opportunity to contribute to this Amnesty Bill.  I have a few points that I have observed here and I would like to bring them up.  One, I have a problem with the memorandum and I would like to move an amendment at an appropriate time and I will discuss with the Chairman. The memorandum reads as follows:  "The object of the Bill is to fill the vacuum left by the expiration of the Amnesty Statute No.6 of 1987 and, therefore, create a legal frame work within which government can implement its policy of reconciliation and facilitate its efforts to - I have a problem with - eliminate rebel elements in some parts of the country".  I would like that to read:  "and facilitate its efforts to end the rebellion in the country"  because it is not just to eliminate rebel elements in some parts of the country, but to eliminate any rebellion!  Supposing some of the rebels are not in Uganda, or you drive them outside Uganda and they go to another country, have you eliminated the rebellion?  We should talk of eliminating a rebellion so that total peace if seen by our country.  

I am one of those who have benefitted out of this Amnesty Statute 1987, and I remember when the government sent a representative to me in Nairobi, I read the letter from the government and I replied but I wrote, I can remember, one sentence which said that if the government of Uganda has realised that it is very important to talk to the rebels, then this is a right move in the right direction. I would like to encourage government to carry on and talk to the rebels in Teso because the rebellion in the North is not like the rebellion  in Teso.  

They have said several times that the rebellion in Teso was different because we were fighting for our cattle which were taken by the government and by the Karamojong. It is the responsibility to of the government to protect the lives and property of the people.  So, we were not fighting for power;  and when the government extended an olive branch to us that they want to discuss with us to stop that war, then that meant to us that the government knew exactly why we were fighting!  When the government extended this olive branch to us, we had discussions with the government,not only that the government should put in place contingent plans for us, but what would be the next thing to do after we had agreed with them. That is why a Presidential Commission was established. 

In the Bill itself, there are two groups of people:  there are actual fighting groups, the "combatants" and there are those who are assisting them inside the country called "operatives" or "collaborators", and that is always the most powerful group.  So, if you say you are going to eliminate rebel elements in some parts of the country, you are talking of the combatants only, but not the operatives which consist of personnel who are helping the combatants. Politically, the operatives motivate the fighting group, the combatants.  So, the operatives must be included and brought into this memorandum so that the whole thing encompasses the whole country and all the rebels including those who are local operatives, the collaborators.  

I have another problem with the functions of the DRC.  When we surrendered in Teso and I came with some of the fighters from Kenya, there was one problem;  the government had not put in place enough contingency plans for those who surrendered.  So, we had a problem of putting these boys back to the villages and to enable them get some work to do.  I want, in the functions of the DRC, to include contingency plans to introduce development programmes for these people who are going to come back.  You must have this before the Amnesty Bill is in force.  There must be arrangements for absorbing these people  because it is easy to say let them all come back, and after they have come back, these people are forgotten and they will commit crimes because they have nothing.  

So, in the functions of the DRC, I want to introduce some development programmes. In the development programmes, I would like to be included, for example, some of these people who cannot be absorbed in the Army. Some of them have no skills and, for  example, the DRC could form group farms for such people so that government can provide them with tractors, or the DRC could say,  some of the individuals who can go and settle in their villages can be helped with draught proof animals or with some money so that they can start some projects. Also, some of the artisans and some of the fighters could be  helped in the same way as the above group; that is to say, some sort of group farms have to be established. 

The problem which I know is that it is easy to say come back, but even us when we came back, there was a problem to settle the boys down!  The boys were swarming in my office every day, in tens, in twenties, asking me, "Sir, what are we going to do?"  There is a problem if these people are all going to come back without contingent plans. The majority have no qualifications, the majority are illiterate, the majority are children who were abducted from schools!  So, the government must have contingent plans so that, at least, some of these people can be resettled properly, and they can lead a meaningful life.  

I remember when I cam back, I started some projects - the government helped me to start a cotton project which is now almost complete and soon we shall start working on the farm.  So, the government had to use me properly by assisting me to start off.  So, in a similar way, I would advocate very much that, Mr. Minister, this is included so that when these people surrender, when they come, you have already contingent plans for them. Thank you very much, Sir. 

MR. GOBBA (Erute North, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to start by thanking the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his wise and inspiring words to us Members of Parliament, and to the country at large, asking us to support the Amnesty Bill so that our brothers and sisters who are outside fighting, suffering can come back here for the good of this nation.  I thank you so much, Mr. Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  

I rise to support the Bill, and I support it because I know that once this Amnesty Bill is passed into law, we are going to have this country forge ahead with unity. Mr. Speaker, this Bill should have been tabled, maybe a year or two ago, but for reasons beyond our control, the Bill is being tabled today.  I would therefore like to say that this Amnesty Bill, if passed into law and applied religiously and implemented properly, will not only help to reduce the number of Ugandans who have been running away into exile in the foreign lands, but it will also bring to an end the rebel activities which have plagued this country for many years.  

Mr. Speaker, the word "rebel" used not to be in our vocabulary here in Uganda, we started to hear this word in 1980 when the leader of UPM went to the bush when he was protesting the results of the 1980 elections. When he took power, many disgruntled forces started and they also took his example and went to the bush, thus the word "rebels".  

Mr. Speaker, there was a time when Uganda had about thirteen fighting forces fighting Government, and through his own initiatives, the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni had to talk to most of these rebel groups. The result is clear: We are seeing hon. Omaria here, we have hon. Moses Ali in Parliament and we have hon. Omax Omeda. That is the result of our President talking to many fighting groups which were rebels. Actually they surrendered.  Mr. Speaker, two main groups remained and these are the groups which are still there: the Lord's Resistance Army - that is the Kony group and ADF operating in the West.  These are the groups that have been and are being supported, purportedly, by the Sudan Government.  Sudan, we hear, is supporting Kony and ADF because they think we are also supporting Garang.  

Mr. Speaker, it is needless really to emphasize the atrocities committed on the population of this country by these groups. You can name a few: abductions of children from schools, of adults to join their ranks, rape, killing and looting of property.  Many lives have been lost and they are continuing to be lost in the hands of our sons and daughters who are rebels, and these rebels fear to come back home because of those atrocities.  They fear the Government because they think when they come back, they will not be welcome. And not only that, Government had, from time to time, been refusing to talk to them and that keeps them very far away from the Movement.  Two, they also fear the wanainchi those on whom they meted these atrocities. This Amnesty Bill, therefore, is the right direction now. 

My own fear is this, Mr. Speaker; how will somebody who witnessed a rebel killing his children, his parents, his relatives really forgive this rebel? Yes, they may try to forgive, like yesterday hon. Owiny Dollo gave us a revelation of two people, one old man whose two male children were killed and he has only one left and when he was asked for his opinion about the amnesty, of course he was bitter and he said he could not accept to talk peace like that, and that that would be asking for too much from him. Eventually, when he went out I believe his colleagues talked to him and he came back and accepted to pardon the rebels but I still believe that man was not himself at that time. Given time, if he meets the person who killed his children face to face, he may change his mind. It is human weakness.   

Hon. Dollo told us there is still a lot to be done, and I suggest these two things: one, that religious leaders - Protestants Catholics, Moslems, Orthodox all those leaders should play a leading role in sensitizing, in preaching the gospel of forgiveness and of love to the wanainchi, not only in areas that have been affected by rebel activities because we have even lost men and women in those areas who do not come from those conflict areas. So, this should be a national issue. We should all agree with all religious leaders to preach this kind of thing in their churches, in the mosques or wherever they worship so that we get to absorb that ability of forgiveness.  

Two; Government should also launch a national campaign through radios - this was mentioned today by some Members - through television, through drama and through films, in a bid that this could rehabilitate our minds so that we accept these people so that the Amnesty Law, once passed can land on a soft, fertile ground.  

Mr. Speaker, in order that the Amnesty Law is respected, I would like also to suggest the following: that treason suspects who are in our prisons - Luzira or other prisons in the country  - should be freed unconditionally to show that Government is serious. Like somebody mentioned some time ago that during the peace conference in Nairobi, some party violated it. They went and signed the peace accord but it was not adhered to. It was violated. So, I would want Government to show that it is committed to release all these prison suspects from the prisons.  

Two; all former presidents should also be covered by this Amnesty Law. I know there have been constant threats on them wherever they are, even if they are quiet, by remarks like those we heard yesterday from one hon. Member - "swine", "primitive past leaders", "bankrupt past leaders" and so many other descriptions. They are disturbed and they are threatened; they are living in fear. They fear to come back but if they could be allowed to benefit from this Amnesty Bill, it would be wonderful.  It would bee nice to see Idi Amin back here, it would be good to see Obote and Binaisa - all there past leaders here and being accorded the respect that is supposed to be accorded to them -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, there is a Minister.

MR. OMEDA:  I would like to inform my Colleague who is holding the Floor.  When you talk about the ex-presidents or rebels, they should also be willing to accept the amnesty because in Teso, what happened when we surrendered - was the last person to surrender - the government organised public rallies for us to tour all the counties in Teso to seek for forgiveness. We had to make an apology.  We said: "our people, forgive us if we did commit atrocities and we also forgive you if you did some bad things against us." So you must be willing.  I wonder whether the former Presidents, as he has mentioned the name of Idi Amin, whether he is willing to come to stand in Uganda and say, I am also asking for forgiveness because amnesty is an act of forgiving. He should also be willing to ask for forgiveness from us the people of Uganda.

MR. GOBA:  Thank you very much for that information, but I believe once the olive branch is offered, the response can always be there.  Mr. Speaker, this evening, hon. Minister Mukwaya made a very serious statement as to when the Lango and Baganda will love each other, or something like that.  To me, I took it very seriously.  It is a very, very bad and serious statement.  I would want to see that once this amnesty law is passed, we forgive each other. I would love to see a Muganda looking at a Northerner as a brother and sister.  I would like to see the Acholi and the Lango looking at every other tribe in this country as brothers and sisters. And once that is done, such utterances like those hon. Mukwaya made today will never be there.  

MRS. MUKWAYA:  I know my colleague means well, that is why I want to correct the impression.  What I stated here was that, I was disturbed the Baganda have always welcomed everybody but that when such statements like the one which was in the Papers indicated that we are enemies, then I cease to appreciate whether our hand of friendship is really valued.  It is not me who stated it. So that is for record purposes.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, please proceed and conclude your submission - (Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER:  Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no.

MR. GOBA:  My third suggestion, Mr. Speaker, is that if we are to succeed with the Amnesty Law, it must be real and not a sham. It should be respected because you know, in Lango we have a proverb; 'Ping alok'  which really means that today you could be a poor man but tomorrow you will be very rich.  Or that today you are nobody but tomorrow you are going to be somebody.  Today you are a rebel, tomorrow you are a President.  So, we have to respect this amnesty law because if today you are in government, you never know about tomorrow.  That is why I am saying the law must be real not and not a sham.  

The fourth suggestion, Mr. Speaker, is that government allocate funds to pay survivors of families which lost their dear ones, especially their bread earners, killed by rebels in their own homes. Of course this has been mentioned in the Bill. Similarly, even the students who were abducted from schools and were taken captive, some of them when the amnesty law is in force, they will come back and when they come back, they will not be able to go  back to school, especially the girls who are now traumatised mothers.  So, these girls should be given a start in life, they should be given 'entandiikwa' so that they start a new life.  They cannot do much, they cannot go anywhere, government should do that.  

However, I was saddened yesterday by hon. Kweronda's statement about money, asking us where the money is, I believe once the amnesty law is through, the rebels will come back, and the money which is being spent right now to combat the rebel activities in the North and West is so much that once the rebels are here, that money will be a saving.  Even the money which is being used for buying the military equipment is so much that once this amnesty law is through and people have complied, there will be a saving and that is the source of money to be given to these families which lost their dear ones.

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, government will have scored very highly locally here and internationally if they allow past leaders to come back.  Mr. Speaker, with these few remarks, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR. AKIDA (Jonam County, Nebbi):  Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity, Mr. Speaker.  I am also happy that you have given me this opportunity as the Member of Parliament who headed the Committee that investigated the war in the North and in the North West.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to be very brief in my submission this afternoon. 

It may be of interest to know what an amnesty is.  Amnesty is the forgiveness given by government to persons who have committed crime against it, particularly political crimes or crimes committed in the furtherance of political ends.  Amnesty restores the offender or the wrong doers to the legal status that they had before committing the crimes.  The term amnesty comes from a Greek word 'Amnesia' which means forgetting.  It therefore denotes a situation where nothing is retained for the disadvantage later of the offender.  

Amnesty could be as old as the history of mankind.  Throughout history, Governments have ever granted amnesty to restore unity after war or an internal uprising, and one of the earliest recorded amnesties took place in the year 403 when the people of the ancient Greek city of Athens overthrew their rulers, the thirty tyrants, and established democracy.  

In Uganda, Mr. Speaker, we have ever had an amnesty granted and as has been stated, the Amnesty law we had was the 1987 Amnesty Statute that expired that year for failure to renew it or extend it. Now, as the former chairman of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee that worked and investigated war in the North, and also having found out that amnesty was one of the recommendations that the Committee made before this august House, which became a resolution and was passed, I would like to take this opportunity to very sincerely welcome this Amnesty Bill and I want to say that I strongly support it even though it has come two years and nine months after from the day it was recommended by the committee as one of the means of ending the insurgency in the areas affected.

MR. PATAKI AMASI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Member for giving way - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I thought the hon. Member was going to be the last person to contribute.  I would rather think that the Member finishes, then I give you the last opportunity, then I call the chairman, then the Minister.  So, maybe you can keep your contribution to this.

MR. AKIDA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to say a few things about the Amnesty Bill itself.  When I read the Amnesty Bill, I considered that certain categories of people should also benefit from it. I have in mind persons who have been prosecuted, convicted and sentenced by the previous Governments on political crimes, serving custodial sentences or some may be on the death list like the former Governor of Kampala, Nassur Abudallah.  I think this category of people should also be brought in.  Let them benefit from this amnesty.  

I have also in mind persons who have been convicted during the course of this Government, those who are serving custodial sentences and also those who might be on the death list.  This Amnesty should also be extended to them as long as the crime they have committed was against the State, with the motive of overthrowing of this Government.  I would also want to say that this amnesty should also be extended to Army deserters.  People who have deserted the army as a result of this war which is still going on.  This amnesty should also be extended to them because if it is not, these people will continue to live as fugitives amongst the people and therefore they are prone to committing crimes against the citizens.  

Another category of people I would like that this amnesty should be extended to are persons who are in illegal possession of firearms.  These people should also be given opportunity to surrender their guns to Government and they should be forgiven.  This has been done before when the Army even came in and gave rewards to those people who would come and surrender their arms and I think this would be a very good opportunity if this kind of amnesty can be extended to them. 

When I talk of people who are in custody, I would like to include even those who are on remand, either on bail pending trial for crimes against the State. I would also pray that this amnesty should be extended to them.  We have several of them all over the country languishing in prisons like Luzira.  We have got Brig. Abdallatif who is said to be 68 years old, we have got Col. Athocon, we have Col. Juma Ndege, we have got Lt. Col. Abdallah Atuke, there is Maj. Tulwa Peter and Maj. Dembe Kemisi. All these people together with men under them are in remand.  I would also wish that this amnesty extends to them.  

In brief, I would like to support what hon. Omara Atubo said  that as we attain the status of amnesty, that is if we pass the Amnesty law, we should also consider three things and one of them was peace keeping. When you talk of peace keeping, to me it means that Government must be in a position to protect the lives and property of the people of Uganda, and I think we should encourage  Government to protect the interests of the people and not slacken because there is an amnesty law. Government should only slacken on those people who will come and surrender.  Those who will not and those who are potential trouble makers should be seriously dealt with.  Another aspect is when you talk of peace making.  For me, when I talk of peace making, I mean this aspect of the political dimension -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is time, wind up.

MR. AKIDA:  I will now give a summary of my speech.  Government should also pick up the arms of political power.  Government is holding the political power in this country, so it should use it to bring peace by way of negotiations, by way of bringing in as many people as possible for dialogue so that this kind of problem is minimised.  

I want also to talk briefly about peace building which my friend talked of. When we talk of peace building, actually we mean humanitarian action and when we talk of humanitarian action, we mean that there must be some developmental activities on the ground such as agriculture, industries and other things and, to me, I feel that the moment Government brings in humanitarian action that puts on the ground some developmental activities,  more people will be attracted to surrender. It will also stop people from joining rebels.  I think this is an important issue which this Government should think about the moment the law comes into force.  

Mr. Speaker, you will excuse me. Perhaps it is very bad to speak last because I had a lot of things I wanted to say but let me go over them briefly.  You see, we could be having problems which none of us may really be in a position to know.  For that matter, I would like the Government of the NRM to sit down and try to look at our past history with the benefit of hindsight: What mistakes did the colonial powers make when they came here?  What mistakes did Obote I government, Amin's government, the UNLF government, the Lutwa government and the Obote II government make when they came in? What did they do?  What mistakes did they commit that may haunt us up to today?  I think if we can go backwards and we discover the mistakes they made, we should be able to avoid committing similar mistakes. The best we could do is to correct them.  I think doing that together with reconciliation and forgiveness, we shall be able to cure the wounds that we might have created over a period of time.  Therefore, amnesty per se is not going to bring peace in this country.  

I want to say it categorically that amnesty per se will not bring peace, unless it is backed by peace keeping, backed by peace making, backed by peace building and of course by all of us having that heart of forgiveness and reconciliation.  I thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR. PATAKI (Obongi County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am not against people, neither am I against forgiveness.  I am taking a different position.  I rise to oppose this motion.  
Mr. Speaker, I do not like this House to enact a law that will fail to be implemented.  Government has done enough, it has done all that is possible, Mr. Speaker, to see that peace returns in this country.  Members of this House, especially the Defence Committee, travelled far and wide up to London, Nairobi, all over this country in the north seeking for peace.  Possible attempts were made to negotiate with all rebels by trying to woo them back home but all failed, Mr. Speaker.  Now, we are saying we should enact another law but is it going to work?  

All that has been said in this House during this debate from yesterday; all has been done.  The 1987 Amnesty Bill - some Members say it was short-lived but has it benefited us?  Only a few rebels came out like those in this House but that one worked because that was in Teso which is within this country, not from outside.  Why did the others not take that chance, if we ask ourselves?  What were they doing and why should they make us again enact another law?  Are we going to sit in this House making amnesty bills; for how many times?  The first one was in 1987, now we are making this one, another one we shall make in the year 2000 and something like that.  Are we going to be making amnesty laws from time to time? Do we not have other laws to make?  

Mr. Speaker, personally, I think this law is not going to work.  For those who failed to respond in the first amnesty bill of 1987, we shall continue talking to them to let them come.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for the Member to stand here and doubt the credibility of the Amnesty Bill when this very Member was in this House when the then Defence and Internal Affairs Committee went round and gathered views, and one of the views they brought was the essence of the establishment of the Amnesty Bill to be enacted into a law, and that is why we are debating this Bill?  Is he in order to keep on wasting Members' time by doubting what was already passed by Members Sir?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, this debate has two sides and we expect this. Otherwise, if we all agreed, there would not have been any debate.  So, he is actually putting his view. For him he is not convinced and therefore he is right to make his contribution the way he wants.

MR. PATAKI AMASI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we all know that those waging war against this country are under instructions from their allies.  Kony and Juma Oris are under instructions from Bashir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Member, I gave you only five minutes.

MR. PATAKI AMASI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The ADF are under instructions from Kabila and his allies.  So they are not going to respond to this amnesty law.

MR. OMEDA OMAX:  If the Amnesty Law of 1987 did not work, it is because it was not given wide publicity.  I was in the bush and I did not personally read what was passed in this House but I was only lucky that I got the information through the Presidential Commission for Teso.  So, if it has not worked, it is not because the Amnesty Law was not effective, it is because it was not given publicity.  This one we are making today is slightly different from what you know.  That one was left in this House but this one is going to go out even outside the country. We shall write to them.  Thank you.

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Speaker I thank you, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I have two pieces of information.  The first one is that the Amnesty Statute of 1987 achieved substantial amount of response from rebels in the bush.  The most notable one was the coming out of the UPDA which is more memorable by the June Accord between the UPDA and the Government of Uganda of the third of June, 1988  which was a direct consequence of the Amnesty Statute 1987.  

Two, when I was Minister for Northern Uganda, Mr. Speaker, I had occasion to travel to my Colleagues' Constituency in Obongi.  The people of Obongi are up to now suffering because of the activities of  Rescue Front Two which is centred in Aringa County.  Among the things they told me - if hon. Baku was in this House, because hon. Baku was kind enough to accompany me during the tour of my Colleagues' Constituency - among the things that the constituents of my Friend in Obongi said was that Government should find ways and means of forgiving these ailing children of Aringa and Obongi so that insecurity can end.  Thank you. 

MR. PATAKI :  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the two hon. Members.  If the 1987 Amnesty Bill lacked information, and that Law was enacted for Teso mostly which is a very small area, what about this one now which is going to affect the whole country, how are you going to publicise it?  And how is it going to reach to these guys? 

Secondly, the people of Obongi have lost a lot of youth.  About 200 were abducted and taken to Sudan and many died in obscurity.  Therefore, the people are very bitter. They will not love to see somebody who took their children to die in the bush coming again to enjoy with them.  That is why they tell me that those guys should be taken to book but whoever comes alone and asks for pardon, the people will decide their fate, depending on the gravity of their offenses. You see, you can pardon somebody who asks for forgiveness. If somebody pleads for leniency, you can pardon that person but if nobody asks, why do you say you have to pardon the person? He is not going to take it seriously!

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, this Law will not work because some guys were saying that those who will respond to this law will be rehabilitated and they have forgotten that we have failed to rehabilitate the ex-soldiers - the former soldiers.  The issue was mentioned here yesterday. We failed to rehabilitate those guys and the veterans, now if you rehabilitate these others coming, these ones will go back!  They will say, "what about us?" and then what will be the use of this Law?  

When you talk of rehabilitation of these guys, you are rehabilitating only the top brass, the young boys are not considered and what will they do? These are the boys still doing a lot of havoc in the areas.  You talked of the colonels, you are mistaking the colonels and the majors who were rehabilitated  a year ago.  What about those other young boys who were in the bush and killed people? Those should be the beneficiaries which should be rehabilitated but this one is not going to happen and, therefore, this law will not be effective. Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER Thank you.  Well, hon. Members, since yesterday, we have now heard twenty Members contributing to this debate and it would now be time to call upon the chairman and the Minister but I have got information from them that because of matters that have been raised which they need to reconcile with their earlier positions, they are not in position to give their final comments on the Debate on the Bill.  In the circumstances, I find this an opportune time to adjourn the House until tomorrow, 2.30. p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2nd December 1999 at 2.30 p.m.)      
