Tuesday, 3 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Ahabwe Godfrey Pereza 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Ahabwe, on behalf of Parliament, I want to welcome you and congratulate you for having passed through the by-election without any problem. You are most welcome! (Applause) 

Honourable members, we have started today with good news in that we have a new Member, hon. Ahabwe who has joined us, and at the same time, we also have got good news from hon. Betty Udongo, Member of Parliament for Nebbi District, who gave birth on 23rd November to a baby boy - (Applause).  Congratulation!

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to congratulate our new Member of Parliament. I do hope that the plaster on his head is not necessarily out of election violence -(Laughter).

Mr Speaker, under order 34 of our Rules of Procedure, all statements and messages made to Parliament by the President shall be debated. You know that it took you personally as the Speaker, and we as Members of Parliament, a bit of time to get the President to address us on this very important topic of the security situation - the war in the north. I think under our rules, it will only be fair, if you can give us the opportunity to have an input to the President’s statement. I hope that before we go for the Christmas Holiday, you will allot to us a few days to discuss this important topic. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Definitely, since the rule provides for that; I have just got a copy of the printed address. I hope you have got your copies. So, I think we shall find time shortly to do what is required under Rule 34.  

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Supplementary to the same issue, but on a matter of protocol: First and foremost, I would like to congratulate you for ably presiding over the last session when we had two presidents addressing this august House - (Applause).

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to express concern about the protocol and respect they accorded on such a ceremonial occasion. Some people in this House, especially from the Front bench, strolled in the House when the President, yourself - national anthems had been played - when you were in the process of conducting business. That is not respect to the august House! I am saying so because some ministers consistently stroll in when you and the President have already taken your positions and the National Anthem has been played. They just take it like any other session of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I would like to hear this either from the Leader of Government Business or from our own hon. Speaker, warning these people that on a ceremonial occasion, everybody shall be seated before you enter the Chamber. And if they are not there before you enter the Chamber, they should remain outside until the occasion is over. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The Prime Minister is not around and is the Leader of Government Business, but everybody knows that I assist him in many ways. I want to agree with hon. Aggrey Awori at least for once -(laughter)- that as leaders, before we can demand of the people we lead to be disciplined, we should be disciplined ourselves. We should accord respect where it is due. In some places and some times, Members will get shut out of the House. Now that is not a good thing to happen. I think Members should normally find it easy to enter their House.  

I think hon. Aggrey Awori is right that it is very rude, and in some instances it is even considered as an insecurity matter, that people should just walk in and out freely. Therefore, I am going to communicate this to – but it is to the House. The Leader of Government Business has no role in this. It is the House itself, which must be disciplined. We certainly are going to advice our colleagues the ministers that if they do not want to be embarrassed next time, they should try and be on time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I need your guidance. Mr Speaker, every vibrant Parliament I have known of the world over greatly respects the phenomenon of question time. On a number of occasions, we keep on getting reminders from the Office of the Clerk that such and such a question are coming and we expect highly that it will come. 

Mr Speaker, noting that most of the people we represent speak to this Parliament through the representatives of the people, do you not think it is time we found a method of concretising the need, even if it means obliging ministers, to answer those questions appropriately? Otherwise, there is a lot of laxity on the part of the Front bench in regard to the answering of these important questions. If they do not show or demonstrate that they are serious in Government, we could take precautions.

MR AMON REEVES KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Early September, I think it was around 5th, I moved a motion here in connection with the River Nile on the Pre-independence Agreement that should be repudiated. It was separated from the Nile Basin Initiative Bill because these were two different issues, and it was referred to the committee to address the pertinent and genuine issues I raised in connection with that motion. But up to now there is some dead silence. So, I am seeking your clarification whether I should re-table it or whether it should come back to the House for discussion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, since there was a ruling on that matter, I imagine the ruling still prevails, and therefore, the committee is directed to complete the work and report.

MR ERESU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were writing the rules for this 7th Parliament, there was a proposal, and rightly so, that we have live coverage of parliamentary proceedings. This rule was later on rejected. But I understand that the equipment is in place, personnel have been trained and they are there. In other words, resources have been put in place and these resources are lying to waste. Is it possible to re-visit this particular rule?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, if that proposal was rejected some time ago, it does not mean that it cannot be re-visited. I think there are provisions here allowing us to re-visit these rules. Therefore, you study them and see how best you can invoke them so that we can re-consider this matter and decide accordingly.

MR THEODRE SSEKIKUUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday at around 7.00 p.m. I happened to pass around the precincts of Parliament, and I discovered that the whole Parliamentary Building and its surrounding were in total darkness. It was as if it was a dungeon. The neighbours, the Ministry of Education also was in a blackout save for the lights from the far distance and other premises. I found the guards without any light on them and it was really a disturbing matter to be in, in the Parliament of Uganda.

Secondly, I have noted that over the past weeks, the Appointments Committee has been vetting and passing members of commissions. I fully understand that these appointments shall reflect the national character but none of them - I am yet to see one - come from Sembabule. 

I have also noted with concern that in one of the commissions, the Electoral Commission, we replaced Hajji Aziz Kasujja with Hajji Badru Kiggundu. Now, do we have really to have a transplant? Not only there, Mr Speaker, when you see the Public Service Commission, the same thing happened. Engineer Zikusoka was replaced with Prof. Zirabamuzale. It goes on and on, and one thing I am afraid of is that we are tending to take things in a straight jacket and this is very reactionary and conservative. Not all of us do belong to the PCM (Protestant, Catholics and Muslims).

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the honourable Member from Sembabule that Dr Higiro Semajege on the Constitutional Review Commission is from Sembabule District. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you for that information, but I really was talking in substance of commissioners and there is a blind eye being given to other denominations. Not all of us really belong to those mainstream religions, and I would really think they should allow people with the ability to come up and not really straight-jacketing. A Moslem has to be replaced with a Moslem! If he is in the chair, that chair remains theirs! That is very bad for this country, Mr Speaker, and I note it with great concern.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, noted.

MR WADRI EZATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern, which came to our attention on Friday, 29 November. In the Government daily, the New Vision newspaper, an article was carried that Kampala City Council intends to bring in a new tax which takes effect from after 6.00 p.m. This tax targets, as indicated in that paper, Arua Bus Park.  

Mr Speaker, it is not the wish of the businessmen and travellers to West Nile region that they have to sleep in the open, but it is being dictated to them by a number of conditions. The roads to this region are in a sorry state, security does not allow them to travel, and hence the businessmen have to stay in the open where at least there is security so that they can be able to travel during broad daylight.  

We are aware that under the Local Governments Act, local councils are authorised to raise revenue through any legitimate means. We are also aware that the Greenboat, which has got a responsibility of raising taxes through street parking, stops at 6.00 p.m. I think it is very unfair that people who have to suffer sleeping in the open, not because of their own mistakes, are yet to be punished more and be asked to pay an extra tax for sleeping outside. 

Mr Speaker, I raise this issue so that Ministry of Local Government and Kampala City Council reconsider the decision that they have made. Today it may be the people travelling to West Nile but tomorrow it could turn to other people travelling to other parts of this country. I think there is need for these authorities to reconsider this bona fide appeal that I am making on behalf of the people of that region. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At least hon. Ezati has recognised the appropriate authorities to be approached on this. We in Government are not aware of this tax, but he has rightly said that the Ministry of Local Government and Kampala City Council need to look at this. And I would have thought that prudently, he could have approached either the Prime Minister, the Minister of Local Government or even the Mayor of Kampala and complained about this tax.  

Obviously coming to the House causes a roundabout route for this matter to be handled - or even the Minister of Finance. So, maybe hon. Ezati, after here, should sit down with the appropriate authorities. We do not make the laws on a daily basis; this is not a legislative matter. It is an administrative matter and, therefore –(Mr Wadri rose_)- I was giving information, Mr Speaker, and the honourable Member should be polite enough to allow me to do it. So, I was saying that after here, hon. Ezati –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you for giving way, acting Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, it seems that Government is taking the issue of taxation as a light matter. But taxes are affecting our people very seriously and when we come to you, do not deny –(Interjection)- this is a preamble, Sir. It is because I have to explain why I am giving the point of order. Thank you. 

Sir, the issue of taxes is causing chaos and when we come here to tell Government that taxes are a problem to our communities, you should appreciate. We are coming to you as messengers because we are in the field. Therefore, you should appreciate the information that we give you. Therefore, Mr Speaker, is the Prime Minister in order to refuse the information about taxation, which is seriously affecting our people because there is an outcry nation-wide? (Laughter) I do not think that even Government knows the type of taxes that have been raised. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, unfortunately, today I have not seen the Prime Minister and, therefore, I cannot rule him out of order when the Prime Minister is not there –(Laughter).

MS MUGERWA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. When the Minister stood at the beginning he said that the Prime Minister was not around and he was acting in his place. I wanted to take the higher precedence.  Thank you.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in today’s press, I noted a matter pertaining to honourable members of this august House who represent Pader District. They were threatening to go on hunger strike and sit in front of the Prime Minister’s Office until food is delivered to their home district. I would like to know, Mr Speaker; were the honourable members concerned about the welfare of their own people or also concerned about lack of attention from the Government on a matter, which is very serious in their district? Maybe I could learn more details from the Minister concerned with disaster and the honourable colleagues.

THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Brig.  Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I must thank the Members of Pader for not threatening to hang themselves, or commit suicide because that would have been very serious. Now, having threatened to go on hunger strike, and before that hunger strike would have affected them, I think we would have done something. Thirdly, I want to inform the Members of Pader that they should actually have said what we have done together with them. They did not mention this –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not allow him to complete?

PROF. LATIGO: I think it is important for the House to know because hon. Awori made reference to what was published in the paper, and it was clearly published quoting me saying that 180 bags of beans and 660 bags of posho were delivered. That is all that has been delivered so far, and I think that in terms of food, we acknowledged - and the Rt. Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister knows - that this food was delivered in three trucks. We acknowledge that very clearly. 

Our concern was because of the fact that while pledges have been made and the situation at home is getting worse and worse, we do not see a response. But I am glad that the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister has said that before we go on a hunger strike - which I dread personally but I will have to do as a representative of the people - something will have been done. I am glad about that - (Mrs Okot Santa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But why do you not allow him to make the statement and then later, if you think there is something you have to add, then you make it?

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must also say that, before our sister hon. Santa came back from her trip to China, definitely she left these people here in a very serious position, and together with her colleagues whom she left behind, we have been working very hard. But when she came, she really blew the whole matter as if we were not doing anything for the people of Pader. But of course, everybody has a style of showing how she represents her people. I am not blaming her for that. But what I want to say is that the problem is lack of convoy. 

The World Food Programme food was stranded: Eight lorries were stranded in Lira for almost 10 days, and each lorry was paying 6,000 dollars as demurrage for spending a night in that place. So, the World Food Programme decided that instead of spending money when they could not deliver the food, they would offload the food in Lira and Lira got supplies, which were not intended for them. They never even thanked the Government or the World Food Programme. 

We now agreed with the World Food Programme to now deliver for us the food up to Lira for Pader so that we can find a way of delivering the food because we have already discussed with the Chairman of Pader and also the RDC. They said they would try their best to look for convoys but they were not able to. The latest information now is that the World Food Programme Country Director met the President and he was promised six mambas to help escort food within the region of the north, and these six mambas are now available. I think the food for Pader, Gulu and elsewhere will be available. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS OKOT SANTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament representing Pader District, and I represent everybody in every corner of the district. I want to clarify that I do not distribute duties to my colleagues, the Members of Parliament with whom I share the district. 

Mr Speaker, between the Minister and I, who knows the district better? If you can recall, it is not my first time to make a statement in this House concerning food consignment to be taken to Pader District. If it is the issue of escorting the food to Pader District, how does food reach Kitgum District? There is no way one can reach Kitgum District without touching Pader! Even if you are going to use a plane, you fly over the district of Pader. 

Mr Speaker, I want to clarify one issue that we are threatening to hold a hunger strike. It was a mistake, which was written. We are going to launch a hunger strike to show to the whole world, to show to this country, that we are suffering with our own people! We have given the Government 20 days. We shall sit in front of the Prime Minister’s Office on the 21st, should this issue not be corrected. 

Several times we had information that food for Pader was distributed in Lira. Who plans that? Is that not a plan from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness? Is Pader not part of this country? Food passes Pader District and it goes to Kitgum. Did he want me to announce to the people of Pader District to hold a roadblock and charge all the trailers that go to that end? I found that this was not possible.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, yesterday the Chairman rang me from Lira. He spent three weeks in Lira waiting for food, which they had deceived him was on the way. Three weeks he was in Lira not doing his work in the district! He told me 23 people have died in Purang sub-county, 12 in Lira-Paruwo sub-county, 7 in Awero sub-county plus many others. 

It is not my first time to talk about this issue of food.  If there is no escort to take this food to Pader District, is it the mistake of the Members of Parliament? Isn’t that a weakness of the Government? What is the definition of UPDF? Is it not Uganda People’s Defence Forces? What are they defending then? I do not buy this issue. If food will not be taken to the people, we are going to be the first leaders in this country to die there in front of that ministry unless it is taken. Thank you very much - (Applause).

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too wish to react to the article that appeared in today’s New Vision. It is true food goes to Kitgum, but we should also know that next to Kitgum, there is a camp for the Sudanese refuges at Rubone. Food passes through Kitgum to Rubone. Then in Kitgum, we also have internally displaced persons who were there before the recent incursions of rebels. 

Mr Speaker, that food is meant for those internally displaced persons. They are about 90,000 in number. But the majority of the people of Kitgum, over 100,000 to date have not received food. They are still yearning for help and it is erroneous to believe that the people of Kitgum are wholly being served with food. No! We still need that help. 

We are appreciative of what the Minister of Disaster Preparedness has done despite the shortcomings, but we are still in need of assistance. Otherwise, Kitgum is still in need of food and any assistance that Government may give.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ATENG OTIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing up on a point of clarification.  The Second Deputy Prime Minister has stated here that food was sent to Pader but it remained in Lira. I would like to be clarified whether the food that is in Lira was meant for the people of Lira or it was meant for the people of Pader? 

I know very clearly that when food is meant for Pader, it is stated clearly and the representatives of Pader receive it in Lira. So, I need that clarification. Otherwise, we are made to think that we are feasting on what we are not supposed to. Thank you very much - (Applause). 

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, first of all I want to make two clarifications. I was not going to make the first one, since I had no opportunity to also make the second one.

It is not true that food is being taken to Kitgum and not to Pader. That is wrong, and whoever gave my sister, hon. Santa, this information was wrong. She got it from a wrong source. Since the problem applied to Pader, it also applied to Kitgum. And if she sees that Kitgum is getting some food, this was taken there before the problems applied in Pader. Therefore, Parliament should know that this statement she made, that Government is giving food to Kitgum and not to Pader, is wrong. It is implying that Government is against Pader. It is not! Therefore, we should make correct statements in this Parliament.

Secondly, food that was distributed in Lira was in transit, whether to Pader, or Kitgum or Kotido. Now, instead of incurring another expense in bringing the food back, going to Soroti and then approaching Pader from the other side, we thought, “these are all Ugandans”. Meanwhile, we shall now replace that food for Lira with that food which they have supplied -(Laughter). So, really, it does not matter.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AND TREE PLANTING BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to request that I do not move to have this bill read the First time. Although it is ready and copies are already in Parliament, the certificate for Ministry of Finance has delayed, and I request that I do the First Reading at a later time. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE FOR GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002” be read a second time. I beg to move.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural concern on this one. I am seeking guidance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we dispose of this first? There is a motion for a second reading. Has it been seconded?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now what is the point?

MR AWORI: When I look at it, Mr Speaker, it looks like an amendment of the Financial Institutions Act, 1993. It is not really a repeal of that law per se. Why is it a new law altogether rather than an amendment on the existing law? There is nothing fundamentally different.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know the details of the bill at the moment. It is when we proceed with the motion that I will know. But it is up to them to bring another bill. If they have done so, you make your contribution and agree or disagree.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate hon. Aggrey Awori's concern. It is true that there is some similarity between the proposed bill and the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993. But there are some material and substantial amendments, which make it imperative to have a completely new law. So, in our wisdom, we thought it was better to do away with the old law and bring a fresh law altogether.  

MR OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought I would draw the attention of the hon. Minister holding the Floor to the memorandum of the bill, which says, “The object of this bill is to revise and consolidate the law relating to Financial Institutions.” So, there would be nothing out of the ordinary to consolidate the bill. And if this law consolidates everything, then we have to enact a new law. I just want to draw your attention to that, sir.

MR RUKUTAANA: I thank you very much. And of course when you consolidate, you come up with something totally new, therefore, the necessity to have a completely new law.

Mr Speaker, if I could speak to the bill now: the bill actually seeks to repeal the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993. Members will be aware that since 1993, there have been significant developments and changes in our financial sector. Just to mention a few, they include: 

    • Intensified liberalisation in the financial system. 
    • International supervision convergence under the Basle Committee, which requires Uganda's legal framework to be reviewed. 
    • The coming into the arena of new forms of financial institutions and businesses that entail new types of risks. 
    • The closure of banks due to insolvency, mismanagement and other reasons.  

Because of all those reasons, Government found it necessary to revisit the old law and put in place a new one that would accommodate all these concerns, with particular emphasis on making provisions that ensure that financial institutions are run in a sound professional and proper manner. All that is intended to ensure that depositors’ money, our money, is protected. 

What we have done is to consolidate all the laws, to revise the 1993 Statute, and to put everything in one form so that the financial system can now be run in a sound and proper manner. I think the importance of having one ascertainable law cannot be over emphasised. That is why we thought it necessary to come up with this bill.  

This bill has been a subject of debate with the Committee on the Economy, and since it touches a matter, which I know is dear to each and every member, I beg that members do support it whole-heartedly. Thank you.

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Jachan Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002 was read a first time on 2 July 2002. It was thereafter committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development which scrutinised it and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations.

This bill is seeking to repeal the Financial Institutions Statute of 1993, which replaced the Banking Act of 1969.  Since the enactment of the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993, there have been significant developments in the financial sector, which has warranted the bringing into force of this bill, and some of the developments include:

    (i) Intensified liberalisation of Uganda’s financial sector requiring specialised regulations;
    (ii) International Supervisory Convergence under the guidance of the Basle Committee, requiring Uganda’s legal framework to be reviewed;
    (iii) The development of new forms of the Financial Institutions business introducing new types of risks, thus requiring new regulatory framework; 
    (iv) Closure of a number of banks due to insolvency, deficiencies in the law, weak supervision, particularly by the Central Bank, and other reasons some of which have been stated by the Minister of Finance.

It was, therefore, considered appropriate by Government to address the above concerns by accommodating the issues through a proposed new law; the Financial Institutions Bill, 2002, which is now before this House.

The committee, while conducting its business, invited a number of stakeholders who included the following:

    (i) The Minister of Finance and his technical team
    (ii) Bank of Uganda officials
    (iii) Centenary Bank officials
    (iv) The Economic Policy Research Centre 
    (v) Makerere Institute of Social Research

Although the Uganda Bankers Association was invited, they did not turn up to meet the committee. The committee, however, learnt that the Association was effectively consulted during the drafting process and, therefore, their input is contained in what we are presenting.

The Central Bank also organised a two-day workshop in which stakeholders were invited including the Bankers Association. 

The committee also perused the Financial Institutions Statute 1993, which is a subject of repeal now.

The object of this bill is to revise and consolidate the law relating to Financial Institutions, to provide for the regulation, control and discipline of financial institutions by the Central Bank.  

The bill also seeks to address the concerns of the new business developments in the financial sector to avoid insolvency and further to protect depositors’ interests.

The Minister concerned has tabled the financial implications of this bill in accordance with section 10 of the Budget Act. It has no direct implication on the Central Government as a body, as all this will be under the direct budgetary supervision of the Central Bank.  

Observations:

The stability of the financial sector is an important factor for the growth and development of the country. It provides a conducive environment for investment and serves as an attraction to local savings mobilisation.  

Mr Speaker, as you will recall, there is need for us to improve domestic savings as a factor of GDP in this country. The globalisation and liberalisation of the world economy calls for harmonisation of the laws in order to conform to other related laws, which the bill seeks to address and ensure that they are consistent to international practice.  

The committee observed that this Bill is also a response to the problems that adversely affected the financial sector in Uganda where a number of commercial Banks and other financial institutions were closed. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall Greenland Bank, the Co-operative Bank and the International Credit Bank, to mention but a few, were closed. Members, however, observed that limiting shareholding to 20 percent as proposed in Clause 18 of the bill contradicts the idea of promoting core-investors in institutions in Uganda.  The Committee is of the view that the limitation is a disincentive to investment in this sector.  

The bill also provides for the categorisation of licenses depending on the nature of financial investment one wants to carry out; for example, merchant banking or mortgage banking etc.  

Members observed that this is a good measure that controls the various activities, which might otherwise put depositors’ funds at a great risk.

The bill also addresses the issue of credit concentration.  The committee noted that this was one of the causes of insolvency in some banks. The bill now proposes that no single person is to get credit of more than 25 percent of the total capital and this, in the opinion of the Committee, is the right direction.  

The bill proposes the establishment of a Credit Reference Bureau. This is a good idea, as the bureau will help in monitoring and tracking of creditors who jump from one institution to another on failing to meet their obligations with the first lender institution. 

Ideally, Mr Speaker, loan provisions should not be more than three per cent but the current average in Uganda is in excess of ten per cent.

Mr Speaker, the creation of the Deposit Protection Fund was appreciated as it provides a fallback position to mitigate loss and reduce systemic risk and promote depositor protection and confidence. All financial institutions will be contributing towards this fund.  

The committee has requested the Minister of Finance to ensure that within one year from the date that this bill becomes law, the Deposit Protection Fund should become an autonomous body.

The committee was further informed that to avoid past situations where an institution was part of a group of companies, and the Central Bank had no access to it, this will now be rectified by enhanced consolidated supervision where the Central Bank will require, in writing, information from any affiliate, associate or subsidiary of a group.  They will be required to present to the Bank of Uganda an audited balance sheet and profit and loss account.

Mr Speaker, there have been reported cases of money laundering in this country.  Members noted that this might be harmful to the sector of banking.  There has, therefore, been an inclusion in the bill of a clause to allow the Central Bank to freeze accounts whose proceeds are suspected to be from a criminal source.

Recommendations:

    1. The Central Bank should strengthen its monitoring and supervisory capacity to ensure that the good intentions of this bill are achieved.

    2. The Central Bank should facilitate the establishment of a Credit Reference Bureau soonest to enable more effective monitoring and tracking of credit defaulters.

    3. Licensing of financial institutions should be handled with a lot of care and professionalism to avoid unfit and improper institutions being licensed by the Central Bank.

    4. Notwithstanding the protection the law gives to the Central Bank and its employees, poor or lack of supervision of financial institutions by officials of the Central Bank should be taken seriously, and the concerned and identified officials should be brought to book accordingly.

    5. The establishment of an autonomous Deposit Protection Fund, as mentioned earlier, should be within one year from the day that this bill is enacted.

    6. The Bank of Uganda Statute, 1993 should be amended to be consistent with the provisions of the Micro-Deposit Taking Institutions Bill, 2002, which we passed recently, and the Financial Institutions Bill, 2002 which gives the Central Bank other new roles.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, this bill is comprehensive in empowering the Central Bank to carry out its duties of a watchdog in the financial sector and as a regulator.

The committee wishes to thank all those who responded to the invitation for their time and positive contributions.

The committee recommends that this report be adopted and the bill be passed with the proposed amendments. Mr Speaker, I thank you, and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson -(Applause). Now, honourable members, the debate is open.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Acting Chairperson of the Committee for his articulate report, a point that persuaded me to assume that one day he should be considered for the position of Minister of Finance.  

Mr Speaker, this is a very sensitive report, and it is also derived from a sensitive bill. When is an institution a banking institution? This is a very important question I am pausing, because my assumption is that the bill maybe endeavouring to target people who are not necessarily a burden on the ground. For example, Mr Speaker, there are several depositors if we are seriously addressing banking institutions.  

I would like to report what is realistically on the ground. In Busega area, which I happen to represent in Parliament, there is quasi-banking institution by the name of Promote Uganda Limited, attached to about 2000 members.  They have registered as members and they carry a depositor’s card with their photographs attached.  

They deposit money regularly and the man who is in charge of that institution, one Kasajja, has collected over Shs200m from these people. He is promising them motorcycles after a given period of time. They deposit money from time to time as if they are depositing it to a real bank.  

This institution pays taxes but it is not registered as a banking institution. Now, Mr Speaker, this is the time when the Minister of Finance should come in to rescue these poor people, because talking about Micro-finance in a big way is meaningless to them. They only want to access what is within their reach, and that is their immediate bank; that is their substitution of Barclays Bank and Standard Chartered Bank.  

I would like to assume that we might not carry this bill any further if it does not address the worries, which I have articulated. I know they have been addressed to a certain extent but not in a manner which vividly addresses the concerns of these people.  

As I speak now, there has been a strike and the Police have had to go to Busega. If it were not for my effort, people were going to kill one another. I had to intervene, I talked to the common people and they listened to me very well - you know very well - and I cooled up the pressure.  Otherwise, they wanted to hang the man; they were arguing that the man had stolen their money - (Interruption).

MR KALULE SENGO: Mr Speaker, I am worried! My colleague seems to be talking about financial institutions, which will be coming under tier four. We are now talking about financial institutions in tier one. We are not even talking about Micro-finance institutions; we are talking of institutions in tier one; these are the banks, credit institutions and the rest!  

I believe the minister came here and promised that within six months, he will be coming up with a law to give guidance to such institutions like the one he is referring to. I am therefore requesting that my colleague should concentrate on this particular bill and not on institutions in tier four. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am surprised to note that the honourable member is talking as if he is addressing the population in New York City. I am addressing the realities on the ground in Busega, and to those people –(Interruption) -

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Mr Speaker, my colleague is talking about institutions that should be under the micro finance deposit-taking institutions. The honourable Member for Gomba has informed him. I therefore beg to move that under Rule 59, the member should not be heard any longer - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the member requires assistance, instead of just making him stop. The financial institutions are defined in the bill itself, and as the member has said, we dealt with the micro finance deposit-taking institutions and we passed a law. 

There was also an undertaking by the Government that within six months, they will bring the law to deal with those small institutions, which you are talking about, and this undertaking still holds. After six months, we shall require Government to present to us that law. But this, as the honourable Member for Gomba has said, deals with tier one institutions - UCB, Barclays Bank and institutions like that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged for that advice, Mr Speaker, but the concerns have been delivered.  

Lastly, I have a concern on page three. I am not very comfortable with this statement as advanced by the chairperson: “There has, therefore, been an inclusion in the bill of a clause to allow the Central Bank to freeze accounts whose proceeds are suspected to be from a criminal source.”  That is a very intricate matter. How do you know? What capacity do you have to spot a source of a seemingly criminal nature? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe you will excuse me because courtesy requires that I introduce our children who have visited us, so that they are recognised. These are children from Kyelima Way Forward Primary School, Kayunga District and Main Street Primary School, Jinja Municipality. You are most welcome! You can proceed, honourable member.

MR LUKYAMUZI: With respect to what I have just read, it seems this assumption needs to be cautiously checked, because you must have very strong grounds to assume that the source of such money bears some criminal overtones - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, for your information, there is what we call “money laundering”, and that is not acceptable. I think that is the situation they are talking about.  You commit some criminal act somewhere and then you come here to launder the money. And then if they get to know, I think the International Committee would expect such action. I think that is what is being envisaged.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, much obliged. Much as I am aware of that, I am proposing that the matter is intricate. Because, until an appropriate court in a given land has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the matter in question is of a criminal nature, you may not simply assume that it is. You cannot assume that because there were rumours in the US that this money was secured through such circumstances, therefore your money must not be accepted.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, those were the concerns calculated from the yardstick of what is happening in my area. You may not tell those people the dimensions of tier one, tier three, tier four, but I have addressed the concerns of these ordinary people in Busega. Thank you very much.

MR MICHEAL OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are deliberating on these bills about financial institutions, if a member tries to digress into the different tiers, I think it is good at times to listen, because just a few weeks ago this House was treated to drama. We thought a certain bill was coming, which was going to address interests of our constituents, but what was brought was another one. So up to now, that hangover is still lingering. If a colleague digresses to tier one, tier two, tier three, tier four and so on, I beg that it should be understood.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, as we deal with the Financial Institutions Bill today, I am very glad that it is being repealed. Why? This was the very statute, which was used to undermine this august House. You remember the UCB saga. Up to now the report on UCB is not out. This very statute was used to undermine this august House in the sale of UCB. Up to now we do not know whether it was a fair deal for Ugandans, because they used the very law, which was passed by this august House.  

Mr Speaker, I feel that as we go ahead with this bill, it is very important for us to crosscheck the extraordinary powers we give to the Bank of Uganda because once you pass the law, they will use the very law to shoot you in the foot. It is very unfortunate! So, I caution members that we go very cautiously and see that the powers we give to Bank of Uganda should be pro-people powers. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I have looked at the financial implications of this bill. I need to be guided a bit. I thought if a bill has any financial implications on any institution of government, definitely they must also be spelt out. For example, the Bank of Uganda is an institution of government. Even if it does not have implications on the Central Government, provided it has some implications on the Bank of Uganda, something should be spelt out about that, so that we know how far it is going. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there you have to look at the law under which this requirement was imposed, to see what type of financial implication is on what fund. Because if you want to expand, it may even be necessary to amend or expand the financial implications meant in the parent act.  But I think the point is taken. 

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have stood in this Parliament several times but every time these people with a lot of economics in their heads have not been able to answer me satisfactorily. 

We all know and we have been hearing that Kiggudu was charged for misappropriating about 23 million shillings. I also hear that this money was lent to UCB. The man who was given responsibility to recover debts has not come out to tell us whether the bank, which borrowed it, that is UCB, repaid that money. It is the same money that appears in the charges. I will be very happy if the Minister of Finance, or the liquidator himself, tells us what happened. I think he should not remain so silent. We need to know.

Secondly, I am not happy with the way the liquidators are doing their work.  When it comes to the banking institutions – (Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the member on the issue where the courts of law have addressed themselves on several cases on the same issue, and they have disposed off some cases, and members are serving sentences and others are still on. Can I be clarified whether this House can continue to debate a matter, which is in court? Thank you very much. 

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I think the minister, who is the overall person responsible, will answer that.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, after the liquidator has entered the bank to close it up, all the work of the bank ceases. But they continue charging compound interest when the account itself is not working! To me this is really unfair. 

When I was reading through this consolidated bill, I did not see any provision, which protects the ordinary man who has failed to pay 10 million and at the time of liquidation, when he is struggling to get that money, his account is closed. The account is closed but they expect him to pay, and the interest keeps on becoming bigger and bigger! 

To me it is like somebody who has failed to pay rent of two shilling for the whole year, and then you leave him the house for another year and you say he will pay four shillings; and you go on accumulating that way. Definitely, there should be a way of assisting these people. But if you go on collecting more money from accounts which you have already closed, I would not want to say you are a thief, but I think there should be something suitable - (Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker, when Greenland was closed, immediately after one week all those accounts which were operating there were re-opened in Bank of Uganda. I was one of the members affected, and I was trying to make sure that the money does not accumulate. So I went to Bank of Uganda, started paying there and they gave me my title.  So, I do not think that it is correct to say that the wanainchi are suffering. To take advantage of a closed bank - you borrowed the money and this money does not belong to the bank, it belongs to the public!

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Nsubuga Nsambu is that what he is articulating is so correct. I have also come to understand that it was wrong for anybody to have closed Greenland Bank on charges of insolvency. We all know that the money, which was borrowed from Greenland Bank, is the same money, which was used to buy off UCB. You know where the money is, why don’t you return it so that the bank comes to life again?

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I wanted to inform my colleague on the Floor and my other colleague who was giving him information that this Financial Institution’s Bill, 2002 is repealing the one of 1993, which has got some of the flaws or weaknesses that we are trying to cure.  

In that case, when we reach some of those sections to deal with liquidation, let us pay particular attention and amend them to the effect that the poor people you are talking about, who have been suffering, do not suffer. Otherwise, that liquidation process was carried out under the old law, which we are now replacing with a new law. So, I do not really think we should waste time criticising the old law because we are repealing it today.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I cannot say that you are amending. When the chairman was talking, he said they are consolidating the law, which has been very difficult to follow, so that it is all put in one book. That does not mean that they have amended.  Otherwise, if there was an amendment that is so important it would have been shown in his report, but there is nothing to that effect! (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the point is; this is a bill called the Financial Institution’s Bill. At the end, you will find that they are repealing the financial institutions law, which is prevailing. 

Now if you think that the law that was operating was defective, this is the opportunity for you, never mind what the Minister has proposed, to be free to improve the new law. This is the opportunity for you to improve the new law. I think that is the point, which members are putting to you. Be alert, study it and see where you could put the kind of amendment you want to effect.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Speaker, one more thing.  When we were at the Conference Centre, the Governor of the Bank of Uganda told us that they do not charge interest above 17 percent, but in these institutions, which have been liquidated, they have been asking for 25 percent. To me it appears that they are flogging a dead horse. If the big man says that they should not exceed 17 percent, where do they get that sum of 25 percent? I would love the chairman to explain that fact to me. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

PROF OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The start of the debate on this bill brings back the crisis that we faced when we were debating an earlier similar bill. I think the key point here, Mr Speaker, is that we as a country are confronted with two issues: to regulate the institutions that are in place, and to promote the development of financial inter-mediation at all levels, whether at the commercial bank level or at the village bank level.  

I think the challenge that the Ministry of Finance has, and which they have probably not given sufficient thought to in considering this bill, is a law that will promote the development of the financial sector. 

When you look at this bill - and that is where I have a problem with the title of the bill – it is “The Financial Institutions Act”.  When I see a title like that, I expect to go into this bill and find provisions that will help this country to promote the development of the financial sector, and yet in the introduction to the bill, it is to provide for the regulation, control and discipline.  

The element of developing the financial sector requires that we have deliberate laws that will enhance the process. I think this is where the request was made to the Minister of Finance to come out with an appropriate bill, and I do not know whether it is specifically for tier four or we actually need a bill for the promotion of financial inter-mediation. We leave that for the ministry.  

I have three specific issues to raise at this stage. If you look at the report of the committee, which I must truly commend the Committee for, they recommend deletion of clause 2(2) of the bill. But the reason that they give for recommending deletion, while valid in their context, misses a crucial point, which I would need clarification on, because the original provision gives the Central Bank – (Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think that we shall come to these details when we are at the committee stage? Now it is a general debate on the principles, I could give you opportunity to deal with this one during the committee stage.

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you, this was very specific and can be addressed when we reach there. My second big concern is what we have seen happen with Uganda Commercial Bank and Trans Africa Bank. 

In the seizure of Uganda Commercial Bank by the Central Bank, there was mass outcry from the public and even information from people in the bank that the bank was essentially sound, but the Central Bank gave its reasons for its seizure. With Trans Africa Bank, there were even published reports from the owners of that bank that the seizure was unfair. 

In this bill, Mr Speaker, there are no provisions for such cases, where the complaints are legitimate, to be addressed before the Central Bank takes action on what to do with the seized bank. I would wish to see provisions that allow owners of institutions that are seized by Central Bank to have ample time to table their complaints, so that some form of arbitration is made before some major decisions are made by the Central Bank.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was talking about the plight of his people and he thought it was legitimate to talk about that plight, but he was advised that that was a matter that would come later. I would like to draw the attention of the House - because this is probably important - to the provision of Clause 2(3) - and allow me to read it, Mr Speaker. I know we are going to deal with it, but it is important. 

“This Act shall not apply to a Co-operative Society registered under the Co-operative Societies Statute, 1991 except a Co-operative Society established for the purpose of accepting deposits from the public”, and yet I see in the report of the committee that the committee heard from the minister that they will provide for the regulation of tier four bodies. The committee should have deleted this. I think if Ken Lukyamuzi had actually looked at this provision, he would be fully entitled to talk about the people in his constituency because co-operative societies are actually below the micro deposit-taking level. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend this good work by the committee. I think they have done a relatively thorough job, except for one area where I have an opinion, which I would wish to share with the members. That is, a bank being part of group of companies. It is common practice in Uganda today. 

Most of the big tycoons have banks as part of their group of companies, and it is clear that the supervision has become very difficult to Government, particularly Bank of Uganda, in scrutinising the transactions in these banks. In most cases, some of these banks have collapsed because of a lot of internal borrowing, which the new law pledges to scrutinise and supervise.  

Mr Speaker, the business communities are very complicated and skilful in the art of managing their businesses. Any law always has a loophole. Whatever law you create, whatever supervisory regulation you will put in place, it will always have some loophole where these businessmen will always exploit.  

My proposal here is that we should completely de-link and separate bank businesses from other forms of businesses. If somebody is running a bank business, let him stay squarely in bank business. If somebody is managing hotels, resort beaches, factories and the rest of it, let him manage that and borrow from the banking institutions. They should be separate; otherwise the management will be very difficult for Bank of Uganda. This is solely being demonstrated. That is the contribution I have.  

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I have one or two questions to raise. One, section 88(1)(f) gives the Bank of Uganda, after taking over the management of a financial institution under section 87 of the Act, exclusive powers, amongst other things, to reorganise or liquidate a financial institution in accordance with this Act. Mr Speaker, I think it had better be clarified whether the word ‘or’ is an alternate in conjunction between re-organisation and liquidation. If we do not come out clearly on this, we risk having the same pitfall we had with the old law, which we are trying to repeal. 

Secondly, I have a question, which I want to raise to the minister with regard to a regulatory body and public interest. Government protects the people of Uganda and also the banks' interests, and Government in turn appoints Bank of Uganda by constitutional provision to be the regulatory body. Therefore, I think to give full powers to Bank of Uganda to act as a regulator, and at the same time as a person to appoint a liquidator, may not run in the interest of the people. Can the Minister satisfy me that this particular interest will be catered for before I support this bill in full?  

The other issue is indicated in section 18(1) as thus: “Except as expressly provided in the Act, no-

    (a) individual;
    (b) body corporate owned or controlled by one individual;
    (c) group of related persons;
    (d) body corporate owned or controlled directly or indirectly by a group of related persons;
shall own or acquire more than twenty per cent of the shares of a financial institution.”  

In other words, by passing this law, we are trying to reduce on people who will create monopolies and oligopolies. In Section 6, it says they have been given time within which they could- (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on a point of procedure. We have got a bill before us and amendments proposed by the Committee, and I am sure more amendments will come from the colleagues when we go to committee stage. We have a report, which has been presented by the Chairperson of the Committee. The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, procedurally, should we start debating the various sections of the bill? Some of them - I am a member of the Committee and that is why I am seeking this procedure - have already been amended or proposed for amendment. So now, at the general debate level when we start going to specific sections of the bill, are we not duplicating or even wasting time? I am seeking your guidance.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have told you several times that bills presented by Government or any other person to Parliament, the moment they are presented become working documents for Parliament. That is why you are able to shape final documents from whatever you think. So, if you think this document is not good enough, you will have a right at the committee stage to panel-beat it and advocate for necessary amendments. 

I think the debate here during the motion for second reading is a general debate for advocating policies. But then at the committee stage, that is when we go into details, scrutinising each clause and amending them in the way we want. So, I want to assure everybody who is here, who has an amendment, that he or she will have an opportunity to do so at the committee stage. But you can talk about the principle, advocate maybe for the kind of amendment you intend to move.

MR AWORI: Further guidance, Mr Speaker. When the bill was presented, I raised a matter of procedural concern. I said from the looks of the bill, it does not present a case for repeal of the existing law.  These are sheer amendments of the existing law, the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993. But you advised at that material time that we wait and hear the arguments from the Committee, and from the line minister why it is a repeal of the existing law.  So far, I have seen literally nothing fundamentally new.  

At the same time, Mr Speaker, you are advising us that when we come to the committee stage that is when we can point out 1,2,3.  But essentially, one or two or three items do not necessarily constitute a repeal of the existing law. So, guide me, Mr Speaker. How do I debate this matter without pointing out a specific item that shows some inconsistency in my argument?

THE SPEAKER: You are free to do so and to say there is no need to enact this law. You will be free to oppose during a second reading of this bill. And if you succeed, then we shall not proceed. We shall continue with the law, which is there.  When we come to the third reading, and passing of the bill, you may also resist and if you succeed to get necessary people to support you, you will stop enacting this law. That is how you can do it.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. I am not intending at any one time to go to the amendments. What I was trying to put across is that the new law which we are going to pass or if we pass it - I agree with hon. Awori - has nothing fundamental, and that is why I was pointing out some of these things. 

For example, when I raised the issue of article 88(1)(f), that is the very replica of what appeared in the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993 under clause 30(f). So, nothing new was added. In that case, by bringing some of these highlights, I was merely trying to bring to the attention of this House that we may be running on the same spot in respect to this bill. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am constrained by your advice that we wait for a second reading then we can debate specifics. But at the same time, I would like to take this opportunity to ask the line Minister on an existing situation, especially when it comes to definition of various terms:

One, when can one use the word ‘bank’? Two, when can one use the word national with a capital ‘N’? I raise this matter for two reasons. Number one, there being no specific definition of a bank in the bill, we are just using various terminologies and exercises to define something that is not quite clear - amorphous for that matter.  

Number two, using a specific example, in all other matters in this country –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt you, but would you like to look at page 9 on interpretation - it may be adequate or inadequate – but you will see “bank” defined. It may not be satisfactory but it is defined. So it is not true that it is not defined.

MR AWORI: Actually, I think you have helped me, Mr Speaker, by saying it is adequate or inadequate. I think that is my contention.

My second point is the word, “national”. Constitutionally, when we refer to some institution or organisation as 'national', there has to be a public interest, protected by law. I know in this country there is a bank called National Bank of Commerce, which is strictly privately owned. How come we are allowed to call it National Bank of Commerce when the Government or the public has no interest per se? 

I just wanted guidance from the honourable line minister on this particular matter, in terms of definitions. At least you have helped on the definition of the bank, now it is the applicability of the word, “national”.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister definitely will answer that. Let me proceed with those who want to make contributions.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee, my friend, hon. Omach, for the good job he has done. I will dwell on credit reference bureau, and I will seek clarification from the Minister.

This is a very good aspect, which has been introduced in this bill. We have travelled a lot and we have seen how people control erratic borrowers. He goes to Nile Bank and takes a chunk of money, he goes to Stanbic and takes a chunk of money, he goes to UCB and does the same thing, and at the end of the day he is unable to service his loans.

This is a very good idea, but in my understanding as a person who did not take economics, I see it as either a mother-server to other banks, to give the information concerning the borrowers and their status in other banks. 

What I want to know from the Minister is, supposing a bank refers to a credit reference bureau and the information given is wrong information, and the bank goes ahead and lends the money to a borrower and that borrower has got multiple debts in other banks. What sanctions do you intend to apply to either this autonomous body, if it will be an autonomous body, or Government body? 

My second clarification is on the inter-connection of our banks. In other developed countries where finance business is advanced, all the banks are inter-connected. When you go to borrow from one bank, the information is automatically displayed in other banks. They know you; your photograph appears on the computer, your name and the amount of money you have in another bank are all displayed. 

So, I want to ask the Minister whether he intends to go towards that, and that is the main aim of introducing this bill, or he wants to have another bureau of bureaucrats whereby the banks will be writing letters seeking clarifications and what have you? Mr Speaker, that is the only clarification I want from the Minister.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I do not intend to delay the House, but I have spotted a lot of complexity about this bill.

I would like the honourable Minister in charge of this bill to give me some explanation in regard of the difference between the two sentences I am going to read, which have already been articulated here: One, “The bill is seeking to repeal the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993”. What is the difference between that sentence and the sentence, which states, “The bill seeks to repeal”?  Thank you.

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must begin by thanking the committee for the good work. Mine will be more or less like a caution to my colleagues. 

I think we have gone through a bit of turmoil in the banking institutions. This bill is more or less giving powers to Bank of Uganda to be strengthened and to keep their eyes open to all other commercial banks, so that they can be more prudent. 

Our people have suffered a lot with their money getting into some of these banks that are owned by individuals. I am happy this issue is being addressed. It is no good in this country of ours. We are developing but we are not yet there. Somebody holding 45 per cent shares in a bank, whereby he sits in his bedroom with his wife and makes a decision about the bank! We all know about International Credit Bank. We know what happened. So, this bill tends to address the issue that actually it is good for Bank of Uganda. 

We should expect that since we have a governor, good administration of the bank and we have competent people in the bank, we must have some degree of trust, because we cannot say that everything must come to Parliament. 

I think let us forget the past. Some people have made mistakes. Let us be more focused and look at Bank of Uganda as our institution that we are nursing to deliver. But the moment we still have a hand to pull some of the duties to our side, I do not think we shall move.

We are now liberalising the economy more. We want the private people to deliver. The moment we start blaming the Bank of Uganda, telling them to do this and that, they will not be free. It is like me, Byanyima, saying that my family should be at home at 8.00 and we have prayers. But then I say, “no, you must consult your father somewhere or other people”. Every game, every family must have rules. 

Let us hope that Bank of Uganda, with a good team, can do the work for us. Banking needs prudent people. In every newspaper, everyday you find people’s property being auctioned because Ugandans were more or less financially indisciplined. But now we are being trained to be more financially disciplined. So, let us give these regulations and all the duties to Bank of Uganda to manage our affairs. 

Since we are divesting, we are saying that the Government cannot afford to do all the jobs. But now Bank of Uganda is coming in to say, “it is true the supervision was weak and that is why Greenland, Co-operative Bank and many others came up”. So now this report agrees that there was lack of supervision on the part of Bank of Uganda.  But I am sure now Bank of Uganda must have been strengthened to be able to supervise our banks.  

As Members of Parliament, our interest should be to look at our people who put their money into these banks. But we are saying, the insurance limits them to Shs3,000,000.  But the other time the Government was so lenient and everybody was paid. I do not think we shall have more money to pay our people. Let us protect our people - (Interruption)-

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I wish to seek clarification from either the honourable member on the Floor or from the honourable minister. 

When we were looking at the Micro Deposit-Taking Institutions Bill, we were informed that one of the limitations of expanding or bringing tier four institutions into this legislation was the fact that Bank of Uganda lacked the capacity to supervise. We have now also observed from the recommendations of the committee that supervision is still a big problem with Bank of Uganda. I still also realise that despite the fact that the committee observed this limitation, there is no concrete proposal other than proposing that the Bank of Uganda Statute be amended. 

May I get clarification from the honourable minister as to what plans are in place, now that we are passing this Bill, to strengthen the supervision department of Bank of Uganda, and perhaps also set a time frame for this proposal? Thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Zziwa. My continued pledge is that the supervision we are all talking –(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. The whole essence of privatisation in Uganda is that an individual can run business better than a group of people. The member on the Floor is saying that the individual has failed to run a bank. A few individuals might have failed but does that mean that we should legislate against those? 

I feel that we should encourage our individuals to start financial institutions, to start banks, so that they can be supervised. If the Bank of Uganda has failed to supervise individuals, should we pass a law stopping the individuals from starting banks? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, honourable member. My concern was the experience we have so far. The few individuals who have come out to start banks have not faired well, and here government is coming up to say, “Please hold on, you have 20 percent shares,” so that at the end of the day we have many people who have a stake in the bank. 

We do not have three people of the former International Credit Bank and many others who disappointed Ugandans. We are saying that we are at that stage already. The law we are repealing is that of 1993, so it is just nine years since. We are coming into a fresh one, and the opportunity is for us to have a watertight package or law that will actually see our financial institutions moving smoothly.

Finally, I suggest that we should not think of what happened to UCB, Co-operative Bank and Greenland Bank. I think that anybody with this Bill is interested in seeing that our financial institutions are running on a very systematic financial base. We should not have our people, whom we represent, always crying because a bank has closed. We should have trust in the banks, and I am sure all the rules are within this law to cater for that. 

We should actually ensure that we all participate in this particular bill so that at the end of the day, whatever loopholes were in 1993 law could actually be filled up. We can have a good law where we have the central bank as a partner with Parliament and many other institutions, to oversee our financial institutions. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this chance.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have any observations to make?

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Jachan Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, this bill seeks to give more power to Parliament in as far as issues concerning financial institutions in this country are concerned. The 1993 Financial Institutions Statute gave more powers to Bank of Uganda, and some powers to the minister responsible for Finance. When we pass this bill, we shall be in position to control this and, therefore, control the affairs of the financial institutions in this country. 

In the 1993 Financial Institutions Statute, the capital requirement was only Shs500 million. This bill proposes to raise the capital to Shs4 billion for tier one, and I think that is a substantial digression from the old one. Shareholding by people who would like to become owners of this bank is being tightened so that we do not have only a few people responsible for the affairs of financial institutions. 

The bill has also brought in a new graduation of licensing. In the 1993 Financial Institutions Statute, one licence could allow each financial institution to operate any type of banking that is available. So one could do merchant banking, retail banking and mortgage banking. But in the new bill it is being proposed that it will be graduated, so we can only have one licence for each of those sub-sectors.  

Mr Speaker, in the old bill more emphasis was put on supervision by Bank of Uganda. In the new bill, however, it is being proposed to have one full section on corporate governance. Another thing that comes out very clearly is the four-eye principle where two executive directors will be required by law to be appointed in each of the institutions. This will make it possible for banks to be effectively supervised, first by the directors themselves and then Bank of Uganda later. 

It is also giving very punitive measures, which will enable directors and senior executives of banks to take personal responsibility, and therefore liability and collective responsibility, which were not available in the old law. 

It is also emphasising the fit and proper analysis of the individuals who are to be directors, and also the institutions that are to be licensed. The licensing is being made a little stricter than it was in the beginning. I briefly wanted to mention that.

Hon. John Byabagambi has talked at great lengths about the Credit Reference Bureau. The bill goes into details on how this should operate in this country. I believe that at the Committee Stage, members will be able to say whatever they want to say about this. 

Hon. Hilary Onek talked about separating banking business from other businesses. Mr Speaker, this comes out very clearly on the issues of the graduation of the licensing of the various activities that are under banking. 

Prof. Latigo did say something about the Co-operative Societies. The bill is only talking about Co-operative Societies that take deposits from the public. It is not dealing with Co-operative Societies that are taking deposits from their own members. 

Mr Speaker, you have ably –(Interjection)- I will not take it. You have ably talked about money laundering which is a requirement by the Bursary Committee, an international body that has given us direction on what to do. The money laundering also require people who are responsible for laws in this country to ensure that this is effected without giving wrong judgement to who is doing what. Mr Speaker, these are the few areas I wanted to comment on.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee and the honourable members for raising these concerns. I wish to point out that most of the concerns raised could be better handled when we are dealing with specific sections. 

I will begin with hon. Margret Zziwa’s concern that Bank of Uganda lacks capacity to supervise. I want to allay your fears that whereas it is true that Bank of Uganda may be a little bit weak in its supervisory role, it has the capacity. Nevertheless the strengthening of the supervision powers is not a subject of this bill. It will be handled when we amend the Bank of Uganda Act, because that is the Act that gives Bank of Uganda the powers and functions that it does. So rest assured that when we come to that Act, that is when we shall give Bank of Uganda sufficient power to do the supervision. Well, I wish to say that plans are under way to amend the Bank of Uganda Act, and amendments will come very soon to this House. 

Hon. Onek was suggesting that Bank business should be separated from other businesses –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: I thought the chairperson had handled that issue, so you deal with matters that have not been dealt with.

MR RUKUTANA: Hon. Eresu’s concern, I think that one will be handled when we go to section 88. 

Hon. Aggrey Awori’s concern was on why we should repeal when actually the provisions are substantially the same. I wish to point out, as I pointed out earlier, that there are substantial amendments, which will really make the new bill completely different.  There are several areas: I will point out just a few and others, members will discover as we debate the sections. 

When you look at graduate licensing, there are new sections on share-holding, co-operate governance, credit reference bureau, and there is another part which is new on receivership and liquidation. And besides, the bill has five new schedules that were not part of the old law. So, as I said, the consolidation and amendments substantially alter the old law as to warrant a completely new form of law. I think other concerns will be handled when we go section by section. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I put the question that the Bill entitled: “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now that the actual legislation is going to be at the committee stage, and because members have expressed their concerns about the current law, I appeal to you to take time and study the clause in detail, so that you come tomorrow when you are prepared to deal with the various clauses that you feel are crucial to our country or economy or banking business. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow, when we shall start with the committee stage.

(Parliament rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)
  

