Wednesday, 1 December 2004

(Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon Members, in the Strangers Gallery are students of NAADS Development Studies and they are accompanied by their lecturer. You are most welcome to your Parliament.  (Applause)

2.32
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a special note I rise to wage a formal protest over the way Government, notably the Ministry of Works, has up to now ignored the compensation of my people in Busega who are affected by the Northern by-pass. 

Mr Speaker, the construction of the said road has already began and in accordance with the agreement, which was made, and I have already accessed that agreement, between the Government of Uganda and the Development Partners, no construction was supposed to begin until the affected parties have been compensated. In the case of Busega, Mr Speaker, construction has begun and any time the affected eight people are going to be evicted without compensation. From time to time they have been getting warnings from the contractors, a point which is causing anarchy and torture in the minds of our people.  

Mr Speaker, would the ministry tell this House when my people will be paid. And if not, is the ministry aware that its failure to compensate the affected parties is a negation of the standing agreement between the EEC and the Government of Uganda?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of works -(Interruption)

2.34
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES(Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thank the hon. Member for the statement he has made, but as he realizes and everybody does, the Ministry of Works is not yet represented here and this is partly because questions like this should normally get due notice so that Members can get adequate and well researched answers. In the statement made by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, there is no evidence whatsoever that the people of Busega were ignored. We would like, first of all, to present to us evidence that he has been in touch with the appropriate authorities in the Ministry of Works and these people have ignored his pleas, and immediately action will be taken.  

Of course, you should also appreciate that there are so many people who were affected by the Northern by-pass and it is commendable in a way that the number he has quoted is so low that I am very sure that Government will have no problem dealing with these people if they are bona fide claimants for compensation.  Thank you, Sir.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the people referred to in Busega were deliberately omitted by the Valuers and the Government of Uganda through the Minister of Works, Engineer Nasasira. He officially accepted and acknowledged that omission. I would like to lay on Table that evidence in data.

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that hon. Lukyamuzi had a number of people living in his constituency who had some complaints about compensation. He forwarded the problem to the Committee and we took the initiative to visit the area together with him. But after getting to Busega he abandoned us; we went through all the 21 kilometres of the proposed Kampala Northern by-pass. However, we insisted that all those people who were not satisfied with the compensation should submit their complaints to Road Agency Information Unit, which has relocated from Communication House to Kitante Road, and gradually they are compensating virtually everybody. But the problem is that some of the people he is talking about do not have anything to show that they are the owners of the property; and I am sure when the Minister comes up, he will supplement what I am saying. Otherwise, the doors are still open, the money is there for compensation; so it is only the problem of hon. Lukyamuzi leading his people to the right place so that they could get their compensation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the hon. chairperson of the Committee on Works, I am surprised that he is talking without knowledge of what is on the ground. The letter, which I have laid on Table –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let this not generate an unnecessary debate.  If the list is there and the people are there, and the authority is to do the compensations there, please assist those people to go to the appropriate authorities for a settlement.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a point of emergency, and this is with regard to the auxiliary forces in the Teso Sub-region. I have looked around the House and I realize that the Minister of Defence is not present, but I believe the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister might be able to help me in this.  

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, some time last year when the forces of Joseph Kony invaded Teso, Teso in reaction decided to assemble a force now commonly known as Arrow Boys. The Arrow Boys were very effective in the fight against the insurgency and in response to that effort and considering the kind of challenges that they went through in the course of executing their work, a token amount of Uganda shillings 60,000 was paid per month to these forces; and I recall that there was a provision in the budget of Ministry of Defence for this money to be provided or set aside to facilitate the Arrow Boys. The situation on the ground, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, is that Government is in arrears of five months. This force has gone unpaid for five months, they are moving in tatters and many of them have lost morale and are beginning to think in terms of deserting the force. I think considering that the problem is still with us, Government needs to note this very seriously and to respond accordingly so that the few that are still left of the Arrow Boys should continue to be a force that would ensure security and safety of the people in the region. So, I really wanted a response from the Front Bench on this matter.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Alas! I wish these questions were drawn to the attention of the Minister of Defence, he would have got a well researched answer.  Under the circumstances, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to interface with the Minister of Defence and give an appropriate answer to that question.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: I think, Mr Speaker, I made a little bit of a mistake.  After thinking twice, I realized that the auxiliary force is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and I think the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is here present in the House; and I feel instead of waiting for the other Minister, maybe he could provide an immediate answer so that I am able to inform the people on the ground about what Government is doing to help the Forces out of this situation.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (INTERNAL AFFAIRS)(Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The Auxiliary Forces, the Arrow Group in Teso like others have been catered for through monies, which this Parliament has voted; and if you recall the last time we were discussing the Budget we had even to have a supplementary, but we did not get all the money that was required to cater for the entire Auxiliary Force.  Therefore, the money that was actually voted at that particular time was mainly for the current salaries, and there may have been some Arrow Group personnel who had arrears that were not paid with the money that we received.  

I may not be able to give you the exact figure as to what has been paid right now and what is pending, but the monies that you voted from here is what we used and this was dependent on the resource envelope that was available with the Ministry of Finance, what was requested was not all granted, so definitely there are gaps.  But I will further assess the situation the way it stands, especially in Teso region and also liase with my colleague, Minister of Defence, and then maybe give a more detailed answer, Sir.  Thank you.

MR WACHA: Supplementary.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think the Minister should not concentrate only on Teso region.  The problem that hon. Amuriat is talking about is widespread.  The Amuka Boys in Apac, for example, have not been paid for the last five months.  The Amuka Boys have not been catered for in terms of dressing, there is absolute shortage of foodstuff.  I am made to understand that they are given three mugs of beans to last for a week, I do not know how they manage that; this is a big problem.  The problem is such that if we are not careful, these people who are supposed to be catering for our security might be the cause of insecurity themselves.  These are very serious matters, and I do not see why the Minister says there could gaps.  If the money has been voted for and the salaries are supposed to be paid, they must be paid.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: You see, Auxiliary Forces, as you all realize, were taken on according to need of areas as problems arose; and even the issue of numbers kept changing due to the needs of different areas.  Therefore, what probably was even budgeted for, the initial number fell short because of increases in different areas, because of pressures that arose in the areas.  But then this is again not to isolate this one from the rest of what is happening to the entire country.  You know that the release of our resources has been slow; we operate a cash budget, as it comes in that is how it is spent. So, really the shortages I think should be understood. But then to tell hon. Ben Wacha that I am not talking about Teso Region alone, when I come, the answer will for the entire country.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On 17th of November I raised a matter of public importance and this was concerning the closing of institutions. When I raised that matter, many Members of Parliament also were concerned and we were promised by the Minister of Education to come with an explanation last week, but up to now we have not got it. Mr Speaker, some of us who have students in Technical Institutes and we pay school fees, these students were sent for holidays prematurely, two weeks to time, yet we had paid all the tuition fees, Mr Speaker.  Parents and us, Members of Parliament, are concerned.  Why do they not come up with an explanation?  They have already been sent home.  We paid school fees, now two weeks to the end of the term they are sent away.  Where does our money go, Mr Speaker?  

Secondly, students who are on Government sponsorship have almost enjoyed the benefits from the privately sponsored students all this time.  Mr Speaker, we want an explanation.  Since the State Minister for Primary Education is around, I think she can help me in particular, and maybe the House because so many Members were concerned.  I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION)(Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for raising that issue once again on this Floor.    But I would like to apologize, Mr Speaker, that the document where we want to give details of this issue has not yet been completed; I could not come with it today.  But I would like to say that we had another issue to explain to this Parliament on the 2nd of December, so both explanations will come in tomorrow, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ARUMADRI: Point of clarification.  Mr Speaker, my clarification was on the issue raised by hon. Amuriat.  I have heard variously from some leaders in the Teso Region that in that area, Kony is now no more.  I wanted a clarification as to whether it is in the interest of the economy to maintain Auxiliary Forces even where the threat has been eliminated?

THE SPEAKER: Since you are going to liase with the Ministry of Defence, why do you not comprehensively answer the same now?  I think it will be taken care of when the comprehensive answer is given to the question, hon. Member.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Point of information.  As a piece of information, Sir, to hon. Arumadri and to the House; as a matter of fact, the problems of security in Teso do not arise only from Kony, but also cattle rustling.  Cattle rustling has continued to prevail in the region, and just last week 172 cows were rustled from Ongogoja, one of the sub-counties in Usuk County; and so for us to begin to write off the Arrow Boys, is really making a mistake.  In any case, I know that Government is in the process of disarming Karamoja, and it could be a dangerous exercise to the civilians if the frontier between Karamoja and Teso is left open.  So, I would like to advocate that the Arrow Boys be maintained because we still have security concerns in the region.  That was the information, Sir, that I wanted to pass.

CAPT BASALIZA STEVEN: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am rising on a very serious national concern.  In today’s Paper, they are quoting General Salim Saleh having written to President Museveni not to go on third term, and from the reliable sources, which we have gathered, General Salim Saleh may not have done that one.  My constituents and Ugandans have called upon me to task the Minister of Defence or the Army Spokesman to clarify this issue.  Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the opportunity given to you to raise matters of urgency should not be overstretched really.  This matter can be handled differently, the Minister of Defence maybe will have to answer; but let us move on to other issues.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2003

Clause 14

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing an insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 13, a new clause 14 to be entitled “Supply of copies of Bill for Referendum under 259 and processing of Bill for Presidential assent.”  We propose, Mr Speaker, that Clause 14 should read as follows; 
“(1) Where a Bill is to be submitted to a Referendum under Article 259 of the Constitution, the Clerk to Parliament shall within 14 days after the Bill has been passed by Parliament, forward to the Commission a copy of the Bill as passed and cause the Bill to be published in the ‘Gazette’ and also in the media.

(2) The Clerk to Parliament shall, in the case of a Bill to be forwarded to the Commission under sub-section one, in addition to the statement issued by him or her under section 8 of the Act of Parliament Act, certified in a prescribed form that the Bill has been supported at the Second and Third Readings in Parliament by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament.

(3) Notwithstanding sub-section 2 of section 3, the question for the approval of a Bill referred to a decision of the people by referendum under Article 259(1)(b), shall be in the form specified in the second schedule to this Act.  

(4) The Commission shall take steps to hold a referendum under Article 259 of the Constitution within six months after receipt of the Bill and a certificate of the Clerk to Parliament under this section, or where doing so is impracticable within or for other period not exceeding six months from the expiry of the first period of six months.  

(5) Where the result of a referendum held for approving a Bill has been declared under section 8, the Commission shall within seven days after the declaration of the results.
 
(a) If the Bill was approved at the referendum forward to the Clerk to Parliament a certificate under Article 262(2)(b) of the Constitution in the form specified in part 8 of the Second Schedule to the Acts of Parliament Act in respect of the Bill or, 

(b) If the Bill was not approved at the referendum, forward to the Clerk to Parliament a statement in the prescribed form indicating that the Bill was not approved at the referendum.

(6) Where the Clerk to Parliament receives a certificate of the Commission under sub-section 5(a) that a Bill has been approved at a referenda, the Clerk to Parliament shall within 14 days after receipt of the certificate, forward the Bill to the President for assent, accompanied with the certificate of the Commission, together with the certificate issued by the Speaker of Parliament under Clause 2(a) of Article 262 of the Constitution, which shall be in the form specified in part 4 of the Second Schedule to the Acts of Parliament Act.”  

I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, on these detailed provisions of the new Article for clause 14, I would like to add on, because the Article reads “Supply of copies of Bill of Referenda” and if you look at the justification of this provision, it says, “To enable the voters to know what they are voting for or against”. Proposed clause 14(1) requires the Clerk to publish the Bill both in the Gazette and in media. Now, of course really when this is the Bill that is going to the public and you know the section of the people that reads the Gazette or the media, that is not enough.  So, that is why I would like to propose that we task the Commission to translate this Bill into four major languages in this country and to ensure that this Bill gets to the public.  

Secondly, to task the Commission to educate the public, in other words, carry out civic education, explaining to the people about the contents of this Bill because they are going to vote on them.  So, that is what the proposal –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think, hon. Member, for educating the public we dealt with that yesterday when they said there would be civic education at least for two months.  It was in your absence; we dealt with that one.  But now the issue is translating it into - how many languages?

MRS MATEMBE: I was suggesting four major languages.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which are these?

MRS MATEMBE: Of course Luganda language, for instance, then there is what they call Runyakitara, then there is Luo and Ateso –(Interjections)- you can help me, because you see, Mr Chairman, voting on a Bill by every Ugandan who does not know what they are voting on is really a mockery of democracy.  Therefore, I beg to move that we add on that one.

THE CHAIRMAN: But this civic education, would it not be conducted in local languages?

MRS MATEMBE: You see, when the Bill, like copies of these four languages are available -(Interjections)- please do not complicate matters, we must behave within our reasonable limits.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MRS MATEMBE: For instance, if this copy of Runyakitara is there and the people are educating the public using this very copy of Runyakitara, even the very people may access these copies and read for themselves.  It makes the understanding and the information circulation much easier than when the Bill is only in English.  Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, my amendment will cut across clause 14(1) and clause 14(6); “Where a Bill is to be submitted to a referendum under Article 259 of the Constitution, the Clerk to Parliament shall within 14…”, instead of “14” I would like to propose a month.  Mr Chairman, my justification is, democracy is about timing; it is also about scrutiny.  The more time you get to scrutinize a Bill before it comes law, the more you can rely on that law.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, I was of the view that we were considering the new clause 14 as proposed by the Chairman of the Committee, and I am not aware that we have disposed off that proposal yet, and yet hon. Lukyamuzi is proceeding to the clause 14 within the text.  Are we handling two clauses concurrently, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, because according to the Committee, they want this one to come before clause 14 in the Bill.  So if we pass this one, clause 14 in the Bill will become clause 15.  So, we have not come to clause 14, we are dealing with this one, which is between clause 13 and clause 14.  Thank you.  

So, hon. Members, you have heard the proposal of hon. Matembe.  First of all, she is talking about translation in languages and civic education, but we had covered that one so I think she is satisfied.  Maybe we may contribute on this.

MR NDEEZI ALEX (Representative of People with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am assuming that we are still dealing with the amendment from hon. Matembe.  Mr Chairman, I wish to say that I am a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  I also wanted to raise a similar issue in the Committee, but I was worried about financial implications.  But now that the matter has come back here, I also wish to agree with hon. Matembe and support her motion.  But I also feel that this motion should be upgraded to reflect our national character.  Upgraded from the point of view of my tribe, I want to add two more languages; one is Braille for the blind, another one is my own natural language, sign language.  (Applause).  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what should be done with the sign language?  I thought that this one can be dealt with during education, otherwise how do you print it?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: While I appreciate hon. Matembe’s proposal, they impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund as a public fund, and that is Article 93; and it would appear to me that under Article 93, that kind of arrangement can only be raised by Government.  Can you guide us, hon. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I can, because we are dealing with this Bill, which is owned by the Minister; and a Member in the House when the Minister, the owner of the Bill is here, is proposing that this can be improved.  So, she is marketing the idea to the Minister, that your Bill requires this for improvement.  So, there is no contravention here because we have yet to hear from the Minister whether she accepts this or not and for what reason.  But I think let us carry on with the debate, and then later that can come.

MRS MUKWAYA: While I was going to respond at a later stage, now that the Prime Minister has raised this issue, the Certificate that I got from Ministry of Finance did not cater for that expenditure because the expenditure would be reflected in the Human Rights Commission.  So, to put it in here and demand Electoral Commission was not part of the Certificate that Finance gave me.  So, I do not know how we are going to proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, this is going to cause problems because you may say your Bill might have proposed civic education for one week, but we have found it that one week may not be enough.  Have we not moved to say two months?  So, in the same way, if we are making a good Bill, I think the question of funds at this juncture should not come in.  If it is a good point, I think we consider it.  If it is going to cause expenses to Human Rights Commission as you say, I think we address it, otherwise then we shall be stuck.  No good proposal will come out because it will entail - they are marketing this idea to you, you just accept it on principle and then we proceed.  Otherwise, I see us being stuck somewhere.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with that Motion or proposal.  I am seeing a situation whereby it will create even more fears and division among the population of Uganda.  For instance, Mr Chairman, our Colleagues the Sebei people, the Bagisu people, in which group are you going to put them?  The Samias - I am comfortable I am a Muganda, I have been catered for, but how about my Colleagues?  If we are going to talk about four major languages, what were the parameters used to say this is a major language and the other one is not a major language?  Why do you not think of Swahili, which can cut across and cater for so many people?  Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose that submission. 

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  We are not dealing with a new scenario; this matter has a precedent.  The Odoki Draft Constitution was translated in a number of languages to help the population follow the Draft Constitution.  Now, if a Bill is coming for the amendment of the Constitution, it takes almost the same form of a Draft Constitution, and it can be handled in a similar manner Mr Akabwai handled the Draft Constitution.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, actually already Article 4 of the Constitution enjoins Government to translate the Constitution into local languages; a duty, which apparently Government has not undertaken up to now.  I think this is the time now to reiterate the command given in Article 4 of the Constitution.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, the problem is that this Article did not give numbers of languages because people attach sentiments on their languages. You take four and then others say this and the other. But can we not, honourable Members, cure this problem by insisting on civic education being conducted in local languages because the civic education envisaged here is that, you tell people why they are being asked, and therefore you must tell them the contents of the law in respect of which they are being asked to vote.  Do you not think that can solve - because since this civic education will be throughout the country, the local languages of each area maybe used and this may solve the problem so that you do not restrict yourself to four but maybe 50, depending on the local languages we have in the country; because somebody may say there is discrimination, you are talking about luganda, I am not this and the other, that kind of thing - I do not know, I am just suggesting.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I really want us to look at matters bearing our people in mind.  I am sure if those people were to be here, they would say at least some of the languages, I am telling you they would be saying that because some of them would even read for themselves. I remember, as hon. Mwandha said, we translated that Draft Constitution in different languages, I think they were about four, but there was no complaint.  People were enjoying reading and when we went they asked us questions because they knew they had been educated; they had known these matters.  

If you want to get a correct answer from these people, rather than just using them to say ‘yes’ or ‘no,’ if we want them to make a decision from an informed point of view, we should do our best to inform them; and in fact the issue of finances - I have always heard whenever we say ‘But the referendum for what, since for instance the District Councils can join with Parliament and they make a decision.’  I have been hearing from many of the honourable Members here, ‘No, democracy is very expensive, if we want it we must …’ now what has happened, hon. Minister and hon. Prime Minister?  Now you have just remembered that democracy is expensive.  

So, Mr Chairman, I am begging hon. Janat Mukwaya to at least agree with me once because what I am saying, I am saying it very seriously; it is for the benefit of the Ministry of Justice.  The other day we were discussing at a conference, they were talking on how best they want to reach people with justice, with law; this is one way, Madam, I am helping you my dear sister that we may translate this statute and even the lower people also at LC II, the women down there can read for the other women.  I am telling you, Mr Chairman, it will not cause any disunity, it has ever happened.  Hon. Bakkabulindi was not yet in these matters, he did not know that we translated these languages, so it does not cause disunity at all.  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and thank you hon. Matembe and Members for raising this concern.  It is true Article 4 of the Constitution mandated Government to translate the Constitution.  The Constitution was passed in 1995, to-date it has not been done.  We are suggesting to impose this same obligation in this law and put it on the Electoral Commission.  Suppose it fails to do it, just like the Government has failed in ten years to do it with the Constitution, what would happen?  

So, what we are saying is, in my opinion I have listened and understood the submission and even the sentiment of hon. Matembe’s submission. I agree with it entirely, but the question is, must we put it in the law or should we leave it as an administrative process that they have been doing?  The Draft Constitution was translated but there was no law that mandated anybody to translate it, but it was translated.  

In the interest of expediency and in the interest of us making these matters public and going out, would it not be prudent for these matters to be translated, but must it be put in the law? If you put it in the law the mandates change, and you are going to stall the process because there will be no translation and we will not be able to move and we have prescribed periods.  We have clear timelines, which we need to follow.  

Translation does not take one week, translation takes another period of time.  If they are going to process this thing as a process and have the civic education done in these languages it would be okay, but I would not be very comfortable with putting it in this law.  So, hon. Members, I urge you to support us on this and the position as has been raised should be stayed for purposes of practicality really.  Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: In support of the Committee, Mr Chairman, civic education will done in our major local languages - actually not major, all languages, because the Electoral Commission has offices in every district.

But, secondly, media does not mean only newspapers; the radios will be talking about this major issue.  So, with the 60 days of civic education with print and electronic media and us going out to explain to our people, I want to beg hon. Matembe that, you were once there in the Electoral Commission you know what it is, please support the Committee and I beg you to withdraw your amendment.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  We are talking about standardizing practice.  It would not be sufficient to leave this matter to just civic education; we want even the civic educators to have reference, and the reference will be the translated text of the Bill so that where error has been made we can trace the error.  These are delicate issues, which cannot be shadowed over.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but you have not addressed one issue.  I am sorry I am not to participate, but I trying to guide you. Now, when you talk about translation, how will you make sure the translation in Luganda is the same in Japadhola, it is the same in Ateso?  That may cause also a problem that, “For us in Ateso we got it that way.”  Do you not see a problem?

MR MWONDHA: There are people who have been specifically trained in matters of translation, and it is their job from which they earn a living.  They will be entrusted by this function; they are translators known as such.  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Sir.  In support of the opposition to the proposed amendment by hon. Matembe, I would like to submit that, Sir, there is a difference between what is ideal and perfect and what is practical.  I do not think it is right for us to provide for these translations in this proposal so that tomorrow a mere translation into one of the languages alone renders the whole exercise null and void.  Sir, Christianity has been in Uganda for more than 100 years.  There are many languages in Uganda in which the Bible has yet to be translated, does it make these people any less Christian than those who have got the Bible translated into their languages?

Therefore, Sir, I really totally agree with hon. Matembe that if we had the best circumstances and conditions every language in Uganda, I do not know how many of them there are in our Constitution – about 60 I am told – we should have everything thing, even Bills should be translated into the languages.  But you also know, hon. Members and Mr Chairman, that there so many activities in this country, which are translated into the local languages without any necessary provisions for them within the enabling laws.  Therefore that is not provided for in the enabling law does not mean that everything possible will be done in order to let people know what is provided.

Finally, Sir, for all these proposals there will be positions for and against, and I am sure in my mind that everybody will be doing their level best to educate their people as to the reasons for and against the proposed amendment.  Therefore, this is another valuable addition for our people to be aware of what is provided for in the proposed amendments, and therefore help the people to know more.  For me I would be only too ready to go to my people and explain –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and hon. Minister for clearing the way. The clarification I am seeking is in regard to what hon. Patrick Mwondha was submitting about supporting the four major languages.  Assuming you want to translate for Baganda and Basoga and you use the word ndala, will it mean the same?  I am seeking that clarification because ndala in Lusoga means a different thing and in Luganda it means a different thing.  Do you see the misinterpretation that you can create if it is not done for all?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think we have exhaustively dealt with this issue.  But I think we should also take care of Article 6 of the Constitution; the official language of Uganda is English.  The other problem we may have is if there are disputes about this translation and you go to court, the court must have a point of reference in deciding this issue.  Most likely, what language will be the point of reference?  The point of reference will be the English text.  We are confused because somebody may tell you, “Oh, they told us this is the meaning.”  This one also you should address, hon. Member, when you are making a contribution on this issue.  Let us end with this then I put the question.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance because we have been dealing with hon. Matembe’s motion, but we also have our motions added.

THE CHAIRMAN: We deal with one then we shall come to your motion.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, whatever has been going on only indicates that we still have a big problem in this country for unity because we do not have a common language, we do not want even to move towards having a common language, which is our local language; and we have included in the Constitution all the ethnic groups and we are going to add on others, and we cannot even afford to identify at least four because we cannot do justice to every small language.  But we cannot even identify four languages, which can be spoken – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are widening the debate on this issue.  Hon. Matembe was concerned about civic education, but we told her that had been catered for.  The other one was translating this in various languages, he was zeroing on four languages.  So, that is the motion, which we have, and I intend to dispose of it so that we can move.  So, I want to put the question –(Interruption)

MR YERI OFWONO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, in our Rules of Procedure, Rule 62, “All Members shall dress in a decent manner, that is that to say, a pair of trousers with a jacket, a shirt and a tie; Kanzu, jacket and safari suit for male Members.”   Is it in order for hon. Kajeke to dress the way he has dressed?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: It could be a new style of dressing, but I think it is neat.  (Laughter).  I want to put a question on the motion by hon. Matembe.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, when I looked at these proposals of the Committee, I found that there was something missing here –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Put it, please.

MR KIWALABYE: What happens if the President refuses to sign the Bill if presented to him, and this has ever happened in this country?

THE CHAIRMAN: The President has no power to refuse to sign a Bill over which a referendum has said yes; this is in the Constitution.  So, that is not an issue.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I was reading Article 91 and I found you could not apply Article 91 directly to this Bill because there are conditions attached to each of these.  Like Article 91(3(a), it has also some –(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and thank you, Mr Chairman.  Article 262(4), where in the case of a Bill to which Clause 3 of this Article applies and Clause 3 relates to the proceedings in Parliament and referenda and other things; where in the case of a Bill, which sub-clause 3 of this Article applies, “The President (a), refuses to assent to the Bill or (b), fails to assent to the Bill within 30 days after the Bill is submitted, the President shall be taken to have assented to the Bill and the Speaker shall cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and the Bill shall become Law without the assent of the President.”  It is provided for in the Constitution.  

MR KIWALABYE: Much obliged –(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in the existing Clause 14 of the Bill, in sub-clause (4), we proposed to delete the phrase “within 14 days” and insert “within 30 days” and there are other amendments, which we are proposing on the same clause.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe we go one by one.  Is it not better that way?  Now, you have heard that amendment.  I think the purpose is clear, he is increasing the days from 14 to 30.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the Committee proposes that immediately after sub-clause (4) in the existing clause 14, we insert the following – and, Mr Chairman, as a backdrop these particular provisions were discussed yesterday and the amendments from the hon. Members were inserted.  When we were discussing clause 11, very similar proposals came up and they were amended.  I will now read them taking care of what had been previously amended in the original clause 14.  I am proposing to insert after Clause (4) the following sub-clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you have something you bring it, let us dispose of his.  Let us get the Committee, before I pronounce the clause as amended, you bring in all other amendments and then we see where we place them.  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Sub-clause (5), “For the avoidance of doubt, it shall be sufficient for the purpose of sub-section (4) if the Commission ascertains whether the names of the persons who purport to have signed the petition appear on the national voters register for the purpose of the referenda.

(6) The Commission shall, notwithstanding sub-clause (5), display the petition with the list of the names and signatures supporting the petition in a public place in each polling station to which the referenda relate for public scrutiny for the period prescribed under sub-section (10).”  That prescribes the 14 days that hon. Members had proposed.

(7) A person who claims that his or her name was included in a petition without his or her consent, or that any of the names in the petition is that of a deceased person, shall lodge an objection in the prescribed form to the Commission.

(8) The Commission shall by notice in the Gazette appoint a period of not less than 14 days for the purpose of public scrutiny and lodging of objections under sub-section (6) and (7).

(9) If the Commission upon inquiry into an objection lodged under sub-section (7) is satisfied that the name of the person lodging the objection was included in the petition of his or her consent, or that the name of any deceased person is included among the persons supporting the petition, the Commission shall not count that person as one of the persons supporting the petition.

(10) A person who will include among the persons supporting a petition under sub-section (2) the name of a person without the consent of that person, or who knowingly includes the name of a deceased person among the persons supporting the petition commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.  I beg to propose.  

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like us to separate the person who is alive whose consent was not sought, from the person who is dead, because it is very easy to establish that the person was dead and yet the name is in the paper for that one who brought it in to really - it is a clear case, that is why I want to separate the two, and say if the petition contains a dead person that name of that dead person shall be removed and the one who put him there will have a punishment.  But for the person who is alive, I want to us to delete section 10.  Why?  It is imposing serious punishment, and the way I know our people these days somebody can deny you in broad daylight -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The only problem as I see, hon. Member – just information for you, because this formulation has been passed for a different purpose somewhere yesterday.

MRS MATEMBE: I can raise it again on -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No but you see, when you bring an amendment, it should not contradict an amendment that has already been passed.  There was something, which was passed, I think in respect of clause 9 or clause 11; that matter was considered yesterday in your absence.  Now, when you bring in this amendment now, it actually will be contradicting what was passed yesterday.  So what we can do is to maybe wait for a recommital should we think it is necessary, so that when we look at this amendment which you are proposing, we at the same time look at the amendment which was passed yesterday because we shall complicate the issue if now we do what we do when yesterday we passed another one.

MRS MATEMBE: It is unfortunate that yesterday I went away to attend to a very serious matter and I was not here, I would have raised this issue.  So, I give notice here that I will bring it on recommital because it is a very serious matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, before I effect the amendment, I need your guidance because the Chairperson has injected in so many unexpected amendments.  I had wanted to amend clause 14(1) in the report and clause 14(6), but then I heard the Chairperson injecting in -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you tell us what you want to amend.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to propose 30 days instead of 14 days, clause 14 (1) where a Bill -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Point of information.  The Chairperson has rightly put it that it is 30 days not 14 days, so hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s interests have been catered for.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, the Chairperson should have acknowledged my amendment because he ambushed me before I would justify.  (Laughter)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I wish to seek some indulgence on sub-clause (6) of clause 14 about any Speaker of a District Council, who in communicating any information under this section makes any statement, which he or she knows to be false in any material particular, commits an offence.  Mr Chairman, this is a very serious offence, very comparable to the offences that we dealt with yesterday in clause 13.  I therefore wish to move an amendment that the -(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: I would like to be guided on which clause the Member is dealing with so that I can follow because the clause that I have read does not contain the penalty for the Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr Chairman, I made it clear that I was raising sub-clause (6) in clause 14 in the text.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you see, when you read page 9 of the report, after sub-clause (4) of the original clause 14 they have substituted apparently whatever was there with what was read to us by the Chairperson, dropping apparently the other one. Do you not see it, because you see immediately - this is item number 15, existing clause 14, page 12.  It says, “Immediately after sub-clause (4) insert the following.  So, I think they are re-writing the clause as it is and I think dropping the clause, which you are complaining about.  Are we together?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, mine is quite different, it is not affected by what he is inserting, unless you are advising that you wish to dispose of his insertion first then I would bring in my amendment later on.  But it is not affected by his insertion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what was your position?  By what you read to us, were you deleting the others or they will come after?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we were just inserting so the proposals that are after that will remain.

THE CHAIRMAN: So that the present (6) would follow from where you ended; okay you can come in then.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I therefore wish to propose an amendment of the fine imposed under the text 14, sub-clause (8) of 12 currency points –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  How much?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: The text is imposing a fine of 12 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months. I am proposing that the fine should be the same as that in 13 namely, “48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”  The justification, Mr Chairman, is that any person wilfully giving wrong information in a charged atmosphere of a referendum could cause the same damage as that one who is using defamatory or inflammatory words.  Thank you.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, do I now take it that other ones have been approved then I can proceed to the –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought I put the question and they were approved. 

MR OULANYAH: I am sorry, Mr Chairman.  Now -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The ones you read for us.  

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I just have a drafting issue to raise because in clause (7) and clause (8) in the report, which talk about including names of deceased persons, Mr Chairman, the drafting should be such that the problem arises only when the name of a deceased person relates to someone who was deceased prior to the signing of the petition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR WANDERA: But from the way I heard it, it appears that whenever any name of a deceased person –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think, hon. Wandera, we explained yesterday that seven days before today somebody signed a petition and died because the date of the petition should be there; and therefore for you to raise something that the name of a dead person when you know that he just died yesterday when the petition was made 10 days, it has no merit because it does not mean when you sign a petition you cannot die, but it depends.  If you are supposed to have signed it when you actually you are just down, that is the case.  So, because somebody has died after signing the petition does not nullify.  It is only when you find out that at the purported date of signature, the person was no longer there.

MR WANDERA: I agree with you, Mr Chairman, but for avoidance of doubt I do not know whether the Chairman can draft a clause stating what you have said, for avoidance of doubt.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is not necessary.  If you bring it to me in court I will be able to show you the difference, and in any case it will be your case to prove that by the time this petition was made the person was dead.  Is it clear, hon. Wandera?  Yes.

MR MULENGANI: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I was seeking your guidance.  The circumstances under which the Bill was proposing to publish the lists of the signatories of the petition is to enable people to check whether they are rightfully on the list and be able to go and either claim that they are not rightfully on the list, they were purportedly put there by the petitioner.  Could it not be wise therefore that we also consider the suggestion by hon. Matembe that people may deny having signed the petition, possibly because of influencing their decisions?  Could it not be better if there is a time limit given beyond which if a person appeared on a list, even though he comes to withdraw his name or he objects to the appearance of the list, he would be objected?

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a question of evidence; whether you have drafted in or you are changing your position, that is different.  It is question of evidence, we cannot really go in evidence in this Bill; but for those people trained to decide they will be able to find it out.  

But something has been nagging me, that apparently as I was going to put the question on amendments by the Committee, hon. Lukyamuzi came in and then after we explained I did not put the question.  So, I think let us first of all deal with the amendments by the Committee so that we can dispose of the amendment by the hon. Member for Buikwe.  Now, I put the question on original Committee’s amendment read out by the Committee Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we deal with the hon. Member from Buikwe.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, actually, the hon. Member from Buikwe wanted to take a donation of our paragraph 16.  We had proposed an amendment, which he is now also proposing, so I do not know whether we should give it to him or I present it.

Mr Chairman, we had proposed that in the existing sub-clause (8), we delete the phrase, “A fine not exceeding 12 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both,” and insert “A fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”  The justification is that this is a district speaker; a district speaker falsifying records should have a severe penalty.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us give credit where it is due.  Since you have come in after the Member had raised his amendment, we can take it that the Committee agrees with the Member.  (Laughter).  So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, the original Clause 14(2) talks of a district council taking a decision and that decision submitted, but does not tell us who should do that; it is only in (6) where the speaker is mentioned.  So, I would like to add, “The Speaker of each District Council, which passes a resolution” under the original clause 14(2).  So, you specifically put that responsibility on the Speaker in that section, which corresponds with (6) where the Speaker is specifically again mentioned.

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought they said that, “Statements shall be certified by the Speaker of the Council” to be correct.

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, that is right, Mr Chairman.  But when you say, “Each District Council, which passes a resolution shall forward”, you are talking about the Council, but in that Council, I think the Speaker is the one - I was thinking of Parliament where the Clerk is in charge of this – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying, “The Speaker of each District Council, which passes…” is that how you want to start?  Any problem?  Therefore you will have to delete then the last part of the clause, because it is going to read, “The Speaker of each District Council, which passes a resolution … and then the statement shall be certified by the Speaker of the Council.”  Are we going to repeat, “Speaker” twice?  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I think the details will be in the drafting but you could say that, “The statement having been certified by the Speaker himself.”  But we have no objection to the proposal by hon. Mulengani.   

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?  

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, my concerns are on the same, but –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let us pronounce ourselves on this one, hon. Kiwalabye.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, Clause 14(8) says, “The Commission shall by notice in the Gazette appoint a period of not less than five days for the purpose of public scrutiny and lodging of the objections under Sections (6) and (7).  Mr Chairman, I find this a little bit disturbing – clause 14(8).

THE CHAIRMAN: We changed that.

MR OCHIENG: To 14 days?

THE CHAIRMAN: 30 days.  

MR OCHIENG: Fine, if it is catered for.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, should I put the question?  I put the question that original Clause 14 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

Clause 15

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the original Clause 15 and insert the following; “Change of political system by representatives of the people in Parliament and District Councils under Article 74(2) of the Constitution. 

Clause 15

(1) A petition to Parliament under 74(2) of the Constitution may be proposed by any registered voter or group of registered voters or by a district council.

(2) A petition to Parliament for a resolution for a change of the political system under Article 74(2) shall not be valid until it is supported by not less than two-thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all District Councils.

(3) The support of Members of a district douncil for a petition referred to in sub-section (2) shall be expressed by a resolution by the District Council supporting the petition. 

(4) Where a resolution referred to in sub-section (3) is passed by a district council, it shall be forwarded by the Speaker of the District Council to the Commission together with a certificate by the Speaker in the prescribed form stating the total membership of the District Council, the number of members who voted in support of the petition and the number of the members who voted against the petition.

(5) Upon receipt of a resolution and a certificate of the Speaker of a District Council under sub-section 4, the Commission shall verify the fact stated in the Speaker’s certificate.

(6) Where the Commission is satisfied that a petition is supported by not less than two-thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all districts in Uganda, the Commission shall certify to the Clerk to Parliament in a prescribed form that it is so satisfied and forward to the Clerk a copy of the petition.

(7) Upon Parliament passing a resolution in support of the petition referred to in subsection (6), supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall forward to the Commission a copy of the resolution certifying in a prescribed form that the resolution was supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.

(8) Upon receipt by the Commission of the resolution of Parliament forwarded under sub-section 7, the Commission shall within 48 hours cause the resolution to be published in the media and shall within 14 days cause the resolution to be published in the Gazette.
(9)A Speaker of a District Council who:

(a) In communicating any information under this section makes any statement, which he or she knows to be false in any material particular or; 

(b) While charged with the responsibility of communicating information under this section wilfully or knowingly omits to do so commits an offense and he is reliable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points of imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.

(10) So far as practicable, the provision of this Act relating to referenda shall apply with the necessary modifications to any proposals for a change in a political system under this section.”

I beg to propose. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, while talking about change of a political system, are we not legislating in vain because the Courts of Law have already pronounced themselves on this matter?  In fact, the Courts of Law have even gone ahead to say organs under the Movement as we know them now are organs of a political party. They have gone ahead to say that political parties are free to organize in this country.  Have they not effectively changed the system? 

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know, I have read the judgment myself, I think they were not disturbing the political system in the Constitution.  They were only saying that, the organs, which were created by the Movement Act, set up organs that are similar to political organizations.  They did not attack the system in the Constitution, but they talked about organs set up, that is, the Secretariat and this and the other, unlike the organs under the Political Organizations Act.  So, the system was not changed.  

But here this one is concerned about, for instance, if people want to change from the Movement political system as in the Constitution, what you do, because the procedure is laid down in the Constitution, that it can be done by petition by the district to the Parliament.  Once Parliament has agreed with the petition from the District Council, then the political system is changed without any other action. Otherwise, if you have changed from Movement political system as it exists now, you have to go to a referendum.  So, here this particular provision apparently as I see it is providing for the mechanism from the procedure of making the petition to Parliament and Parliament agreeing with the petition.  I hope it is clear. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I have got one amendment, but I also need some clarification before I move the amendment. I do assume, Mr Chairman, that this Referendum law we are formulating today should be the last chapter of referenda related to the change of a political system. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Member, I told you last time when you were making a contribution on this because you are against the referenda, I said, “No, we have not come to that stage because the referendum is provided for in the current Constitution.”  It may be a good idea, it may not, but time will come when we are addressing a review of the Constitution so you can persuade your colleagues to delete wherever there is a referendum or referenda from the Constitution.  But before this is done we have to make a law to operationalize what is in the Constitution, and this is exactly what we are doing now.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I will take that advice, when time comes I will appropriately persuade hon. Members to support me.  I would like to amend sub-section (8).  Mr Chairman, we are dealing with a very difficult situation, the perception of a referendum should come only when it has to come; regularized referenda are not very healthy for a very good constitutional arrangement.  So, my amendment is that where we have proposed 48 hours we should substitute that with one week, and where we have speculated within 14 days it should be 30 days because you really need to scrutinize these things for posterity.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard; the essence of the amendment is to increase time, which you have mentioned.

MR MUSISI: Mr Chairman, having noted your observations from the Court ruling and the same observation by hon. Patrick Mwondha, I beg for a degree of guidance.  Is it not futile to now legislate for a system that has never existed? 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, as I have told you, the judgment was concerned with organs that were created under the Movement Act; the Movement Act came after the Constitution.  The judgment of the Court was not talking about the system in the Constitution; it was talking about organs, which we set up under the Act.  It did not say that a system is not there because subsequently the Supreme Court had to deal with judgment of the Constitutional Court, and it upheld the referendum; the referendum was about maintaining the system.  So, the system was actually confirmed by referendum, which the Supreme Court upheld.  So, there is a system.  So, what may bother you –(Interruption) 

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, may I be clarified whether the Member means that Court amended the Constitution?   

THE CHAIRMAN: What?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: By the judgment my Colleague across is referring to, did Court amend the Constitution, because I have not read this judgment myself?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think he has understood.  The Court interprets the Constitution because in the Constitution, 1995, they said they shall set organs of the Movement system, and then subsequently the Sixth Parliament passed the Movement Act, that is, to set up organs of the system.  So, the Court was concerned with organs that were set up as organs of the system.  So, they were not concerned with the system and I think he has understood; and then subsequently the Constitutional Court nullified the referendum because of the Referendum Act.  But subsequently the Court said no, the results of a referendum were valid; there was an exercise, which was carried out, and that exercise was to say whether the Movement System should continue.  So, there is a system; I think the problem is about organs.  

I put the question to the proposed amendments by the Committee and as subsequently amended.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Does that include my amendment?
  
THE CHAIRMAN: Which amendment?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have inserted an amendment.
  
THE CHAIRMAN: Which one, the hours?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, on (8), is it inclusive?

THE CHAIRMAN: What did you not accept?

MRS MUKWAYA: For the Chairman to respond, because hon. Lukyamuzi wants to amend (8) to increase from 48 hours to one week and from 14 days to 30 days, and we were going to raise an objection through the Chair.  That is why he was standing up.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, what sub-clause (8) is dealing with is, when the Commission has received from the Clerk of Parliament the resolution of Parliament, should the Electoral Commission sit with it for one week?  That is why we have proposed that upon receiving it, it should within 48 hours cause this to be known to avoid anxiety in the public.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, it was concerned with what we do here –(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: I heard the reason hon. Lukyamuzi gave, and if we wait for seven days, then it is against the reason you gave.  48 hours is the best option, unless you make it 24 hours or something like that, but not seven days.  Unless you decrease the hours, that is when it would make sense, but if you increase the days, then you mean it should not be available to the public.  (Laughter)  So, please drop the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let me do this, let us put the question on the amendment by hon. Lukyamuzi on sub-clause (8).

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let me put the question that clause 15 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the long title of this ‘Referendum and other Provisions Bill’ seeks to help to operationalise Articles 74 and 76.  I am seeing the manner in which we are bringing the amendments, in some parts we are specifically mentioning that Article 74(2), Article 76 in the law we are trying to make, and yet there is a possibility that the Constitution will undergo amendments.  So, I see a situation where in less than five months we might have to validate this particular exercise we are doing.  I see it as very costly, and I do not know if you had a second thought on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, there will be no problem.  If the Constitution is amended, we have to conform to the provision of the new regime in the Constitution, so it is adjusted.

MR ODONGA OTTO: What I am driving at is, could there be a way where we do not specifically zero down that 74(2)?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we cannot because we are talking about an existing Constitution, as of now that is the position and it is the Constitution. This law is trying to operationalise the existing Constitution, but maybe six months from now we may change it then it will become redundant -(Interjection)- no, we shall not come back.  That particular provision will be read in conformity with the new Constitution.  

I put the question that clause 16 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17

MR OULANYAH: On clause 17, Mr Chairman, immediately after sub-clause (2), we propose to insert the following:

“ (3) Where a change of political system has been effected under Article 74 of the Constitution, any enactment relating to elections shall have effect with such modifications as may be necessary to give effect to the change in accordance with this section.  

(4) The Minister may, with prior approval of Parliament, make such regulations as may be necessary for ensuring a smooth transition from the previous political system to the newly adapted political system, and may for that purpose modify any existing enactment.”  

I propose.    

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I would want us to delete (3) because a change of a political system will certainly change everything fundamentally; and in my view that enactment relating to elections will have to be amended and we make a new one.  So, when I see a provision saying that – first of all I did not understand what it really means when I read it -(Interjection)- come on, I know what I am talking about; yes, you know I am a lawyer.  So, Mr Chairman, when you read this provision - I put there ‘What does this really mean?’  Because once you change a political system and we go to, say, multiparty, everything in that Act must change.  So, when it reads that, “Any enactment relating to election shall have effect with such modifications as may be necessary to give effect to the change in accordance with this section.”  I do not see this possible because it will be a new thing altogether.

THE CHAIRMAN: My understanding, hon. Member, as the Chairperson of the Committee is here, is that he is saying, if for instance there is a change from Movement system to another system, we have Presidential, we have Parliamentary Elections Act, Local Government Elections Act; there are a number of provisions there that are tied to the system.  For instance, the candidate, you go on individual merit and this and the other.  So, when you are talking about modifying, that law controlling Presidential Elections, that law controlling Parliamentary Elections will have to be modified.  Of course modified, you can say by implication, but it maybe better that you effect it by direct amendments in the Bill, but again you have to have modified, so that the law dealing with elections under a Movement system does not continue; you adjust it to the new order.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, of course I understand what you are saying.  But do you say that in this really, because once the system has changed, there is need for a new election law.  Have you always provided for Laws, which we want to make as a result of changes? 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, this is a matter of drafting.  When you are dealing with transitions, before you actually effect the major amendments to the major laws, the law cannot have a vacuum.  Between the date that the resolution is passed changing a system to the date that you are amending the Parliamentary Elections Act, there cannot be a vacuum.  Now, this is meant to cure that vacuum, that what should have been a vacuum; and a similar provision is actually in section 98 of the Parliamentary Elections Act.  If you look at it you will find it is actually verbatim.  Why, because you might take six months before you amend the Electoral laws like if you look at the roadmap that has been presented.  What happens in that period?  Nature abhors a vacuum.

THE CHAIRMAN: For instance, if there is a vacancy, Members of Parliament, and you have to do it in 30 days, what do you do?  This is I think what he is saying?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I need your guidance, and very serious guidance.  It is true that we have to formulate a law, which will direct the people of Uganda about how they will go on effecting a referendum, namely; the Referendum of Political System.  Do you envisage another scenario of a change from one political system to the other after the last coming Referendum?  If not, because I believe we have some scientific capacity to predict some scenarios, we should not talk from no quantified ground.  This is a global arrangement where the existence of diverse political systems is a common feature all over the world; and when we move from the Movement to the multiparty system, I do not anticipate any scientific experience where we would again exercise an election on a political system.  I want anybody to convince me whether that can happen, and I need serious data to that effect.  Otherwise, I want to effect an amendment after I have got –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, we are not speculating anything because you very well know we had a multiparty system from 1962 to 1971, then we had a Military regime 1971 to 1979, we had a multiparty system 1980 to 1986, then we went to a Movement system 1986 to now.  So, when you are inviting this Member to speculate what might happen, I think that may be demanding too much.  So, what we do, let us address the things as Parliament, other things are not within our powers to speculate and we have to legislate now.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, finally, my impression is, the situation you are anticipating, if it ceases to be a multiparty system, it will be a military situation and you cannot legislate on a military situation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what was your amendment?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I wanted an answer, which would guide me to that amendment, but the answer you have given me cannot help me to effect a new amendment.

MR RUZINDANA: This amendment has got two parts.  The first one is on regulations and that one is okay, but the next one is to modify any existing enactment.  Now, that is amendment of the laws that are in place.  I am not sure we can do that because if the Minister can do it, then the Minister can bring a Bill to Parliament because it needs prior approval of Parliament.  So, why not bring a Bill for the amendment of existing enactment?  Regulations, that is okay; but existing enactment being amended by the Minister, I think that is not what the Chairman intended.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, what is intended here before actually even the Bill is drafted, because you are not going to go to this thing while you are already drafting a Bill because you do not know the nature of the decision.  Once the decision is taken, preparations for amendment of all laws will begin; Electoral laws, whatever laws, even people are suggesting the Police Act needs to be amended, all those number of laws have got to be amended.  They need time to prepare that.  Now, in the meantime there should be transitional provisions and that is the essence of this proposal, which I said is similar to section 98 of the Parliamentary Elections Act.  If I can read just one; section 98:

(1) “Where a new Political System is adopted in accordance with Article 74 or Article 271 of the Constitution, the provisions of this Act and any Statutory Instrument made under it shall have effect subject to such modifications as may be practical and necessary to give effect to the adoption of the new political system.  

(2) Where a new political system is adopted as referred to in sub-section (1), the Minister may with prior approval of Parliament make such regulations as may be necessary for giving effect to the change in the political system for the purposes of this Act and may in particular, subject to sub-section (1), where necessary by such regulations, make different provisions for campaigning than what is prescribed under this Act.” 
This is for the interim period to take care of it.  So, if the law comes then you amend it, this particular provision stops to apply because there is a substantial amendment there.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruzindana, I suspect that maybe they were trying to borrow what you see in Article 274 of the Constitution.  I hope you have the copy of the Constitution.  Hon. Members, it reads as follows; “The first President elected under this Constitution may within 12 months after assuming office as President, by statutory Instrument make such provision as may appear necessary for repealing, modifying, adding or adapting any law for bringing it into conformity with the Constitution or otherwise, for giving effect to the Constitution.”  I think that is the kind of policy that is being borrowed here, but eventually the modification has to be done by Parliament.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, if the modification is with prior approval of Parliament, why would the Bill not come and then the modification, because these modifications actually mean amendment of the law, and they are with prior approval of Parliament.  So, why does Parliament not just enact amendments to that law?  

THE CHAIRMAN: You are saying that power to make laws is vested in Parliament or to the authority authorized by Parliament?

MR RUZINDANA: Yes.  If we want to maintain this, then we should create a (5); the (4) becomes for regulation and then five for amending existing enactment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we separate, you think?  Is there any problem in separating the two?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, there is no problem.

MR RUZINDANA: In addition, Mr Chairman, if you read (3) it actually caters for that last one in (4); (3) caters for the modification of existing enactment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I am asking whether the hon. Augustine Ruzindana would be comfortable if I took out the last phrase, “and may for the purpose of modifying existing enactment.”  I propose that be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Alright, now I put the question to the proposed amendment by the Committee as modified subsequently.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 17 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 as amended agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to insert immediately after Clause 18 the following part – and I will need a glass of water on this.  Mr Chairman, we propose to insert part (4), which will relate to ratification of Bills by District Councils under Article 260 of the Constitution.  Article 19: 

(1) Where a Bill to which Article 260 of the Constitution applies has been passed by Parliament in accordance with Paragraph (a) of Clause 1 of Article 260 of the Constitution, the Clerk to Parliament shall, within 14 days after the Bill is passed, forward to the Commission a copy of the Bill as passed.

(2) The Clerk shall under sub-section (1) certify in addition to the statement issued by him or her under Section 8 of the Acts of Parliament Act in the prescribed form, that the Bill has been supported at Second and Third Readings in Parliament by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament.

(3)  Upon receipt of the Bill forwarded under sub-sections (1) and (2), the Commission shall cause copies of the Bill to be made and forwarded to each District Council in Uganda for ratification.

(4) The Commission shall be responsible for ensuring that the ratification of a Bill by District Councils under this section is carried out in a transparent manner.

(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), the Commission shall appoint or cause to be appointed Returning Officers and other Election Officers as may be necessary and with such instructions as may be necessary for giving effect to sub-section (4).

(6) A Presiding Officer appointed by the Commission shall be present when the resolution for the Ratification of a Bill under this section is being voted on, and shall record in the prescribed form a statement indicating the total membership of the District Council, the names of the members of the council and the number of the members who voted in favor of the resolution and the number of the members who voted against the resolution.

(7) Notwithstanding sub-section (2) of section 3, the question in a Motion for a resolution to be submitted to the District Council for ratification of a Bill under Article 260(1)(b) of the Constitution shall be in the form specified in the Third Schedule to this Act.

(8) The statement referred to in sub-section (6) shall be certified by the Presiding Officer to be correct.

(9) The Commission shall be responsible for bearing the expenses of the District Council for the purpose of voting on ratification of a Bill under this section.

(10) Any Election Officer who is carrying out any duty of recording the votes of a District Council under this section knowingly makes a statement, which is false, or who makes a statement in respect of which he or she is reckless whether it is true or false commits an offence.

(11) Any person who commits an offence under this section is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.

(12) The Commission shall, after tallying the results of voting on the Bill by District Councils under this section, if satisfied that the required number of resolutions have been passed in accordance with paragraph (b) of Clause 1 of Article 260 of the Constitution, certify to the Clerk to Parliament in the form specified in part (9) of the Second Schedule to the Acts of Parliament Act that the Bill has been duly ratified by at least two thirds of the members of the District Council in each of at least two thirds of all districts of Uganda.

(13) If the Commission, after tallying the results of voting on a Bill by the District Council under this section is not satisfied that the Bill has been ratified in accordance with paragraph (b) of Clause 1 of Article 260 of the Constitution, the Commission shall certify to the Clerk to Parliament in the prescribed form that it is not so satisfied and state the number of resolutions supported by two thirds of the members of the District Councils and those not so supported, or the cases where no resolutions were passed under this section.

(14) Where the tallying of the results of voting on the Bill indicates that the Bill is not supported by at least two thirds of the members of the District Council in each of at least two thirds of all the districts in Uganda, the Bill shall be taken not to have been ratified for purposes of Article 260(1)(b) of the Constitution.

(15) The Commission shall, within 48 hours after issuing a certificate under sub-section (12) or (13), cause the certificate to be published in the media and shall within 14 days cause it to be published in the Gazette.

(16) The Clerk to Parliament shall within 14 days after receipt of the certificate of the Commission under sub-section (12) forward the Bill to the President for assent, accompanied by the Certificate of the Commission issued under sub-section (12), together with a certificate issued by the Speaker of Parliament under Articles 262(2)(a) of the Constitution, which latter certificate shall be in the form specified in part 7 of the Second Schedule to the Acts of Parliament Act.
  
(17) The provisions of this Act relating to referenda shall apply with the necessary modifications to any proposals for ratification of a Bill under this part.”
 
I propose.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I do not in any way intend to contradict the Bill, a submission I have signed for, but I just wanted a simple clarification on (10), where it says, “Any Election Officer, who in carrying out any duty of recording votes of a district council under this section knowingly makes a statement, which is false or makes a statement in respect of which he or she is reckless, whether it is true or false…”  I seem not to understand the mischief here, is it recklessness, is it being reckless with the truth or it is being reckless with the false aspect because I do not see any problem of being reckless with the truth unless you are an intelligent Officer?

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe before the Chairman replies, I think it is courteous to mention that we have pupils and their teachers of Buwundo Primary School, Mukono District, Buikwe West Constituency.  I think they are in the Gallery; you are welcome.  (Applause).  Chairman, can you respond?

MR OULANYAH: There are two aspects to this clause.  There are two levels of criminal responsibility that are being established; one is knowingly, you know it is false you go and do it, and the second is reckless, you want to penalize people who recklessly make statements, whether the statement they make is actually right or false but they are reckless about it; ao that is what we want to stop.

THE CHAIRMAN: I see, it is a way of, for instance when you have an accident and you are suing somebody you say negligent and/or reckless, so that if the evidence adduced shows not really knowledge but did not care, so you convict on not taking necessary care and then it is the punishment that - if it is knowing, I think it is more serious than being reckless, but sometimes you are not allowed not to be reckless.  That is why they have combined these in the same.

MR RUZINDANA: In the same vein, this new clause, sub-clause (4), the Commission is being given the responsibility to ensure –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, hon. Odonga Otto?  Let us clear him and then we come to you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I understand your explanation, but I wonder why we do not leave the offence to be reckless other than going ahead to say “reckless with the truth or reckless with false information” because the elements of recklessness are clear in the minds of any lawyer, what constitutes recklessness. For example, if you drive through the traffic lights, when the lights are red, that is already recklessness; we do not need emphasis to say, “When the lights are red”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Of course if it is true, then there is no problem. The problem comes only when it is false. I think they are trying to say, if you are handling this matter, please take some care.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I want to be helped.  Can the chairperson of the committee give me a situation where I am reckless with the truth because the truth is the truth and it frees society?

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are not just talking about the man on the street or a man sitting on a bus, we are talking about any election officer who is carrying out any duty and he is reckless with the truth. For example, if there are prescriptions as to how you declare results, then you run to the Radio Station and declare yours there, you would be reckless with the truth because under the Rules, you cannot do that, you should not do that; you have the guidelines. It is the truth, yes, but you have acted in a reckless manner with that truth. That is an example, Sir.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, then the charge there would be negligence of duty and not recklessness because if there is a manner in which you are to declare the results, you cannot do otherwise.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because these facts will have to go for adjudication, the person who is presiding over this will be able to categorize whether it was negligence or whether it was recklessness, and definitely it is not our work, but the two scenarios can be there.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, surely somebody speaking the truth and being punished! I have never heard of this. Really, let us be serious. This word “reckless” should not cover somebody who is doing a truthful job; it should be removed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Accidentally he is reckless, but accidentally it happens to be true.

MRS MATEMBE: So why should I be punished for the truth? It should be removed for goodness’ sake.

THE CHAIRMAN: And should it not attract a complaint?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, for those who have not suffered with reckless truth, they do not appreciate this. Tallying of results; people are over anxious, they go announce different results, the real truth comes after some time and then there is already confusion -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, then that is not true. I think, Mr Chairman, the example the hon. Minister has put forward points to the fact that the person was so reckless, delivered wrong information, maybe even somebody had an attack and died; and yet in the end she had won elections, she misses being in Parliament. If it is true, the “recklessness” you are talking about has turned out to be wrong after all and you can punish that one, but not “reckless truth”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. chairperson, hon. Minister, the position Members are putting it is this: Reckless that he was so fast to go and declare, even when you crosscheck, you find that what he declared is the correct thing, then how do you take him to court?  That is what is bothering them.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, you have regulations and guidelines for the officers carrying out these processes and then a particular officer - let me use the same example, I thought that was fairly illustrative - outside these guidelines, the particular officer goes to a radio station and announces the correct results there. The responsibility of announcing results is the duty of either the Returning Officer or the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, and this officer has acted recklessly but with the truth. You are punishing the recklessness because he should not have done it, but he did it.  

MRS MATEMBE: Sir, when that happens there are rules of punishing employees for goodness’ sake, because if this is an employee of the Electoral Commission, when they go back in their office they say ‘You did wrong,’ they put administrative measures on the person. Surely, Mr Chairman you cannot insist that we include this word of ‘recklessness.’

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairman, for instance if you change the formulation and you say, “which is false” or “who recklessly makes a statement”; they are bothered with this truth.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, originally I was not going to talk about this one, but the problem is not (10), the problem is linking (10) to (11); that this officer who has maybe released results wrongly should not be imprisoned for two years or be fined 48 currency points; I think it is the problem of linking this (10) to (11).  Otherwise, I think it is true that a person can recklessly declare something, which is true, in an inappropriate way.  But should that person be imprisoned for two years or be fined? I think that is the problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruzindana, our problem on (11) is “a fine not exceeding.”  When they say not exceeding, that is the limit, the maximum.  But it is within the discretion of the Judge or Magistrate to even impose a caution or a small fine.  So, this is a ceiling rather than the minimum.  You leave it to the discretion of the Court.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also wanted to give an example of where the truth is not necessarily appropriate. For example, in the United States of America they have various time zones, and therefore when the voting has ended in New York it is three hours behind in California, and they used to have exit polls that would grossly – these exit poles would be accurate but they would grossly influence the voting pattern in these States.  Therefore they have found it prudent to impose a ban on the television networks from exit polling.  Although they may say the truth, but they are adversely influencing the voting pattern in these States.  Therefore, it is not always right to say the truth; it matters how you say it and where you say it –(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to give information.  On the 12th December 1980 at 4.00 p.m. the Head of State of that time, Paulo Muwanga, announced that anybody letting out the results before the official announcement would be charged in Court and would pay 0.5 of a million or be imprisoned for five years.  So, they were punishing anybody who would say the truth at a wrong time.

THE CHAIRMAN: Anyway, hon. Members, how do we solve this?  We are taking a lot of time.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, maybe you could guide us on this because I do not see a problem with this, but people see a problem with it and we need your guidance on this.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to make a small contribution.  Mr Chairman, what I get from hon. Kityo is that we are putting what Mr Paulo Muwanga had at that time into Law.  We are now just legalizing it, and yet we are trying to cure that problem that was existing at that time.

Two; on (11) the penalty is quite punitive for someone who has recklessly told or said the truth.  Two years; you can find a Judge or Magistrate, who will give that maximum sentence, will find it very punitive for someone who has told the truth though recklessly.

THE CHAIRMAN: This punishment under (12) as I have told you is not mandatory, it is only putting a ceiling.  The Judge or Magistrate can caution you, can fine you 10 shillings, but the maximum beyond which he cannot go is the sum, which is stated here; he can caution you.

MR OKUPA: But my problem is, if the Magistrate is also reckless or is supportive of the thing, he can impose the maximum penalty, which I feel is unfair.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then if he is reckless and has badly used his discretion, it can be a ground of appeal against the sentence.  

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would suggest that we amend and it will read as follows; “Any officer, who in carrying out any duty of recording the votes of a District Council under this section knowingly makes a statement which is false, or makes a statement in respect of which he or she is reckless, commits an offence.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr chairman, I am seeking clarification on (4) that, “The Commission shall be responsible for ensuring that the ratification of a Bill by District Councils under this section is carried out in a transparent manner.”  Mr Chairman, I would like the Chairman to explain what he meant by a transparent manner because I have not seen whether the voting is going to be by secret ballot or by open ballot; so it must be specific.  The pattern of voting, how is it going to be?  Is it a secret ballot by District Councils or an open voting so that it is known? 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we are trying to foresee a problem and stop it.  You could have a District Speaker, who goes to a drinking place in his house or wherever and collects the necessary signatures and presents it as the resolution.  All you want to do is that actually there was a meeting convened and a resolution passed by a sitting council, not just a paper presented whose source is not known because it can be done.   Somebody can go to a – in fact even individually look out for the Councilors to sign.  So, you want to stop this, so it should be transparent, just like to proceedings of this House that it has come with a resolution.  

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, it is not clear because if we are saying that it must be a sitting council, that Councillors should give up their signatures maybe publicly so that nobody will come afterwards and say, “This is not my signature.”  But, Mr Chairman, do you not see that there is a need for some kind of secrecy in as far as carrying out this voting is concerned?  This is my source of worry.  So, it is going to be –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you not think that the Councils have got their procedures of making decisions?  Do you want now to interfere with their procedures?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, even the Electoral Commission has procedures but we are kind of trying to make sure that they are transparent in as far as they are trying to do is concerned.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, much as we want really to legislate for everything, but let us not also usurp powers, which are given to institutions.  The District Councils in the Local Government Act are mandated to make procedures, like we have been telling the Courts that Parliament has their own procedures and we are mandated.  So, let us not interfere with the District Management because they are empowered.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment on 3(4), that it should be deleted because of the following reasons; one, both Parliament and the District Councils have constitutional roles to play in regard to the referenda.  Two, Mr Chairman, the Local Government Act and the Rules of Procedure of each District Council are standing procedures, which must not be ignored.  So, if you subject this scrutiny under (4) to the District Councils, you should equally subject the same to Parliament.  So, the provision here is redundant and I propose that it be deleted.  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  The process of doing this thing is supposed to be monitored by the Electoral Commission, that is, the proposal in the law; and we have already passed many provisions, which support the role of the Electoral Commission in monitoring the process.  So, it is not an ordinary resolution of the District Council, but it is a resolution in this respect where you have appointed Officers to come and monitor what is going on.  So, that is the distinction.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question to the proposal that we delete.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, this transparent manner is alright, but I think we are placing too general a responsibility on the Commission.  Maybe we could define it a little better, either by saying that this section is carried out in a transparent manner at a sitting of a district council or in a sitting of a district council, whichever is the right article there, because wherever the process may be taking place I think it should be when the council is sitting or in accordance with the rules of the District Council or something like that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Can you deal with that?

MR OULANYAH: I just wanted to know whether the hon. Member is not satisfied with (5) because we are leaving the discretion to the Electoral Commission to issue instructions on what these people should do in order to establish this trend of transparency under (5).   I do not know whether that does not satisfy you.  

MR RUZINDANA: If you see the earlier part that covers Parliament, for example, (2), “The Clerk shall under sub-section (1) certify in addition to the statement issued by him or her … that the Bill has been passed, supported at Second and Third Readings in Parliament by not less than two thirds”, that is specific.  Now, we do not have something specific with relation to Council.  So, you have attempted to provide it by stating ‘in a transparent manner.’  Now, ‘in a transparent manner’ is not as exact as in (2), and therefore to make it exact, we need to qualify it by saying that, “in accordance with the District Council regulations or in accordance with the law in a transparent manner at a sitting of the District Council” or something like that.  Otherwise “a transparent manner” is too general.  I am attempting to save the Commission from giving it responsibility, which is not exactly defined.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Hon. Members, could this help you maybe if you delete after the second sentence and you say “at a duly convened council meeting?”  Can that satisfy you?  Is it okay?  You say, “The Commission shall be responsible for ensuring that the ratification of a Bill by the District Councils under this section is carried at a duly convened council meeting” - something like that.

MR OULANYAH: That is okay, Mr Chairman.  

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am not happy with sub-clause (5).

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we dispose of (4) before we go to (5)? Shall I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am not happy with this (5) because I think it is redundant.  The Electoral Commission in its performance of its duties to hold elections, appoints Returning Officers or whatever type of Officers.  Why do we put it here that the Electoral Commission should do this, should appoint this, should appoint that, when it is already their duty? 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the point, hon. Members, is that if you have agreed with (1), that it is at a duly convened meeting, a duly convened meeting is presided over by the Speaker of the district. Now, when you say, will the Returning Officer be the person to preside over or will he be present, are you saying that these meetings should be in the presence of the Returning Officer?  Is he going to sit in the Chair with the Speaker when the Council is carrying out its function as a District Council? I think that is the point he is trying to raise.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, what I think Colleagues will have to appreciate is that, this is not a normal council sitting so that is why we are charging the Electoral Commission to manage the process and also finance it.  With this new amendment, which we have just agreed to in (4), while it is true, but I think (5) is important because this is an election managed by the Electoral Commission.  So, I do not see the contradiction.

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Chairman, the District Council has its jurisdiction, and when it is conducting its meetings it has its rules of procedure.  Now, I do not see why the Electoral Commission comes in to even appoint Presiding Officers to oversee the elections and debates during that time.  Why do we not leave the District Council to decide without the intervention of Electoral Commission?

THE CHAIRMAN: We can do this, what we need is the presence of these people when the exercise is going.  Can we say, “in presence of?”

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  All that this proposal is making is that the process will be monitored; I think that is agreed.  The process of getting these resolutions supporting this particular procedure is going to be monitored; I think we agreed on that.  Now, what this clause is providing for is that process of monitoring.  How will it be monitored; and in clause (5) we are saying the Electoral Commission will appoint and give instructions to its Officers who will be in these Councils to monitor without voting, without saying do this, but they will monitor and report to make sure that it was done in a proper way.  That is what it is saying; it is not saying anything else. 

DR KEZIMBIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not know why we want to reduce this to mere monitoring.  This is an important election that is taking place in this Council.  We are moving from Parliament to the Councils to effect a definite process and this is an election and the Electoral Commission must take charge and have even Officers who are taking charge of this, not just sitting there to monitor.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are the minutes of this process not going to be minuted as minutes of the Council?  Is the Council being coerced, because this has to be voluntary?  That is why you find that certain Councils may not act because they do not think it is necessary.  But they have to be witnesses that the process is the duly expected process.  I think they are asking you, is he going to preside over a Council meeting because this is done in a Council meeting.  So, who takes charge?  Is it the Election Officer or the Speaker of that Council?  I think these are the issues, which I think you have to solve.

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have a feeling that the exercise of having two thirds of all halves of Councils in Uganda to sit down to think they should change political system, first of all, is not easy unless it is stage-managed.  We are imagining a spontaneous exercise emerging from all District Councils.  Now, to create an artificial scene where you have Returning Officers coming in Electoral Commission vehicles filling the Council Halls, it makes it so synthetic that even the Councillors themselves would not believe in what they are doing.  So, I would suggest and move therefore, that an amendment be made and change the word ‘Returning Officers’ to ‘Monitoring Officers’ or ‘Observers’ because I do not see any other purpose of a Returning Officer where the Councils are deliberating on their issues.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, you can guide the House because we are trying to operationalize an article of the Constitution; and having listened to the Chair it appears, if I heard correctly, the Chair is saying that this Article 260, it appears that some Councils can sit, others may not.  My understanding is that the Constitution commands that once a decision has been taken by Parliament, the District Councils of this number should endorse.  So, the question is, would the District Councils sit on their own?  Is this an election?  If it is an election, who is mandated to manage the elections in this country?  It is the Electoral Commission.  So, if it is the Electoral Commission to manage this particular unique voting, it must have its Officers to manage this particular exercise.  

So, it is not stage-managed as hon. Odonga Otto is saying, because if what we have presented is stage management you propose an amendment because the Constitution is very clear; “A Bill for an act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in clause 2 of this article shall not be taken as passed unless, (b), it has been ratified by at least two thirds of the members of the District Councils in each of at least two thirds of all the districts in Uganda.”  So, what does Parliament want?  I am proposing to you that the Electoral Commission should convene these Councils, they should vote.  So, if you do not want this stage management, you propose how we implement (2) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, what is happening in this article, ratification is a constitutional making process by District Council.  The process starts with Parliament. After Parliament has done its work the constitutional making process goes to the District Council; and what is done is Council work, Council proceedings.  It is Council proceedings, and therefore if they are Council proceedings, they are processed by the procedure of dealing with Council meetings.  But the Electoral Commission, because eventually it will have to gather this, has to be present to see because it will know the Rules of Procedure of that Council, the Local Government Act, the membership; it will be present to monitor that these things are going on properly.  

It is not elections, it is a constitutional making process because certain Articles in the Constitution are amended by Parliament alone, other articles of the Constitution are amended by Parliament plus a Referendum, others are amended by Council. So, it is a constitutional making process and therefore it must be done in the proceedings of the District Council.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, in the amendment of (4), that is why we inserted the words “District Councils duly convened.”  Now, they will be convened in the normal way of convening Council, and once they are convened then they have an Order Paper on which there will be ratification of such and such a thing; and then they will go according to the normal Rules of Procedure of those Councils.  

Now, what is provided for in (6) is the correct terminology, that the Officers of the Commission shall be present.  They will be present and then they will see how the process is conducted, and then they will have a form on which they will enter the proceedings of Council of that day.  But they will not conduct Council themselves. Like the Speaker will be conducting the earlier resolution of Parliament, that is how the Councils will also do it; and therefore in this amendment of the Committee there is need to use similar terminology throughout.  

In (5) we are using, “Returning Officer and Election Officer”, in (6) where the correct terminology is being used, we are using, “Presiding Officer”, and then in the section on offences, in (10) it is “Election Officer”, and in (11) it is now, “any person.”  But here let use the same, because where will Returning Officers now be because in (6) we shall have only Presiding Officers.  They will be watching what is happening - and even there the word “Presiding Officer” I am not sure is correct because the conduct of the decision-making in the Council will be conducted by the normal council process, like ours here in Parliament proceeding that will have been done by Parliament itself through its normal Parliamentary procedures. Therefore the terminology may not be exactly correct and the draftsperson may at a later stage need to put the right words there.  The words are definitely not the right ones yet.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you think we need more time for you to think or you are in position?   

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, there are two parallel things happening in this process.  You have the process of the Electoral Commission doing its monitoring and it has its own network of a team of people it has deployed to do that; and it is the Electoral Commission, which has transmitted this Bill to the Council, and it is interested in what happens to it.  So, it has appointed Officers in designate, it can be 12 Officers in one District Council, but in that way there has to be somebody responsible for that.  So, this one is referring to the Officers that are appointed by the Electoral Commission to monitor the process.  They are not going to guide, they are not going to stand there and say, “Vote this way.”  No, they are not going to do that, they are monitoring the process.  When it is all done, they are going to make their own entries for purposes of forwarding this thing.  But in the process of monitoring, you have somebody presiding on behalf of the Electoral Commission in the monitoring.  So, if you want them called a different name that is no problem, but I think we should understand the principle.  If you want a different name for it, there is no problem with that.  So, you can even just take out “presiding” and leave it “an Officer appointed by the Commission.”  So, can I suggest that we say, “an Officer appointed by the Commission,” instead of “presiding?”   Would that help?  There is no problem with that.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, please tell us what we want to know.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, if the Members are satisfied with my proposal on Clause (6) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please let us listen to him.

MR OULANYAH: Clause (5), I do not see a problem with it at all.  Clause (6), we can take out “presiding” and leave “an Officer appointed by the Commission to monitor that process.”  I think that will take care of that concern.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, if we are using “an Officer”, in (6), then (5), (10) and (11) should be validated because all those titles from up we are saying in (5), “Returning Officers,” in (6) we are saying –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We can change the nomenclature, but does it make sense for his suggestion now in (6)?

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, it makes sense.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  So now what are you going to do with these terms, hon. chairperson?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I think those will now be consequential, once it is agreed that we use one term.

THE CHAIRMAN: So they will be consequential amendments, and the functions, it will really monitor what is going on in Council proceedings.  Is that okay?  Now, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in Clause 21(1) we propose to delete the word “to” in the first line so that the phrase reads, “equal access and opportunity to”; it is just grammar.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I have further amendment -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us dispose of that then you bring further amendment.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKUPA: I want to propose an amendment to clause 21 to read as follows; “agents of each side shall have equal access and opportunity to use state-owned communication media”, other than using the word “given”, because we already have the word “shall have” because this is a right; it is not given.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard the amendment.  I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: When you use “shall be given”, it is a command.  

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, supposing you are not given.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is a command; as I have said, the verb “shall” is directive.

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, with all due respect, hon. –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But now when you say ‘have’, have what?  I mean, somebody really is commanded to give you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Point of procedure.  Mr Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto is a Member of this Committee and he –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is he?

MR MUTULUUZA: Yes.  But he is delaying us yet he would have done this work –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay.  I think we have finished that.

MRS MUKWAYA: I just wanted to give him information that the -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished that -(Interjections)- yes, we voted on one there was an amendment, which has been negatived.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I have this amendment on (2) and you remember even in the general debate, hon. Members talked about it.  Let me read it, “Subject to any other law, while canvassing any agent may, either alone or in common with others, publish canvassing materials in form of books, booklets, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, newspapers or posters intended to solicit votes from voters.” I want us to stop there and delete “but shall in any such publication specify particulars to identify the agent or agents concerned.”  I think this House discussed this matter during the general debate and we were looking at this provision being used to intimidate people; and we are saying that usually the principle of ‘anonymous’ is really allowed; and in the environment in which we are operating in this country, where there is so much intimidation and fear - I know it is there where I come from, even in this Parliament anyway.  So, where there is fear, people may be intimidated by this clause.  

So, I want to delete this provision, which mandates people to sign and put like “Miria Matembe,” the whole address and all the details when I am canvassing in an area for an issue, which may not be so popular and people may come even to my house and attack me in the night because we have seen these things happening; and in view of the serious sentence anyway attached to violation of this provision, I want to appeal to you that for the sake of freedom of expression, freedom of information, freedom of peace of mind, we delete this provision.  Well, I have talked and I have appealed to you, for the sake of the goodness of your people whom you represent here, for their freedom, please let us remove this provision.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Sir.  I can understand hon. Matembe’s concern, but she also must know that generally anonymous publications and mischievous publications, if you dare not own what you publish, maybe you should not publish it.  In any case, when you go out to canvass, you are merely putting what you published in words and everybody will know.  Therefore, much as I agree with her, there can be intimidations and there will be from all sides - by the way, we should always never forget that these intimidations comes from all corners of our country in all forms –(Interjection)- yes they can, they are there, it is part of life.  

In fact sometimes, Sir, we better fear in order to behave ourselves.  When you have a situation where there is absolutely no fear, no accountability, you breed anarchy; and actually the results can be worse than the constraints that are being imposed by people owning to what they say.  Therefore, much as I would sympathize with her, I am totally convinced, I, Prof. Kagonyera, if I cannot own to what I say I shut up.  Therefore, I oppose her amendment. 

MR KAKOOZA: Point of clarification.  I would also like my concern to be clarified about what she said.  The blackmail, which can be involved, how it can be; and if you are demanding the global trend that we need accountability and transparency, somebody with no address canvassing for unpopular - where person is not known - now comes and blackmails and is not anywhere known, how do you get to trace that with this publicity, which is made within that particular area? 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I have listened to arguments from hon. Matembe and from hon. Prof. Kagonyera.  We know that there is a law governing relationship between an agent and a principle.  Why are we making agents appear to be liable for the principle?  If we want to know who the author of the document is, why do we not hold the principle responsible rather than the agent?  Are we now changing the law of the country governing that relationship of agent and the principle, because the principle parties to a referendum are the sides?  I beg to be clarified on that.

MR RUZINDANA: I wanted to raise the same point differently.  Mr Chairman, I think there is a drafting problem here.  What needs to be specified is the side, not the agent; and therefore I would like to move an amendment to the effect that, “But shall in any such publication specify particulars to identify the side concerned”, not the agent because the agent is practically impossible.  You cannot have an agent on a poster, you cannot have an agent on the pamphlets; there would be thousands of agents in the whole country and how –(Interjection)- no, what needs to be specified and the particulars identified is the side for which an agent is canvassing, not the –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: I would like honourable –(Interjection)- can I, Mr Chairman, be protected against hon. Odonga Otto, really it is too much.  It is too much, we need to be protected against some Members of this House; there is a limit to how much anybody should enjoy their freedom. So, I am asking hon. Ruzindana to help us know whether there is no significant difference between authorized agents and unauthorized agents.  If a statement happens to be made by someone and then the side he is talking about says, “No, that person is not authorized to speak on our behalf,” how do we handle a matter like that?

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, with due respect to Professor –(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: I would like you to help me if you would want the section to just bar agents from doing publications.  If you want us to say no agent can do any publication either alone or with others, then it will not be necessary.  If you are suggesting that an agent should never publish anything, then it would be okay.  But if you are saying that an agent can publish on behalf of the bigger, then this would be necessary.  But if we agree that no agent will publish anything, in other words, all the publications must be from the side, then there is no problem at all.  But if there are situations that you foresee, that agents in a particular area may have to generate some documents and send, then this particular provision would be necessary.  

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, in practice, there would be sides; sides are represented by people.  There will be one side and another one.  Now, strictly speaking, all people canvassing for one side would be agents, but one side will have pamphlets, and I do not expect that every agent is going to be publishing a pamphlet on his own initiative without authority of whoever are the authorized authorities of one side.  In other words, one side would have its official pamphlet; it will have its posters saying certain things throughout the country saying the same things, and those posters or pamphlets I think should be authorized by the authorities of the side.  Otherwise, if we are going to allow every agent wherever he may be to publish a pamphlet on his own, to publish posters and so on, that is going to be a bit of a problem.  

Now, if that happens, this agent should put the side for which he is canvassing, and in practice we have seen that when we appoint agents we normally give them appointment letters, the authorities now.  Now, those of the side, wherever he may be going, if he is challenged this agent should be able to show an appointment letter.  But for him to be shown on a poster, I think the practicability of it is very difficult because you are saying books, booklets, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, newspapers, a newspaper advert - that would be an advert.  For an advert, the advertiser would obviously be known; and a poster the same, it would be carrying the slogan of one side and so on.  So, I am looking at it from the practical point of view; that is one.  

Two, that the responsibility should go to the principle side rather than the agent.  Otherwise, if you go after these agents, and there are very many of them, eventually it will look like harassment of one side by another; and you need something concrete, which you can take to court, which you can write to the Police about, which you can – rather than every agent.  The agents we know, we have all had agents; if all our agents have got to put their particulars on our posters and so on, I think that is practically impossible.  That is from the point of view I am looking at it.  Therefore my amendment was to substitute ‘agent’ or ‘agents’ for ‘side.’  

MS NAMAGGWA MUGERWA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to find out whether I could make some amendment to take care of what he wants.  I wanted to find out whether we could say, “specify particulars to identify their authenticity.”  Could that help?
 
MR OULANYAH: I was just about to make the same suggestion to the hon. Augustine Ruzindana, that we put “side” instead of “agent” and make the necessary improvement at the bottom of it, so that it is the ‘side’; and then you are barring any agents from doing that, that is okay.  That now means it will be subject to any law while canvassing - any side may publish canvassing materials in the form of books, booklets, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, newspapers and posters intended to solicit votes from voters, but shall in any such publication specify its particulars.  

MR RUZINDANA: My amendment was changing the last “agent” or “agents”,’ not the first one.  The marginal note here is about the rights and duties of agents, and the agents here “may publish canvassing material in the form of books and so on and posters intended to solicit votes from voters, but shall in any such publications specify particulars to identify the side concerned,” so that the side is the last one, but the first one is agent.  If you say “side” at the beginning, then you may say ‘through agents’ as well and it will be a repetition.  What I am avoiding is the practical aspect.

MRS MUKWAYA: Earlier, Mr Chairman, if I heard hon. Ruzindana, he was saying not every agent will publish, they will just distribute.  That is what you submitted.  So, if now you leave the first agent, it contradicts what you submitted because – if I understood you well, your submission is that every side will publish centrally and then distribute.  That is why the Chairman is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what is the position?  I now put the question.

MR MUTULUUZA: I do not follow.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why?

MR MUTULUUZA: Yes, I do not follow; is that a crime, Mr Chairman?  I do not follow, because hon. Ruzindana was saying that we do not remove “agent” in the first line, so we put “side”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

MR OULANYAH: Sub-clause (3), the last line substitute “pamphlet or letter” with “or pamphlet.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MATEMBE: (3) is actually is similar to what we have finished.  If we can also put “no side”, instead of saying “no person” to consequentially amend this (3).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Sub-clause (5), delete paragraph (a) and insert the following new paragraph (a), “Making statements, which are false; (i) knowing them to be false or (ii) in respect of which the maker is reckless, whether they are true or false.”

MR OTTO: On that one, the last aspects would be consequential given the previous trends of discussions, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NABETA: I had wanted to make an amendment to (5), not the sub-clause, but (5) itself. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Make it.

MR NABETA: I was proposing that (5) should read, “No person shall during canvassing do any of the following acts…”  I want to remove “use electronic media” because with today’s technology you can use a pen to record somebody, so you really do not have to have the electronic media.  If somebody is really using all these legally, if you have evidence you should be able to take them to Court or follow the regulations.  So, I was trying to propose that we remove “electronic media.”

MR OULANYAH: I think this particular clause –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nabeta, where do you want to insert your amendment to delete?

MR NABETA: I wanted to insert the amendment into Clause 5, where it says, “No person shall during canvassing…” I wanted to delete “use electronic media” and just have “canvassing do any of the following…” So, I wanted to delete “use electronic media.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I see.  Okay, you have heard.

MR OULANYAH: I think it is okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Still under (5), in (c) we are proposing to delete the word “or allusions.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: In (d) we are proposing to substitute the word “or” with a comma.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: In (e), we proposing to substitute the word “or” with a comma.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: In (f) we are proposing to add “or” after the semi-colon at the end.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: In (h) we are proposing to delete “and” and insert “or.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose also to delete (g) completely.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MATEMBE: This is on Clause 6.  I wish to move that it be deleted, and this is in line with the eloquent arguments that were made here in the general debate.  You remember the hon. Nkuuhe, really as an expert in these computer things, he told us and some other hon. Members; and we were saying this will be undue curtailing of media.  So, it is against those arguments that I am moving that this clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, you have heard.  Any comment?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (6), what you are trying to stop is permission to use this particular instrument for purposes that are prohibited, and then you are also saying we should not allow it to be used to do any of the acts prohibited in –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Knowingly?  

MR OULANYAH: The proprietor or operator of the electronic media shall not use –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Knowingly.

MR OULANYAH: But as we were saying, if you used, for example, the phone-ins as people do and in the first three seconds or one minute you are able to establish that this is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You have to use “knowingly.”

MR OULANYAH: Okay, we can insert “knowingly.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we dispose of just one amendment and then proceed with another?  There is an insertion of “knowingly.”

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, since we amended sub-clause (5) and eliminated use of electronic media, then this is a consequential amendment because - I mean, to commit all these offences, which this law is trying to prohibit, you do not need to use electronic media alone, you can use other means.  So, why are we very specific on this?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are concerned with this one alone, and then we can be concerned with another.  Let us agree, if you do not agree, put your case.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I was saying that these offenses can be committed using other means of communication, and in (4), we eliminated the use of electronic media for the same reason.  Now, why do we bring again electronic media here as if it is the only medium through which somebody can -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: In (4) they were dealing with persons, in (6) they are dealing with the owner; the two are different.

MR KIWALABYE: You are right, Mr Chairman.  I know they are different because now are talking of a person using a certain - and here you are prohibiting the same.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us exhaust this issue.

MR KIWALABYE: I can see that this electronic media is being unjustly treated.  There are other means where somebody can commit these offences.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, No.5 was, “No person shall during the exercise,” that is when he is campaigning for - this one is the proprietor knowingly allowing the other one to contravene.  They are two different issues.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, it is very common for Radio Stations to issues disclaimers that, “The views expressed on this Radio are not the views of the management or its staff.”  So, in the face of disclaimers being issued by such Radios, how will you be able to get someone saying he willfully or knowingly allowed a person to use his Radio when he has already disclaimed responsibility?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Member, if you say so and so is a murderer or he is a thief, then the Radio says, “Well, although he is saying this I have disclaimed,” and you just merely disclaim and then you are not affected.  You allow him to use; you make a disclaimer.  The word will be different really.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Actually, the disclaimers are even made in advance because they do not have the capacity to anticipate what Mr Wagonda Muguli is going to say about one character or the other.

MR OULANYAH: The disclaimers are issued about views that are uttered; they are not the views of the Radio Station, that is correct.  But that is not even the focus of this provision, the focus is on you allowing them to do it; allowing them to use it, not whether it is your view or not your view, the disclaimer does not cover that.  If I phone in and I start insulting somebody for one hour and you permit it, the law is coming in to intervene now to say you made a mistake.  It is different from you issuing a disclaimer.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is high time I put the question.

DR NKUUHE: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I have a clarification and I shall be satisfied if I can get a clarification, because electronic media here includes television, radio, Internet, e-mail and any other media.  There are some media, which you cannot as an owner, you cannot really - because people can communicate and you actually do not know whether they are communicating, but then because they are using your medium, you are liable under this.  Somebody can send an e-mail to somebody –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the offense comes knowingly.  The operating term here is “knowingly.”

DR NKUUHE: Okay.

MR NABETA: Mr Chairman, the issue is really that “knowingly,” but how do you know that I knew that somebody was going to the radio; that is one thing.  Secondly, if the Radio Station is owned on a share basis, let us say it is actually being sold on the Uganda Stock Exchange, which owner are you going to go to?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nabeta, when they say “knowingly,” evidence must be adduced to show that you knew.  If you fail to adduce that one, then that is –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: But also the Chairman knows, if there is any complaint, you can go to the Uganda Broadcasting Council and they will do whatever you want to do to that media.  So, already the laws are there.  If anybody is actually saying somethings that you do not want or that are going counter to the regulations, you can go to the Broadcasting Council and you can also have a civil law suit; the Penal Code will also cater for that.  So, the laws are already sufficient enough to deal with the issue.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, I have my sympathies for hon. Nabeta.  But my first visit to Rwanda after the genocide, everybody agreed that the genocide was fueled by Radio Stations.  So now this is a media that is going to be used by everybody, and if you have a business with a radio and you cannot be responsible to sit there and listen, this is it.  

MS KIRASO: Point of clarification.  I do not disagree with “knowingly” or even this provision.  What I wanted to ask about is the proprietor because it is one thing owning a media station or any other communication station, and it is another managing it, because I am looking at a situation where I and hon. Kagonyera in partnership own a radio station in the West of Uganda somewhere and we are seated here in Kampala, but somebody is managing it on our behalf and should be able to follow up and see what is happening.  So, I am trying to exonerate the proprietor from the sentences.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if he does not know then he is not concerned.  If he does not know, he has not committed any offence.  But I think we end this matter.  I put the question to the proposed amendment of this by putting “knowingly.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 21 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21 as amended agreed to.

Clause 22

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 22, the amendments we are proposing are similar to what we have dealt with in Clauses 11 and 14, and I propose the following amendments to Clause 22; insert immediately after sub-clause (2) the following:

“ (3)  	For the avoidance of doubt, it shall be sufficient for the purpose of sub-section (1) and (2) if the Commission ascertains whether the names of the persons who purport to have signed the petition appear on the national voters register for the purpose of the referenda.

(4) The Commission shall, notwithstanding sub-section (3), display the petition with the list of the names and signatures supporting the petition in a public place in each polling station to which the referendum relates for public scrutiny for the period prescribed under sub-section (6).

(5) A person who claims that his or her name was included in the petition without his or her consent or that any of the names in the petition is that of a deceased person, shall lodge an objection in a prescribed form to the Commission.

(6) The Commission shall by notice in the Gazette appoint a period of not less than 14 days for the purpose of public scrutiny and lodging of objections under sub-sections (4) and (5).

(7) If the Commission upon inquiry into an objection lodge under sub-section (5) is satisfied that the name of the person lodging the objection was included in the petition without his or her consent, or that the name of any deceased person is included among the names of the persons supporting the petition, the Commission shall not count that person as one of the persons supporting the petition.

(8) A person who includes among the persons supporting a petition under this section, the name of a person without the consent of that person, or who knowingly includes the name of a deceased person among the persons supporting the petition, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency point or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.” 

I propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we have already discussed this formulation and the policy behind.  I now want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 as amended agreed to.

Clause 23

MR OULANYAH: Sub-clause (1), delete the phrase “an election petition” and insert “a petition” under this part.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Clause 23(2), delete the phrase “reckless, whether it is false” and insert “reckless, whether it is true or false.”  I think on this one we take the earlier position, which we agreed on by a consequential amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 23 as amended agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose that we delete Clause 25 and insert the following; “Appeals, clause 25:

(1) A person aggrieved by the decision of the High Court on hearing a petition under Section 22 may appeal to the Court of Appeal against the decision within 14 days after the decision of the High Court. 

(2) The Court of Appeal shall proceed to hear and determine an appeal under this Section expeditiously and may for that purpose suspend any other matter pending before the Court.

(3) Unless the Court of Appeal extends a time on exceptional ground, the hearing of an appeal by Court shall be completed within 30 days from the lodging of a record of appeal.

(4) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Court of Appeal under the situation may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision within 14 days after the decision.

(5) Sub-sections (2) and (3) apply to Supreme Court as they apply to the Court of Appeal.”  

I propose.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with sub-clause (3) because I do not know what happens if the Court is not able to finalize the hearing of this appeal within the prescribed time.  What happens, because they say “unless the Court extends the time on exceptional grounds?”  Now, what are these exceptional grounds and who is to establish these exceptional grounds?  Mr Chairman, I am already aware that there is already a ruling by the Court of Appeal that this word ‘shall’ used here is not mandatory.  So, why do we prescribe this period of time when we know that it is not mandatory?  The court can extend the time even without –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, if the law says within 30 days, and the Court is not able to proceed with the case because of other reasons, they will put a minute in the file why they have not been able and therefore extend the time.

MR KIWALABYE: That is what I am saying, Mr Chairman.  Should we legislate on what the Court is in fact allowed to do?  If you say under exceptional grounds, who is to establish the exceptional grounds, the petitioner or the other side?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, there are procedures in Court.  When a time that is prescribed like this is coming to expire, it is your case whoever has petitioned, whoever has appealed, you apply to the Court for an extension; and the extension could be that the Court itself was unable to sit and the Court will consider that and say, ‘That is an exceptional circumstance, the Court was engaged in some other urgent business, it could not sit within 30 days,’ so it would be extended; or you establish circumstances, which the Court must consider and give an extension.  So, it is a normal procedure in the Courts when they establish these, they extend.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am envisaging a situation where a petitioner takes a petition to a court of law, an appeal court, he appeals.  The Court for one reason or another does not sit and does not finalize the case, and the other side claims now under this provision that the appeal is time-barred; the time has expired.  How do you put the onus on me, the person appealing, to establish the exceptional grounds?

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to give the hon. Member information that this clause you are seeking an amendment to is to your advantage because they are not giving excuses to the Courts of law.  They are saying “unless,” which ordinarily means the Court should do its work within the specified times.  What is the mischief here?  The mischief is that we do not want a situation where perhaps Government can influence Court not to sit, so if anything we should have uphold this provision and there is no excuse whatsoever for Court not to do its work.  I think it is a healthy provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is this causing any problem?

MRS MUKWAYA: But I want to clean the record, Mr Chairman. Does the hon. Member have evidence that in the past Government has stopped courts to work?  This is in Hansard, so I cannot leave this record as a manager of - because the Courts cannot stand here and defend themselves.  Have in the past Courts been refused to attend to any matter by Government?

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, because the Chairman of the Committee said the onus of establishing exceptional grounds is on the petitioner.  This is where I am worried because I almost lost an appeal because of such a provision.

MR OULANYAH: Mr chairman, I am afraid there is no further explanation that I can give to this.  All the laws, all the procedures in all the Courts are like that.  If you want to change that now, make your proposal, we vote on it or we go and change all the other laws to reflect what you are trying to say.  The discretion is given to the Court and this is the discretion you are giving to the Court to examine the circumstances.  It is your petition and you must be diligent in prosecuting your petition or your appeal or whatever.

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25 as amended agreed to.

Clause 26

MR OULANYAH: Sub-clause (1), Mr Chairman, substitute the word ‘all’ on the third line with a comma.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Chairman, I had a concern.  Much as I applaud the intention against sectarianism and so on, we already have a law against sectarianism, which covers this kind of thing; “No person shall, for canvassing in respect of a referendum use any words, slogans, symbols, which could arise division on the basis of sex, race, color, ethnic origin, tribe, birth and …” Those things are already covered under the anti-sectarian law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe if you followed the debate yesterday, there was the same issue coming up that appears in the Penal Code and so forth.  But they decided for a special programme there should be a law in that law dealing with that special programme.  That is why they have included it here, that is the debate we had yesterday about this matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 26 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26 as amended agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose in sub-clause (2) to delete ‘it’ and insert ‘that’ for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, the regulations regarding Referendum 29 are quite important.  If you look at (2)(c) the Minister may make regulations and it says, “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1) of this section regulations may be made under it and, (c), applying with or without modifications the provisions of any enactment relating to elections, including any provisions relating to election offences.”  This means again that the regulations may make modifications on any enactment; and I would like to propose that somewhere here we add that these regulations should be laid on the Table of Parliament within maybe a period not exceeding 14 days.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard the amendment; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29 as amended agreed to.

Clause 30

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, I am basically seeking your guidance.  I am rising to request the august House to do some reconsideration on Clause 25.  I seek your guidance on how we can go about that.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have a procedure.  Let us clear this, then we shall come to it. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to amend clause 30, “The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, amend the Schedule of this Act.”  I think we should not leave that responsibility open.  I would like to amend this Clause by adding that “whatever is amended should be laid on Table.”

THE CHAIRMAN: We agreed with the other one, I think this should be a consequential amendment. Is it not?

DR NKUUHE: Mr Chairman, in fact there are about two or three schedules, and some of the Schedules are actually questions.   So, does it mean that the Minister can actually rephrase a question?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, this was an oversight.  That reference should only be in respect of Schedule One because there are suggested amendments to currency point.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, I think we need a law with regard to currency point separate so that we do not have to reproduce in every law, and give the Minister that power and so on.  I think the Prime Minister may take this into account so that we make a separate law regarding currency point and we do not have to reproduce it in every law.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the amendment by Statutory Instrument to amend the First Schedule and he wants it to be laid before Parliament?

MR OULANYAH: On the currency point?  No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30 as amended agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

The Schedule

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman we propose that in the existing Schedule we delete the word ‘Schedule’ and insert ‘First Schedule’; and immediately after that First Schedule we insert the following two schedules.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Second Schedule: Question for approval of a Bill by Referenda under Article 259 of the Constitution under Section 14(3).  In this Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, which is now before you, Parliament has amended the following provisions of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, among other provisions of the Constitution.  Do you approve this Bill?  Yes or no?  

In Third Schedule:  Question for ratification for a Bill by Members of District Council under Article 260 of the Constitution, section 19(7).  In this Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, which is now before you, Parliament has amended the following provisions of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, among other provisions of the Constitution.  Do you ratify this Bill?  Yes or no?  This is to implement the provisions of Article 259 and Article 260.  I propose.  

MR RUZINDANA: I think on the Second Schedule, there should be dots after “the following provisions” so that the provisions can be listed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where?

MR RUZINDANA: The Second Schedule, second line; “The following provisions of the 1995 Constitution” -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think it is intended for that.  

MR RUZINDANA: These dots are intended for that?  Okay, no problem.

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, I do not know if this would serve only the purpose of amending the 1995 Constitution.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, at the moment we have the 1995 Constitution.  We have only one Constitution, but in case it is changed, then we change it.

MR OTTO: I had a suggestion that where they have written ‘1995,’ they leave a dash so that appropriately the year can be put –(Interjections)- my point is, so that if the need arises, then we can say next time it will be the 2005 Constitution.  We leave it open-ended.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because this is meant for the 1995 Constitution, even when you amend it, it shall remain the 1995 Constitution as amended.  So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedules 1, 2 and 3 as amended agreed to.
THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, we deferred Clause 3 as you remember, this was in respect of whether we can have more than one referenda on the same day.  This is something, which we said we think about.  I do not know whether you are in position to decide one way or the other.  Should I put the question?  

MR SEBAGGALA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, before you put a question, I need some clarification.  Mr Chairman, if we carry out various referenda by giving out various questions, the area that I would like to seek your clarification, suppose we have three questions, for instance; Federo, Multiparty and third term - I am just giving an example - will it not divide our agents because you may have your agent, who is in conformity with one of what you want and he is your supporter and he needs a third term but he does not need two or the other two; or he needs Federo but he does not want a third term?  My fear, Mr Chairman, is that we are going to confuse our electorates by telling them that the moment you vote, maybe for third term, you are as if voting for Federo; or the moment you do not vote for third term, then even the other two are not going to be catered for.  

Mr Chairman, that is my area, which I will seek for your clarification, because in as much as we can say that our electorates have been sensitized and they can vote for the President, the Member of Parliament and then the District Chairman on the same day, that one is quite different from voting on questions.  Mr Chairman, I would suggest that we do not give out various questions under one referendum.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to ask the hon. Latif Sebaggala to look at the spirit of the proposal.  It is proposed and it is not mandatory; it is “should the situation arise, there should be a legislative framework for handling it.”  That is the spirit of the proposal.  So, the issue that you are raising is, if it is not practical then it cannot happen; if it is not practical that it can be put that way, then it cannot happen.  But the situation you have proposed of three different votes, that is why you are saying there should be a possibility of holding three referenda on those questions that you have raised so that they are separate referenda but on the same day, so that they vote on each referendum question separately; and that matter is determined there on the questions as they are presented to avoid a situation where those three proposals you have made are to be done in three different referenda on three different days imposing, for example, if we go by the cost of the proposed last referenda proposals, of Uganda shillings thirty billion.  Now, you are proposing that you deal with the Uganda shillings thirty billion to determine the three questions rather than look for Uganda shillings ninety million to determine the three questions.  That is just a proposal for expediency, and I think it should work; and I really urge you, hon. Latif Sebaggala, to allow this to pass and we make progress.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Because of the magnitude of this question, Mr Chairman, I carried out some inquiry in Mutundwe area and my constituents said as follows; one, that if in a general election where you are voting on several portfolios namely, the Member of Parliament and the Presidency, there is already enough room for confusion.  What about in a situation where people have to resolve on several issues of a controversial nature?  Things would certainly be difficult and they advised me to stick on the earlier proposal that we should not confuse various referenda with several questions.  So, that was the view of the Lubaga South people in summary.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Mukwaya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS(Mrs Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 2003” and has passed clauses 13 to 31 and the Schedules with some amendments, and has not voted on clause 3.   But I want to be guided, Mr Speaker, because I had wanted to move under Rule 112 for recommital.  Should I do it now?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS(Mrs Mukwaya): Mr  Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this completes today’s work.  As you have heard from the hon. Minister, still we have not been able to dispose of clause 3.  Still think about it, discuss it and see what we do about it; and after that, if there is any recommital as you suggest, you can apply for it and tell us where you want to recommit and then it shall be considered.  

Hon. Members, tomorrow the work to follow, we have to adjust the Order Paper to include a Report on East African Community.  The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has informed me that they want you to discuss this important subject, especially from yesterday you indicated that you are interested to know what is going on, on foreign relations, and therefore the Committee would like to bring this report for our debate. If there is time, again I would think that it is high time we dispose of the report, which we debated a long time ago, that is, Election Violence, so that we conclude it also, so that we start on a clean plate.  So, I appeal to you, hon. Members, to get your reports on Community and Election Violence so that we can have a meaningful debate, because as I see we shall be able to dispose of the remaining work on the Referendum Bill within a very short time tomorrow.  With this we come to -(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Speaker, in March you appointed a Select Committee on incidents involving Members of Parliament on the 5th of March in Jinja.  I think it was given a definite period within which to report, and now that we are nearing a hectic time, Mr Speaker, I would request that the report be put on the Order Paper if it is completed.

MR KIZIGE: Point of clarification.  Mr Speaker, many of us continue to suffer; when we go to places we are referred to as being hostile people even internationally.  So, the matter that hon. Ruzindana has raised is very important, we want to know where this report is and we know the contents.

THE SPEAKER: I know hon. Ruhindi is the Chairperson.  Is there any Member of that Committee to tell us the position?  

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We did consider the matter that was laid before us about that incident, about PAFO and Members of Parliament in Jinja.  We did have a lot of witnesses, many witnesses did come, we did visit Jinja to see the situation and a place where the incident took place and we did put our views together.  So, while I can not really talk on behalf of the Chairperson now that I did not consult him, but I am sure the report should be way towards completion, if it is not already completed, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Ruzindana, if it is completed we shall be able to fit it in our programme between now and likely 23rd December when we go for Christmas recess.  

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Point of clarification.  Mr Speaker, a long time ago I requested the Minister of Finance to let us know why he has not introduced sufficient small denominations of currency, and up to now the question has never been answered.  But there is a lot of outcry in public, we do not have small denominations; and I appeal to the Prime Minister to ensure that actually Minister of Finance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance is there, hon. Agard Didi.

MRS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Oh, sorry, I did not see him because he came very late, I think.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you advise us?

MR AGARD DIDI: Mr Speaker, we shall consult the Bank of Uganda and report at the next Session.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is only to remind you of the problem of the people of Kaliro that - I think hon. Guma Gumisiriza was whispering in my ears that the issues need to be really passed over to the Executive that a promise is a debt.  As we talk now, Mr Speaker, there is a big crisis in most of the cotton growing areas.  People are not going to have Christmas because the people who requested the peasants to grow cotton, they promised them Uganda shillings 700 per kilo.  But as we talk, the very people who lent inputs to the peasant farmers have now changed their minds, they are paying them Uganda shillings 250; some households are burning cotton because already the debts they incurred cannot be sustained by the price, which is being offered.  

It is a pity that we are being thrown to the market as a force, but even in other countries, Mr Speaker, you know, the American Government can buy milk and throw it in the ocean just to sustain the milk price.  I think the Government of Uganda, since it is very much interested in the issue of cotton coming on board and meeting our obligations as far as AGOA is concerned, the price of cotton for farmers as it was promised at the planting season needs to be addressed by the Executive urgently before people actually completely abandon the issue of cotton.  This is I think a very important issue, which I have to bring to your attention, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is this only relevant to Kaliro, because you said Kaliro?

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: No, for Kaliro is an issue, which I was just reminding you that you are the swan here, that you are going to request the Executive to do the needful.  That is an issue, which is outstanding, and already people are having a lot of problems on that issue.  But on top of that, as though adding insult to injury, on top of us agreeing on cotton in Eastern region and some other parts, cotton price at planting season we were promised Uganda shillings 700 to 800.  As we talk now, the peasants are actually burning the cotton because they are being offered only Uganda shillings 250.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Well, the Minister of Trade will advise us on that, he is here.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, maybe before - he could answer jointly.  I think the problem of Kaliro is not an isolated one; in Masindi, ours is not cotton but tobacco.  These people came in, British American Tobacco (BAT), and I think Master Mind, encouraged people to grow tobacco.  They grew the tobacco, but as I talk now people took their tobacco to the stores, it is over two months, the British American Tobacco (BAT) and the others have refused to weigh or buy this tobacco; and even the tobacco, which was taken in, has not been paid for.  In my constituency people are crying, and I think as we liberalize and invite in these private people, Government should be mindful that the poor peasants, the citizens of this country, the voters, are really suffering and something should be done.  

I was in my Constituency last weekend and it was a key issue.  Much as I had gone to consult on the White Paper, but the issue of non-buying of tobacco was high on the agenda of my constituents.  Can the Minister tell us, where do we run for help?  Thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, Government ceased to fix prices for commodities; Government ceased long ago to fix prices for commodities.  So, if you talk about milk, I do not think the dairy farmers themselves are happy with that exercise because when milk is in plenty the price goes down and they complain; when it is in scarcity, the price goes up.  The same applies to vanilla because we had a problem of vanilla recently.  So, I do not know whether Members are now saying that we should revert to the old order where Government used to fix prices, but I do not think it is tenable any longer.  We can look into it, but my thinking is that it is no longer tenable under the circumstances.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think maybe what you can do for us is to study the problem, the problem as raised; cotton and tobacco, then come and tell us because you have the facilities to monitor the market.  Brief us here, maybe not today, maybe next week Tuesday or Wednesday as the case may be, so that you tell us what the problem is.  

DR NDUHUURA: While we can do that, Mr Speaker, I want to say that generally, under liberalization of trade and the economy, this is not tenable.  

THE SPEAKER: I think you be helpful to the farmers by saying because of this – I would advise that you take your time, study and then give us a - without compelling you to fix the price, but you can tell us the problems and then I think people will understand because you are in Government.

DR NDUHUURA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, we shall study.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have just two concerns.  Just recently, Sir, you allayed my fears when you said that, “sooner or later you are going to justify your Motion on D.D.T.”  I have been looking forward to justify –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not have to repeat myself, I said so, yes.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Then secondly, Sir, you recall a big massive demonstration, which took place in Kampala some time last year, at the beginning of this year, about the unaffordable electricity tariffs.  The report has long been ready for presentation to this plenary session.  When is it coming?  People just want to eat me alive, they think I am deceiving them.

THE SPEAKER: You are a member of that Committee, are you not? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: The report is ready.

THE SPEAKER: You talk to the Chairman to present it, then we shall deal with it, thank you very much.  

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


