Thursday, 2 December 2004

(Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a small adjustment to the Order Paper. This concerns the business, which has been indicated today, which includes a report on election violence. I would like to give notice that a debate on this matter would be concluded next week, and I would like to ask the Attorney General to prepare his reply because that was pending before we closed that debate. There are also a few of the ministers who had been named in the report, who had wished to say something about that report. So, I would like all of them to prepare, and also the Chairperson of the Committee to be ready to start final debate on that matter on Tuesday next week.

The second one is that, there is a petition by international parliamentarians concerning a democratic oversight of the IMF and the World Bank policies, especially in the developing countries.  So, it is sponsored by World Development Movement, Action Aid International UK, Christian Aid, Briton Woods Project, all Party Parliamentary Groups and the Parliamentary Network of the World Bank. The petition is, I believe, on the notice board. You can read it and if you are convinced about its importance, you can append your signature to it; it is outside there on the notice board.  

Now, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils of Mother Anjoleto Primary School, Gulu municipality together with their teachers. You are very welcome children!  (Applause)
(Capt Byaruhanga rose_) But, honourable members, why do you not notify me that you have something important so that I can ask whoever is responsible to be here. 

2.34
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not around yesterday and I was from the constituency. Yesterday we had functions for the World’s AIDS Day and we know Uganda, as a country, has benefited from the Global AIDS Fund.  Madam Speaker, through you and through the Rt honourable Prime Minister, we would like the Minister of Health to give us organisations and agencies, which have been given funds from the Global AIDS Fund so that in our districts and constituencies we can be able to monitor as Members of Parliament whether this Global AIDS funds have benefited our constituencies. I would like the Minister of Health to give us those details of the funds that have been disbursed and to which organisations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, unfortunately, I do not see the Minister of Health. The Leader of Government Business, could you make a statement concerning this?  Hon. Makubuya, what are you doing there? (Laughter)

2.35
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, supplementary to what hon. Capt. Byaruhanga has stated, it is also common knowledge as we observe that Global Day on AIDS, that Uganda has registered a positive image in terms of awareness about the danger facing our population with regard to AIDS. A lot of research also has been carried out by the Joint Research Centre very close to my constituency in Lubaga. The supplementary information I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business is, how effective has that research been to the positivity of the image Uganda is getting outside Uganda?

2.36
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As I have said time and again, even if one is functionally versatile, one cannot cram these figures. One needs notice in order to do the necessary research and give you a well-considered reply. Now, I want to apologize, the ministers in the Ministry of Health are not here, but they should have asked a colleague to stand in for them. I am aware of their absence, but they should have asked someone to stand in for them. 

I have no hesitation, Madam Speaker, in asking hon. Tim Lwanga to inform them so that they answer these questions. I hesitate to give a time frame, but if possible by next Thursday, especially the question raised by hon. Lukyamuzi needs to be well researched. You know, we do not cram these matters; they have to carry out a bit of research and give you a well-considered view. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can the Clerk transmit that request formally to the ministers of Health so that they can answer next Thursday. 

2.38
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I was in my constituency, and in the three places I went to address and explain the White Paper one question continued to come up and that is, why does Parliament pass laws, which eventually are overturned by the Supreme Court or any other courts in this country? Now, because of this, I have found it necessary, Madam Speaker, to request your guidance on this Referendum Law we are trying to come out with. 

If you can remember, in Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere and others v. Attorney General, Constitutional Petition No. 5 of 2002, the Constitutional Court came out and held that although Article 70 of the Constitution provides for a Movement Political System, it does not exist on the ground. The situation set up under the Movement Act, 1997 this so-called system is a political party or a political organisation.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the court repeated this holding in James Rwanyarare and 10 others v. Attorney General, in the Constitutional Petition No.7 of 2002. It was again held that the Movement set up by the Movement Act is not a political system. It is for all intents and purposes, a political party or organisation with a definition of political party or political organisation as stated in section 2 of the Political Parties and Other Organisations Act, 2002.

These two decisions, Madam Speaker, still stand and no appeal has been lodged to the Supreme Court. In fact, an appeal which was filed in the Constitutional Court Petition No.5, 2002 was eventually withdrawn by the Government. Madam Speaker, in again –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Sabiiti, what is the problem?

MR SABIITI: I am coming to that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please come to it quickly.

MR SABIITI: I am giving it the foundation.
   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, come to it quickly because it is not part of my agenda.

MR SABIITI: It is not, but you see it concerns this very Referendum Law we are trying to make and, therefore, I want this House to take note of it. I am saying, Madam Speaker, that given all these rulings and indeed the Supreme Court recently which ruled, why are we merging the two or three Articles under the referendum, that is Articles 74, 255 and another one? We should have separated the two so that the referendum under Article 74, that has been cleared, we need not have that referendum so that we have a law for the other. So, I am seeking your guidance on this matter because we do not want to pass a law, which is likely to be challenged in courts of law. So, that is the guidance I am seeking.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, this matter was ably handled by the Speaker and it is in the Hansard of yesterday. So, I am not going to waste time again on it. It has been done; it is already in the Hansard.

MR SABIITI: I do not think our Speaker has already ruled on this. A number of questions were raised, but now I have come with the details, which I think you need to pronounce yourself on before we move because these are very important issues. We do not want to make a law and tomorrow again we shall have wasted two, three or four weeks on an Act, which is not going to be valid. I am, therefore, seeking your guidance.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I remember yesterday, hon. Jack Sabiiti, attentively attended this House until the close –(Interjection)- or the other day, and this issue was raised yesterday. In his submission he is quoting the courts, and if I understand him well, he is saying that the court said there is no Movement political system because the court said that the Movement organs are like a political organisation. I think the Speaker ably explained yesterday and some lawyers here submitted. The issue before the court was not the political system; and if the same judgement you are reading is the same judgement that I read, the judges were saying that, because of what is on the ground, the organs that are on the ground and the behaviour leads us to believe that this is a political organisation. But the question was not on the political system. That is issue number one.

The second issue he is saying, because this law is the Referendum and Other Provisions Act, he is submitting that we should have a separate law for the referendum and others like ratification and amending the Constitution under Article 259 should have another law. Unless he submits here that there is legally anything wrong in having this law as it is, which I can respond to as a substantive motion, but according to me and my technical people we are having this law as a law that will stand even after we have amended the 1995 Constitution now, but for any other eventuality. That is what we are doing. And I did not think it prudent that I should come to the House to replace the Act that was nullified, Act of 1999, and also bring another law for district ratification and also a referendum purposely for amending the Constitution and even a referendum to operationalise Article 255.  

So, I thought it was prudent that you have one law, which caters for all these issues and I do not think that what he is alluding to, that the court – let us wait, even hon. Sabiiti cannot be in the mind of the court. We are here to make law; the courts are there to interpret the laws. You never know, nobody even imagined that there would be the doctrine - even lawyers who studied recently, I do not think they ever thought that there would be infection as a doctrine. Tomorrow the courts may come up with another doctrine and we shall respond according to the decision of the court.

MR SABIITI: But, Madam Speaker, if Article 74 was declared null and void in the Constitutional Court - it was ruled that Article 74 was dead and in that judgement it is very clear. Can you go further as a ministry to come here and make a law on an article that is already dead? I want explanation.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have said that I do not see a prudent judge taking it upon himself or herself to amend the Constitution. That is not their job. If in your interpretation they did, then I will look at it because I did not see them amending the Constitution. And, Madam Speaker, I was on this Floor of the House and I stated that different people read supporting judgement to the lead judgement and they pretend as if that is the lead judgement because different judges argue and bring issues to support why they are deciding that way. So, individually, we selectively choose which judge wrote in our favour and we pursue that. So, I have nothing useful to add.

2.48
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Madam Speaker, I think this is a serious matter that we should pursue a little. The issue is, in the memorandum of this Bill, there are particular Articles, which are supposed to be targeted for in the referendum and Article 74 is one of them. Now, the question that we should be targeting our minds to is, in the present circumstances, is there or is there not a Movement as described or which is supposed to be a change in another political system under Article 74?  According to my recollection, the Constitutional Court said, “Yes, the Constitution provides for a Movement system.” But what is in operation now in Uganda is not that Movement system, which is envisaged by the Constitution. Now, I think this House should take some time - and, Madam Speaker, you as a lawyer, it is in your interest -look at this judgment and come up with a reasoned statement. The minister’s argument is perplexing. In law, there is what we call court-made laws; these are precedents, which have to be followed until they are overturned. And this is our highest court in respect to constitutional matters. They have made a judgment, we cannot close our eyes and say, “No, those judgments do not exist.”  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, if people have being listening, I think I have been talking the same language hon. Ben Wacha is saying. I said, exactly as you said, that the system is there, there is no question about it; and because the system exists in the Constitution, that is why I am bringing this law for the future because an Act cannot amend a Constitution. The Constitution is there, so the system is there. I am making a law for that system that exists in the Constitution. That is what I was saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha, you are suggesting that we need to look at the judgments. I think let us ask the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to look at this judgment together with some lawyers whom we will select to read the judgments and discuss them for the interest of the House. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2004

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, the matter raised by hon. Sabiiti, and substantially advanced by hon. Ben Wacha, raises concern in regard to what we are pursuing today. Noting that you have made a ruling, which calls for re-examination of the matter we are discussing, is it not procedurally right for us to stop here and wait for another chapter?

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, you have made a ruling that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and a group of lawyers that you are going to choose, should look at this judgment and come back to this House and advise us accordingly.  Whatever they will see in that judgment will impact on what we are handling now. It will be a complete waste of time if we went ahead and passed everything in this, including the memorandum, and then they come and advise us that actually this law should not have contained Article 74 of the Constitution.

Madam Chairperson, today is Thursday, there are lot of other areas on the Order Paper that we are supposed to tackle. I beseech you; give this group till Tuesday, then we will come and finalize this matter, otherwise, we will be wasting our time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, if we require to amend this Act, we shall amend it; we can always amend it.

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, we have the time now to do things right without wasting any more time.  You only need a matter of hours because from now until 6.00, it is about three hours and then the report on Tuesday. Is there anything wrong with that?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I am really disturbed that senior legislators, who know our Rules of Procedure - the Bill was given a first reading, it went to the committee, the committee invited public hearings and even Members were supposed to appear before this committee; how come that at this late hour, my senior colleague, hon. Ben Wacha, did not appear before the committee? We have debated this motion for a week - I must salute hon. Matembe. She had some reservations on some clauses, she sat here, she raised her concerns and we addressed them. I think this is done in bad taste, Madam Chairperson, because the procedure is there.

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, I am very surprised that a very senior minister, like hon. Janat Mukwaya, should come here and expect this House to rubberstamp everything, which comes from any committee. That is also said in bad faith! First of all, Madam Chairperson, you know I have not been well, that is why I have not been attending this House. If I had been attending, I would have pointed this out. At any rate, I pointed this to some very senior Member of this House, I do not have to name him; unfortunately he cannot speak.  This is not done in bad faith. I am a very senior legislator, I am a nationalist and I do not want my name to appear in something, which is shoddy.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Before any Bill is brought to this House, first it goes to the committee. This Bill was privileged to be chaired even by a lawyer like our colleague, and he invited all the people who were concerned to give their views. The same Bill and report have been brought here, this is not the first time; debates were open, we are now almost concluding the debate on the important Bill, and because of one person who was not feeling well, the rest could not understand. Should we take it that way?

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, the Bill we are discussing is actually a very important Bill that is paving the way for what is coming on in this transition; and whatever is coming on will affect this nation very fundamentally, and we are all here Ugandans discussing. At whichever stage before we complete something somebody may say, “By the way, what about this?” We are discussing against a background, if I can use my Kinyankole proverb, which says, “Kworumwa enjoka otina omwina.” In other words, it says, “When you are bitten by a snake, whenever you see the holes you do not go nearer because you fear another snake might come and bite you.”  
Now, we are operating against an environment where we made here laws in good faith and the court nullified them. I remember one time when it nullified, we came, we made another one quickly in a day and then it was also nullified. So, this is where you have been bitten by a snake and you want to behave carefully. 

Now that this issue has arisen while we are debating and we want to finish this law - and all of us, by the way, are really interested and committed. Now this issue has come up while we are about to finish and in your wisdom, Madam Chairperson, you thought actually, “Wait a minute, what if we ask the committee together with some distinguished lawyers, to just look at these judgments and guide us accordingly?” That was a very wise ruling against the snake biting. Now, I would like to appeal through you to the minister maybe to hear my appeal. Since we are still debating this Bill, what is wrong with, if we continue with your idea, ask the committee and –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, the problem I have is that hon. Matembe is aware that when we were in Speke Resort, Munyonyo for the Donor-Government Review Meeting, she expressed reservations about the performance of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and the donors called me to ask, “What is the problem?” I had to discuss with my donors who support my sector. So, this is the problem. If we suspend, in my view, it means a vote of no confidence in the chair of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee because the man was here, he defended and my chambers - because if the chambers have thought that this is not a problem, and more so procedurally, why was this not raised in the committee?

MRS MATEMBE: I thank you, Madam Minister, for your information. When I stand here to talk, in my heart and in my mind I have no ill intention. I talk for the good of this nation and that is why I was saying, what is wrong with just a day and tomorrow and Tuesday? We are saying the Legal Committee, we are not saying any other person; therefore, we are not withdrawing any confidence at all from the committee. What is wrong if by Tuesday these people come and tell us that it is okay and we complete the law and if they say, “By the way, there is something,” we also handle it so that when we finish this law, we go happily knowing that we have done what is right to be done? It is not a question of who is right or who is wrong, but as to whether what we come out with, as a House, is the right thing.  

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remember correctly that your Chair is on record as having said that, if anything missed out in the second reading of the Bill, at the debate of the second reading of the Bill, it could be brought up even at this stage. The Chair is on record, and I am sure that the matter we are discussing is of such grave importance. Literally what the courts have said is that there was rape, but the child born out of rape should not be killed. But it cannot mean that we should rape again, and what we are doing now is to rape again. The first referendum was a rape, should we have the second referendum as a rape again?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have listened very carefully from the argument of my senior colleague outside and my senior colleague inside, and I know very well that when the Chairman had not left this country, he was very much convinced that they had internalised the Bill, they had looked at the merits and demerits, and what has been presented had no question mark.  I am wondering at this particular time when they are requesting for two or three days to revisit the Bill, in the absence of the substantive Chairman –(Interjections)- Madam Chairperson, protect me, I know what I am driving at.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, allow hon. Bakkabulindi to make his presentation.

MR BAKKABULINDI: My question is, if the committee with the sitting Chairman are still convinced that what they did after a long time is a correct thing, and maybe one Member is seeing it is a wrong thing and he insists that he is not convinced, what are we going to do? Are we going again to say the committee should go back until all the people in the House are convinced?  

Madam Chairperson, usually it has been a practice that you do not expect 100 per cent of the Members of the House to say, yes, on each and every provision. But at the end of the day, they will be convinced maybe outside, while the majority have voted rightly on a certain provision. And it is in that respect that I want to request and urge my friends that, we have moved a long journey on this Bill and I think each and every provision has been clearly understood, that we move ahead and finalize this Bill. There is no cause for alarm, as my colleagues tend to be thinking. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Chairperson, I have listened very carefully to what is going on, but with a very heavy heart. I would like to reluctantly recommend that we differ this matter until next Thursday.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the work we are doing is extremely important, and the issues being raised touch one of the fundamental provisions on which this law stands. So, as the Prime Minister has made the request, I will differ this matter to Thursday, and by morning I will have put up the team to look at this particular clause.

MRS MUKWAYA: I seek a clarification, Madam Chairperson, because Parliament as an institution is part of the state. So, I would just beg the indulgence of the Chair that the Attorney General is represented because we cannot have conflicting views with your lawyer as Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The interests of both Parliament and the Executive will be taken into account.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 2004” to consider Clause 3, which was stood over and the matter has been deferred by the Chair. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.09
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF  THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE EAST AFRICA COMMUNITY

3.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs on the East African Community.  

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 82 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) are supposed to report on their activities to Parliament, through the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs at least once in a year.  However, the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly did not get an opportunity to report to this committee on their activities for the financial year 2002/03. This report, therefore, covers a period of two financial years namely, 2003/04. In addition, the report covers other matters pertaining to the East African Community that were raised during the interaction with the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly.  

Methodology

The Committee held a meeting with the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly on 16th of September and they made a representation on their activities of the last two financial years and raised issues affecting their work, in particular the East African Community in general.

The Committee also studied the following reports: 

• The report of the meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Committee for East Africa held on 27 August 2004 at the Safari Park Hotel, Nairobi, Kenya.

• The report of the seminar on the Role and Mandate of the East African Legislative Assembly held between 26th to 28th June 2004 at the Mt Kenya Safari Club, Nanyuki, Kenya.

The Committee then held a meeting with a team from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs led by the Minister of State, Regional Cooperation at which Government position on the issues raised at the meeting with the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and in the reports mentioned above was given.  

From the above methodology, the Committee arrived at this report and now wishes to report.

The Role and Mandate of The East African Legislative Assembly:

Its mandate is:

• To make laws;
• To liase with the national parliaments of partner states on matters relating to the Community;
• To debate and approve the Budget for the East African Community;
• To present resolutions and recommendations to the council of ministers;
• To ask questions; and 
• To discuss the annual reports from the council of ministers.

On page 3, we have their activities summarized in there: 2002/03 financial year, there were about 14 motions moved and in 2003/04 five motions were moved. There were five resolutions passed in financial year 2002/03 and in the previous financial year none was passed.

Committee meetings held for the financial year 2002/03 were 33, 2003/04 only 23 were held. Committee reports presented: financial year 2003/04 they were two, in financial year 2003/04 they were three. Bills passed: in 2002/03 they were six and 2003/04 there was only one. Questions for oral answer: they were 20 asked in the 2002/03 and in 2003/04 only one. Tour of partner states: they visited two countries in 2002/03 and they visited two countries in the financial year 2003/04. Plenary sittings outside Arusha: they made one in 2002/03 and they have made none in 2003/04. Capacity building programmes: they held eight in 2002/03 and in the previous financial year they held only three.

Emerging issues

1. Business transacted by the EALA during the financial year 2002/03 and the financial year 2003/04. The Committee observed that there was a general reduction in the volume of business transacted by EALA during these years.

Members of the EALA reported that the reduction in the volume of business transacted by the Assembly during the financial year 2002/03 as compared to the financial year 2003/04, arose from the fact that the council of ministers is more often than not available to attend to the business of the East African Community, because they are too busy with matters of foreign affairs of their individual countries. As a result, motions cannot be moved or Bills cannot be introduced before the assembly rendering it redundant and yet there is a lot pending business that awaits deliberation.  

In the Nanyuki report, it was noted that there is no provision for appointment of specific ministers for the East African affairs. The Treaty relies on the heads of state and the council of ministers to derive the integration.

2. Movement of the East African persons within the East Africa. The Committee observed that despite the existence of the East African Community, common persons in East Africa still experience problems crossing borders especially with regard to our travel documents and checks on their luggage.

The minister informed the Committee that the movement of East African citizens within East Africa will only be made easier when the East African Community attains a common market.

3. Revision of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.
Members of the EALA informed the Committee that there are many aspects of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community that need to be revisited. One notable example relates to the interactions that Members of EALA share with their national parliaments. The current law does not lay down the rules for interaction between the EALA and their respective national parliaments.  In the event that Members of EALA do not report back to their home parliaments, there is no sanction spelt out against them. There is need for enabling law to lay down the rules for interaction between the Members of the EALA and their respective national parliaments and sanctions in the event that the rules are broken or violated.
 
4.Ratification of protocols

In accordance with Ratification of Treaties Act, Section (3), all treaties shall be ratified as follows:
 
a) By the Cabinet in the case of any treaty other than the one referred to in (b).

b) By Parliament by resolution: -

(i) Where the treaty relates to Army ties, neutrality or peace; or 

(ii) In case of the treaty in respect of which the Attorney General has certified in writing that its implementation in Uganda would require an amendment of the Constitution.  

The protocols so far signed under the East African Community fall under the category ratified by Cabinet.

The Committee was glad to note that the protocol on the establishment of the East African Customs Union and the protocol for the Sustainable Development of Lake Victoria Basin were ratified by Cabinet and laid on the Table on the 5 of October 2004. 

5.The roadmap to the East African Federation
The Committee observed that the journey to the East African Federation is progressing at a painfully slow pace. The instrument of the federation has not yet been prepared for enactment.  

The Minister informed the Committee that the summit met in Nairobi from the 27th to 29th of August and undertook a broad review of the status of the East African Community integration process, and examined further the ways and means of deepening and accelerating the process. The summit resolved to expedite and compress the process with integration so that the ultimate goal of a political federation is achieved through a Fast Track Mechanism. A three-person committee was set up to examine how the Fast Track Mechanism can be achieved.

The Committee consisted of hon. Amos Wako, Prof. Haidari K.R. Amani and Dr Ezra Suruma. They were assisted by Ms Margaret Chemengich, Prof. Sam Turyamuhika and Dr Mohamed Fakih Mohamed. The East African Community Committee on Fast Tracking East African Federation is currently pursuing its mandate. I will maybe later mention that we saw that they finished their work and the presidents received the report. 

A sub-committee on the inter-parliamentary committee on East Africa has also drawn up a roadmap for the East African Federation by the year 2010, and the key milestones necessary to achieve the expected output were outlined as follows:

a) Establishment of a common foreign policy;

b) Establishment of a common security policy;

c) Establishment of a common defence policy;

d) Establishment of a peace-building mechanism;

e) Establishment of democracy, the rule of law, accountability, transparency, social justice, equal opportunities, gender equity as well as recognition, promotion and protection of human and people’s rights in accordance with African Charter on Human and People’s Rights;

f) Safeguarding of common values, regional and international organizations and development partners;

g) Establishment of an East African Council Ministerial Organ within the community’s institutional framework; and 

h) Consolidation of comprehensive sectoral programmes in all areas of the co-operation, and some of these are enlisted in Annex II.

6.The East African Community Budget

Members of the EALA reported that the Assembly’s budget was inadequate, and as a result only 30 percent of the strategic plan for 2001/05 has been implemented. The allowances for the Members of the EALA and that of the judges of the East African Court of Justice are also insufficient.

The minister informed the committee that the emoluments of the EALA and the East African Court of Justice are determined by the summit, the organ that determines their terms of service. He also noted that there have been complaints that the terms of service of those two bodies seem to be inadequate and there have been some proposals in the budget of the East African Community to address the problem.

Recommendations

The Committee made the following recommendations, some of which are a reiteration of the resolutions that were made at the seminar in Nanyuki:

i. Harmonisation of the laws and policies.
That the member states of the East African Community expedite the harmonization of laws and polices to facilitate movement of persons, labour, services, right of establishment and residence. This would also harmonize the interaction of the East African Community with the international community in matters such as trade and aviation. 

ii. Draft Constitution for the Federation.
That the EALA drafts a constitution for the federation of East Africa within a period of 12 months.

iii. East African Community Minister.
That the appointing authority appoints a Ugandan Minister for the East African affairs resident in Arusha as a matter of urgency.

iv. Revision of Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.
That the EALA expeditiously forwards its recommendations to the respective national parliaments proposing the necessary amendments to the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.

v. Interactions between the EALA and Parliament.
That the linkages between the EALA and Parliament be strengthened by the enactment of the necessary legislation that will provide for a clear reporting mechanism and establish regular forum for dialogue.

vi. Budget for the East African Community.
That the council of ministers looks for ways and means of improving on the budgetary allocations for the East African Community to enable it fulfil its mandate.  

Honourable members, there is quite an amount of Annexes attached basically to enlist some of the issues, which have already been contained in the report. And I want to say that, these mainly are the attachments on the sessions, what was covered by the EALA during the year 2002/03 and then during the year 2003/04, and the plan of action which is quite important and which has been adopted by the EALA and the inter-parliamentary forum.

I beg at this juncture, Madam Speaker and honourable members, to say that this is our report and you can make comments and you can make deliberations on it. Perhaps also to just echo one thing that, at an appropriate time, when you have finished looking at this, we may make proposals to the Committee on Rules on seeing how we can amend our Rules of Procedure to accord Members of the EALA, who are our representatives here, not be strangers so that they can participate in some of our –(Interjection)- Pan African Parliament Members are Members of this House so they are not strangers, but the EALA Members are not Members in this House. So, even as we debate their report they cannot come, for instance, to explain. So, it is in that breath that this proposal will be made at an appropriate time. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and the Members of the Committee. This is the first report, other than the budget reports, of your Committee - the very first report on the East African Community affairs and I think it is an important report, only that I have a slight difficulty. I am hoping that the Minister of Foreign Affairs will be here shortly, or is somebody holding his brief –(Interruption)  

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Okumu Ringa): Madam Speaker, I represent my ministry as a Minister of Public Service in the community affairs, and I am quite conversant with what goes on, on the community matters. So, in the meantime, I will hold brief for my colleague, the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Thank very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of State in the Ministry of Public Service whether in matters of this nature we are looking for a person who is conversant on the matter, or a person who is authoritative on the matter?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification whether the Minister of Public Service is a volunteer or he actually has a brief from his colleague, the Minister of Foreign Affairs?

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, as you are aware, we are all Members of Cabinet, and as Members of Cabinet we are disaster-prepared to handle all matters relating to the functions of Government, and in particular, with regard to these matters.  If the House decides that we discuss the report, I would be competently prepared to hold brief for my colleague, the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that within the Community, there is a council of ministers and the issues are really crosscutting, some of them may end up in the water sector, others in the transport sector. So, let us see whether we can move on the debate if there are issues you want to raise.  

3.27
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the first time that we get close to what is going on in the East African Community. I am glad that a report has come forward. For quite a long time, I was one of the people protesting to ensure that before Uganda signs any Customs Union in Arusha, Members of Parliament should be brought on board.  Otherwise, where do you get the moral authority to sign when we are kept away, we that represent the people of this great country, Uganda?  

Madam Speaker, I will restrict myself on a phenomenon of the East African Federation, a point which is becoming very controversial these days.  First of all, I would like to ask. It has been very unfair from the side of the people of Uganda, we always hear ministers talking about the East African Federation, committing themselves to the federation, when they do not know how that federation is going to work. I would like to urge the Uganda Government to ensure that before you talk anything about the Federation of East Africa, you must know the federation is for the people of Uganda, the people of East Africa. They must as a population be fully involved in that phenomenon of the federation. Otherwise, we do not want a federation, which sits only in Arusha to make laws, which laws are not in consonance with the people of Uganda. We must have a common political line if we are talking about the federation of East Africa. We must seek to have a common economic line, a common physical line so that all the people of East Africa feel the pride of the East African federation.  

Madam Speaker, the roadmap to the East African federation, therefore, apart from the perception, which I have read in the report - and I think I am not blaming the Chairperson for articulating what has been reported, but I think the people in Arusha should think beyond the perception, which has been disclosed here. It is not enough to talk about a common defence policy, it is not enough to talk about a common foreign affairs policy, and it is not enough to talk about a common security policy.  It is important before we address a meaningful East African federation, how far have we gone in enticing the people of Uganda, for example, the common people me and you represent, to make them understand what we are going to benefit in the East African Federation? A successful East African Federation, Madam Speaker, would call for a referendum to ensure that all the people of Uganda generally support the bandwagon called the East African Federation. Otherwise, why are you legislating to formulate a law on referenda in Uganda, some of them without any aim, when you have not thought of a referendum to ensure that the population of Uganda gives sanctity to the federation of East Africa?  

Otherwise, what are the challenges, Madam Speaker?  Why am I saying that the people of Uganda must be consulted? I am saying so because of the following challenges: One, we do not want Uganda to go into a federation of East Africa where it will become a non-entity. We must carry with us all the glory and sovereignty so that we feel proud of belonging to the East African Federation. This is why I would like to pay tribute to the late Sir Edward Mutesa, Ssekabaka of Buganda, who at one time refused to be dragged into the East African Federation for fear that the Protectorate of Uganda and the Kingdoms of Uganda would become non-entities. I think the dead man had a point. So, now that we are becoming more and more bright day after day, it is important for us to think about the pride of Ugandans before they go into the East African Federation. 

We are still zigzagging now about what system of government to follow in Uganda. What sort of East African federation are you going to forge if Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda respectively drive various political systems? It is important that we form a commonality in politics in terms of systemisation.  We must all harness the resources of diversity in terms of political systems, hence a multiparty system. There is no way you can carry on the system of government related to the Movement anywhere; you cannot sell it anywhere in East Africa. It is a bygone and you better castigate it and the time is now. 

Madam Speaker, the other challenge, which I think is very important, have we consulted the people of Uganda how best they want to be governed? Before we go to the federation of East Africa, have we harnessed federalism within Uganda? You people have been talking a lot about the East African Federation, what about the federation of Uganda? Uganda has not settled because it has failed to address a system of government capable of bringing every Ugandan on board. At one time, when we got our independence, we had a quasi-federal arrangement. Since it was unilaterally scrapped by Dr Obote, we have never settled; this is the reality on the ground. So, before we go into the East African Federation, let us ensure that every Ugandan wherever he or she is, is free to interact in a federal manner within Uganda. Otherwise, do not talk about the East African Federation short of federating locally and regionally, and this is a point and nobody can challenge me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to end by requesting the Uganda Government not to endeavour to talk about the East African Federation short of the people of Uganda represented by this Parliament. We have a big say in how people in Uganda can be convinced to support the phenomenon of the East African Federation. Let us first ensure that the people of Uganda, in their respective areas, are free to choose a political system they want before we go to the East African Federation. Otherwise, it is totally meaningless for us to forge the East African Federation when we are only going there to perish. You must see what I am talking about now. Thank you very much.

3.35
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is an observation, and I am seeking clarification on paragraph two of page 4. The Chairperson of this Committee has raised a very important issue mentioning the fact that, the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly cannot conduct their business effectively because the ministers of Foreign Affairs of each country are busy transacting the business of their various countries; and in this paragraph it is mentioned that as a result, motions cannot be moved or Bills introduced before the Assembly, rendering it redundant and yet there is a lot of pending business that awaits deliberation.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to know how this problem is going to be solved, because if these ministers do not attend to the business of the East African Legislative Assembly, then it means even the business in connection with East African Federation will not move as fast as expected. I would like to know from the committee, which steps, for instance, are these three countries taking to see that these ministers attend to the business of the East African Legislative Assembly and the work is done effectively. 

Madam Speaker, I feel this shows that the East African Legislative Assembly is not taken as being very important. It is high time, as we move towards East African Federation, that the business of the East African Legislative Assembly or of these Members is taken seriously. So, I would like to request the committee, because they have not made any recommendation to this effect -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, can you look at page 9? There is a recommendation there to the effect that there should be a minister specifically responsible for the Community affairs resident in Arusha.

MR ARAALI: That is from Uganda, I think.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From each of the three countries.

MR ARAALI: But what I am saying, are the other countries in line with this? That is my observation, because what is the use of having a minister from Uganda who is there and other countries are not providing ministers for the same job? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LANDS) (Mr Matiya Baguma Isoke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make a statement by way of requesting you and the committee that arranges the business of this House, to look at this matter as being more than what the East African Legislative Assembly report that we have received states. On the Order Paper, item 8 is report of the Committee on the East African Community. But, Madam Speaker, the report of the committee on page 1, paragraph two, only presents a two-year report of the Assembly on matters of the Community. This is a procedural matter because the subject is more pregnant than what the Assembly has achieved in the last two years.  
The Assembly is one of the organs of the Community; there are other organs, there is the council of ministers. When will the council of ministers make a report? Was it notified so that we really treat the matter of the East African Community comprehensively, so that we all know what is going on and go back to inform the people we represent satisfactorily? We have got the East African Court of Justice, the secretariat has been in place for more than five year and there is a lot it has achieved, this is not being reported on in this report. We have signed protocols including the Lake Victoria Basin Management Protocol, which has far reaching social, economic and political impact on the lives of our people -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I am aware that hon. Baguma Isoke is a member of Cabinet and a member of the Executive. I agree with him that we expected something bigger than this. Could the hon. Baguma Isoke clarify to me whether the Executive has actually submitted reports to the committee for consideration, and the committee has either failed or neglected to include what they submitted to them in this report, then we would know where the problem is and where to lay the blame? Could he assist me to understand?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, on page 2 of the report, it is reported that the committee held a meeting with a team from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs led by the Minister of State for Regional Cooperation, at which Government position on issues raised at the meeting with the Members of East African Legislative Assembly and in the reports mentioned above was given. Does this exclude the rest of Government positions on all matters relating to East African federation, or was it held back, or is the ministry for which you hold the portfolio not cooperating with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Maybe you can provide further clarification on this point as well.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I totally agree with hon. Baguma Isoke that this report should be bigger than this, but my concern is on the issue that he raised that, when will the Minister of Foreign Affairs report here? He is in the Cabinet and he is in a position to let us know, not ask this Parliament that, “When will the minister present his report to this House?” I am only wondering whether we should provoke him or the Cabinet or the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to bring a report on the activities or on the issues that are handled by the council of ministers, because here in this report it is mentioned that the minister submitted some written statement to the committee. So, can I know from you whether there is already a report with the Cabinet such that we could debate it together with this tomorrow or next week, because even yesterday here hon. Dr Nabwiso did raise the issue that he had read from the press that the federation shall by the year 2010 have one president. Can we have a statement from the Minister of Foreign Affairs, other than just reading from the newspapers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can say, honourable members is that, no minister has come to me to ask for time on the Order Paper. Normally I am very generous; if the minister asks I put these things on the Order Paper. But so far nobody has come, so the Office of the Speaker has no problem.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I just wanted to make one small clarification on the very topic. I think the report actually is not for the East African Community; it should be for the East African Legislative Assembly because within our Rules of Procedure, Rule 8(2) demands that they report to this House at least once in a year and accordingly, we should be able to report on their activities. The only way the Assembly Members can only report to this House is through the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and it was through this activity then that some of these activities are coming. So, I just wanted to make that correction; particularly I think hon. Baguma Isoke made that observation.

MR ISOKE: Then, Madam Speaker, my concern has been well understood. In fact, my concern as a member of this House is the concern of my colleague, Mr Wagonda Muguli, Prof. Kamuntu and Mr Elijah Okupa, that matters of East African Community, especially at the present time, pregnant with a lot of issues, issues of activities going on in all these organs and the most recent of last week when the committee of the three eminent citizens of East Africa presented the Fast Track report to the summit. I felt that only looking at this report, as a report about the East African Community activities, is inadequate. That is why my statement was procedural and was referring to the Business Committee that arranges this business. My concern is the concern of my colleagues, that this subject be thoroughly treated by this House. I thank you.  

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to inform this House that according to this report, as hon. Baguma Isoke has raised, you do understand that we are remaining with just one month for this Parliament to revisit the tariff rates of East African Community, that we are going to change the tariff rates from zero, 10 to 25; and within that there is an implication of the Management Act of the East African Customs Union as the whole Community. So, to see that this report is inadequate, I find it a problem. We shall have time and we get another report to debate because as it was read in the Budget, by January we have to ratify and change those tariff rates. How are we going to deal with it?

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the concerns of my colleagues on the various issues raised: One, it is true the report, which we are considering now, reflects only the activities of the East African Legislative Assembly, and as has been stated by my colleague, hon. Baguma Isoke, there are other organs of the East African Community, which are enshrined within the treaty. For example, when the council of ministers meets, they generate activities for the Assembly and the various organs. And in view of the multi-sectoral nature of the activities of the East African Community and the various issues raised, I would like to propose, if it is acceptable to the House and to the Chairperson of this Committee, that we combine the discussion of the report from the East African Legislative Assembly together with the report, which the substantive Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs would bring, so that we can discuss all the issues together. I would like to propose, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. But I think I would like to take the matter a bit further, it is bigger than the East African Community. For instance, what are our activities in COMESA, and what shall we hear about them? What is happening to all the treaties, which the Government it entering us into, which bind us as a country?  So, Prime Minister, I think that it will be necessary for the Government to come with these reports so that we can debate them. There is a very big gap between what the Executive is doing and what the Parliament is doing, and what the country knows. What about ratifying the treaties you make?  There is total silence from that side; nothing has come here for ratification for a very long time.  So, the matter is really quite big, Prime Minister.  So, I do not know what you would say about that?  

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to supplement the point you have raised, because if we look at page 4, it is reported there that the council of ministers has actually frustrated the work of the East African Legislative Council because the ministers are too busy with their individual countries’ foreign affairs than to give attention to the East African Legislative Council or the East African Community matters. So, that really shows that there is no seriousness on the part of the Executive as far as the East African Community is concerned. So, I think we need a total report, we need to know why the Government is not interested in the East African Community affairs when actually Parliament wants to move further than that; we are moving towards federation. But when we are talking about smaller matters now, the ministers are too busy to handle these small matters and yet we are desiring for bigger matters.  So, can all these things come to us and we understand why this Government is not serious about this matter?  Thank you.

3.53
MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate what has been said that - of course, hon. Margaret Zziwa and her Committee are working within their terms of reference. But certainly to give this subject the attention it deserves, it is better to discuss it comprehensively. The areas that I would like those concerned to look at when they are bringing us a comprehensive report are: One, there is the impending incorporation of other countries within the East African Community. There are those who have applied, there are those who have been admitted. We have got countries like Rwanda, Burundi, Congo - I do not know which others - they come in with conditions, and these conditions may undermine our own thrust on the way forward. There are many views on this subject of bringing in new members.  The popular voice is that, why do we not first federate, given our background, this is the East African Community we knew; and then later on, we can bring in other friends rather than bringing in friends who may be having their own interests, then they give us conditions and they undermine the progress on this matter. We would like to have an in-depth thought on that particular aspect. 

Another one is, I have looked at the East African Community Treaty. When you look at the functions of the East African Legislative Assembly, most of them are actually not the functions you would expect a legislative assembly to undertake. The legislative function, much of it is still within the council of ministers and the supreme body. Take, an example, as we –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ruhindi, there was a view from the Minister of Public Service that, maybe we defer this debate until a comprehensive report is produced, because now you are really submitting substantively. We have raised all these matters about our foreign activities, about which we have not yet received a report. I do not know what you think.  

MR RUHINDI: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to debate notwithstanding –(Mrs Zziwa rose_)- let us hear from the Chairperson of the Committee.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I was coming in with a view of looking at the proposal by the Minister in charge of Public Service, of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to bring in a comprehensive report on the various activities within the East African Community, which would be ably debated along with just one arm within the East African Community; and also maybe to mention that the Secretariat of the East African Community had wished to come and meet us as a House some time before this session began -(Mr Mulengani rose_)

MR MULENGANI: I want to thank you, hon. Zziwa, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am looking at a situation that the East African Legislative Assembly reports through the parliamentary Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, then the council of ministers has its own time and mandate to come to the Floor of the House and give the status as per their findings. Will it mean, therefore, that the East African Legislative Assembly will never be able to report through the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs regarding issues of the East African Legislative Assembly? Because if we are to wait for the ministers, they have a mandate to come on the Floor of Parliament and give us their status on their findings about the cooperation, but the committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs also has got its own mandate to report about the East African Legislative Assembly, why should we then tie the two debates?

RR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Shortly before this report was presented, the House wondered why the substantive Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs was not in. My colleague, hon. Okumu Ringa, assertively said he was stepping in for the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Now, it looks like points of clarification raised by the Members are getting hot and he is now proposing that we defer the debate, and yet the issues that Members are about to contribute would help the minister for that matter in preparing a comprehensive report on EALA matters. I would like to pray that more clarifications be given by the Members debate continues, and if hon. Okumu Ringa is not in position to do what he had undertaken to do, just takes note and reports back to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The East African Legislative Assembly reports to the committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. But equally, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is still under the same committee; so, my suggestion would be that of harmonization. It is something that can be worked out when the legislative assembly people are presenting their findings to harmonize with the minister in charge of the region, so that it makes a lot of sense when we come to present to the House when we are looking at a comprehensive aspect of the undertakings. And this can easily be done because both have an undertaking to relate with the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. So, I feel it is something that can really be handled in terms of harmonizing how we report to this House on matters to do with East African Community, either at the legislative level or at the executive level.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I hope you are not forgetting that the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has a very big mandate; it is not only the Legislative Assembly of East Africa that they have to deal with. They may talk first about the common market, about the courts - it is very big. All the foreign affairs of this country are in their hands.

MR ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, you are very right that the mandate of the committee actually stretches actually to many issues regarding the foreign affairs of this country, and it is also true that the minister is obliged to report to this House and to report to the committee. At times he does, at times he does not; and at times Members may feel that they have issues, which are topical, and they can either bring them out as questions and at times they also raise them in the committee.  

Fundamentally, today we had wanted to report on the East African Legislative Assembly. But it is only imperative that we also observe that many issues within the East African legislative Assembly touch on other organs of the Community, and it was in that breath that I conceded that if the minister could bring what I may call reports - though it may be imperative on him to report to the House, but I think it is important that he makes a comprehensive report on the other organs of the Community. You realize that some of the weaknesses observed by the EALA are some of the areas where the minister must answer; why are the ministers not in Arusha, for instance? So, those are some of the areas of concern.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two serious observations to make. The first one is on page 3 of the report, it is a clarification but it is also a serious observation.  When you look at page 3 of the report, there is a summary of activities of the Members of East African Legislative Assembly. 

First, Madam Speaker, you look at activities, they are about 10 activities; and in all of them, except two, there is a decline. Motions moved 2002/03 were 14, 2003/04 only five. Resolutions passed they were five 2002/03, none in the following year.  Committee meetings 33, in the following year only 23 and Bills passed were six 2002/03, only one in the following year. This is a very serious matter. (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam speaker, there is a general consensus that we defer this debate because the issues concerned are big, and that we should give opportunity to the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs to bring us a comprehensive report on all these issues, and I think even the Chairperson of the Committee has conceded to that. Really, I want to understand whether we should continue to talk about an issue when actually we should be moving.  We have several other matters to deal with in this sitting. Thank you, Madam speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Chairperson says that she would have been happier if we had a comprehensive report. I will not be able to stop you from touching the other items and confine you to the legislative assembly, I do not know whether you will agree to say nothing about anything else and only deal with the Assembly. So, Prime Minister, what do you say?

4.04
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to apologise for the absence of the minister. In fact, when I got out of this place, I had gone to find out what had become of him. As you know, the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs is not here, she lost her brother and therefore there was a problem. But I have gathered that he has had a problem and that is why he is not here, but he should have contacted me or some other person.  

As I see it, I entirely concede that he must bring a comprehensive paper, and in that paper he must of course interface with the presidential committee and also Cabinet; and I would suggest that he does so within two weeks from today because that is a very serious exercise. I want to make it clear that we are firmly committed to the political federation of East Africa –(Applause)- indeed for the entire continent of Africa. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Prime Minister, you have made that undertaking and really we would let the two weeks be two weeks because the question of the customs union, the common market and all that affect all the ordinary people of this country, and it is important for their representatives to know what is going on. So, we expect that report not later than two weeks.

Now, honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils from Luteete Mixed Primary School in Bamunanika County in Luweero District; they are up there. You are welcome!  (Applause)

MR MUTULUUZA: On the same matter, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the substantive ministries, which have some reports and treaties also to have the data within our pigeonholes because I do understand that those treaties have got a lot of data, which we can peruse through and it can enable us to be aware of what we are going to legislate on, because as they bring a report it will not be very satisfactory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, I had already given directions on the election violence report, debate of which will begin next week, so please go and collect those heavy books of yours; and the ministers who wanted to make statements should get ready to do so. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 4.08 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

