Tuesday, 05 December 2006
                                                
Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
                         
The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you. Today Parliament of Uganda has been honoured by the pastoral visit of His Grace the Archbishop of Church of Uganda, Dr Luke Orombi who is accompanied by a high powered church delegation, including the Assistant Bishop of Kampala Diocese and a number of senior clergy and officials of the Church of Uganda. He came this morning and gave us the entire day to be with him. Your Grace, you are most welcome to Parliament of Uganda! We thank you for coming to visit us, please come again.

Honourable members, you may recall that sometime back a number of members on the floor of the House called for Parliament to be involved in the preparations for the hosting of CHOGM by Uganda in November 2007. For this purpose, it was further proposed that a committee should be set up to play an oversight role in the exercise on behalf of Parliament. 

In response to this call the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs wrote to me on 11th September expressing his ministry’s full support for Parliament to set up a committee with which his ministry could interact and keep periodically updated on the preparations for hosting CHOGM on behalf of Parliament. On 21st September this year the Business Committee of Parliament discussed this matter and resolved that an ad hoc committee consisting of the chairpersons of Standing and Sessional committees of Parliament be set up and mandated to monitor the preparations for hosting CHOGM. 

As to what extent the committee of Parliament should be involved in the arrangements for hosting CHOGM in Uganda, a small committee was set up to work out the terms of reference and these include: hon. Ogenga Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Perez Ahabwe, hon. Teopista Sentongo and the Clerk, Mr Tandekwire. The committee generated terms of reference, which were presented and considered by the Business Committee on 7th November and adopted. The copies of the same have been distributed to you to explain the terms of reference.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

2.49
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It has been supported.

DR KIYONGA: The certificate of financial implications is also attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to consider and subsequently report to us. I would appeal to the committee to expediently process this so that we can consider these Bills before we go for the Christmas recess, which will come just before Christmas. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE LAW REVISION (FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) BILL, 2006

2.52
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Bill, 2006” be read the first time. The certificate of financial implications is also attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. I must confess that as I see on the Order Paper, most of these Bills are going to be directed to only one committee and all of them are needed. Therefore, it will be up to the committee to look at the Bills and decide which ones to give priority. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE MAGISTRATES’ COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
2.53
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Magistrates’ Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2006" be read the first time. The certificate of financial implications is also attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT BILL, 2006
2.53
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The International Criminal Court Bill, 2006” be read for the first time. The certificate of financial implications is also attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

2.54
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the first time. The certificate of financial implications is attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
2.54
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the first time and the certificate of financial implications is attached.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to appropriate committee of Parliament.

2.55
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, in view of the fact that you said these Bills should be handled expeditiously, I want to note that while all the other Bills have been distributed, the one on the Law Revision Fines and Other Financial Amounts In Criminal Matters Bill has not been distributed to us. I do not know whether it will be possible to get it handled quickly.

THE SPEAKER: Well, steps should be taken to give copies to members. As a lawyer you may realise that this Bill is important because some of the fines that are given in some cases may cause problems unless they are revised. The Clerk’s office in liaison with the ministry will give you the copies.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
2.56
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker and honourable members, when I made a ministerial statement on the situation in Karamoja last week, I indicated that today given the opportunity I would lay on the Table four supporting documents. 

First, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a document entitled, “Cordon and Search Operations In Karamoja, Problems of Human Rights Violation”. This is the title of the report presented to the Rt hon. Prime Minister by the committee that he set up to go and inquire into this matter in Karamoja.

The second document relates to the operational guidelines issued to the soldiers in Karamoja by the 3rd Division Commanding Officer. 

The third document relates to the agreed minutes in a meeting that was chaired by myself and attended by honourable members of the Karamoja Parliamentary Committee on the subject of Karamoja.

The last document is a presentation of the Government of Uganda’s response to the allegation that we deployed troops in Somalia. I beg to lay the papers on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the committee study the documents and report to us. Honourable members before we proceed to other business, I want to take this opportunity to welcome back honourable members of UWOPA who have been visiting Denmark. I see the chairperson is here and you are most welcome! (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT TO MAKE MORE COMMITMENT TO IMPROVE MATERNITY HEALTH IN UGANDA (MOVED UNDER RULE 43 AND 50 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE)

2.58
MS SYLVIA SINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the government to make more commitment to improve maternal health in Uganda. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; you can proceed to justify.

MS SINABULYA: Mr Speaker, WHEREAS Uganda is one of the countries with a high maternal mortality rate in the world, with a rate of 505 deaths per 100,000 live births arising from haemorrhage, sepsis, obstructed labour, eclampsia, malaria and HIV/AIDS among others; 

AND WHEREAS one in five of the maternal deaths arise from unsafe abortions, with 110,000 cases of complications arising from unsafe abortions being treated in health facilities every year and with 44 percent of the maternal deaths occurring among 15 to 24 year olds; 

AWARE THAT only 14.2 percent of health facilities are able to offer emergency obstetric care, only 38 percent of women give birth under the care of a skilled birth attendant and 50 percent of health facilities do not have emergency drugs; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT gender based violence is a foundational problem underlying many of the poor reproductive health indicators and it has not been given due attention in Uganda; 

RECOGNISING THAT the Government of Uganda has a duty to provide sexual and reproductive services and has made commitments at international level, aimed at promoting maternal health, Goal No.5 of the Millennium Development Goals, by ensuring that women get appropriate services in connection with pregnancy, delivery, the post-natal period, and granting free services where necessary;  

CONCERNED THAT despite the government’s intervention to improve maternal health in Uganda, the situation remains alarming; 

NOTING THAT action can be taken at community, health facility, local government and national levels to address the problem through, enhancing access to sexual and reproductive health services, strengthening of the referral system, training of health providers, support of the Health Sector Support Programme, education and sensitisation, community policing, building synergies of health professionals and other stakeholders, adequate budgeting and national policy review; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That Parliament urges government and other stakeholders to show more commitment to improving maternal health by taking all necessary and relevant steps to make maternal health issues a priority at all levels of government and develop and implement policies and plans aimed at ensuring that all women have better access to sexual and reproductive health services by taking in addition to existing interventions the following actions:
(i)	Establishing a maternal mortality control programme.
(ii)	Making maternal deaths a notifiable condition by law.
(iii)	Ensuring that the Ministry of Health accredits all health facilities.
(iv)	Building and strengthening capacity of the health work force.
(v)	Making a policy to address the issue of unsafe abortions.
(vi)	Ensuring availability of blood by increasing the number of blood banks.
(vii)	Development of sexual and reproductive health commodity security by including sexual reproductive health commodities in the essential drugs list and thereby ensure that women do not die needlessly because of lack of basic medicine.
(viii)	Increasing availability and access to family planning services.
(ix)	Requiring better law enforcement and administration of justice by the Police and Judiciary.
(x) Spearheading activities aimed at encouraging constructive male in involvement all   aspects of sexual and reproductive health.”

Mr Speaker, the trends in the indicators of the health status in Uganda over the last decade have been a major concern and central issue of debate to political leaders, health mangers and planners.

Mr Speaker, like I mentioned in the motion, some of these indicators are among the highest in the world. I need to mention here some of the maternal health indicators to make Parliament appreciate the gist of this motion. I will mention a few. The maternal mortality ratio is 505 deaths per 100,000 live births. Our total fertility rate is 6.9 children per woman, and it is among the highest in Africa. 

Delivery by skilled attendants is 39 percent. Contraceptive prevalence is 22.8 percent and the un-met need for family planning is 35 percent. Mr Speaker and honourable members, those are some of the health indicators of this country.

I want to point out from the onset that most of the causes of the poor maternal health out comes are preventable. They are either found in the health system or the social- cultural set up of society.

 In September 2000 at the Millennium Summit, Uganda together with other 180 countries committed herself to achieving the Millennium Development Goals. And Goal No. 5 is on improving of maternal mortality by two-thirds by 2015. Six years down the road, much as other goals are progressing, the maternal mortality rate has not improved. Therefore, honourable members, a systematic focus should be put on eliminating the five killers of women, and these are: postpartum haemorrhage, infection, unsafe abortions, high blood pressure and obstructed labour. All these conditions can be avoided if you have a good and responsive health system.

Priority action should be to increase obstetric health care facilities in all health structures. Because we all know that all pregnant women face some level of risks. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), about 40 percent of pregnant women will experience delivery complications while about 15 percent will need emergency obstetric care to manage complications, which are potentially threatening to the mother and the infant.

 I am aware that the government has a policy of putting one Health Centre IV in each constituency, which centre is supposed to offer emergency care services. However, as we talk now, only 14.2 percent of these are able to offer emergency obstetric care services.   

 Two weeks ago, I, with some other colleagues were attending the launching of a report on un-intended pregnancies and un-safe abortions. The Minister of State (Primary Health Care) who was the chief guest narrated his experience of touring Health Centre IVs, which had been built under the supervision of local governments and finding a theatre so small that he wondered whether – actually he said it was so small that two people could not go in at the same time. He wondered whether it was the patient or the doctor who entered first. But I also wondered: How does the doctor operate on the patient? Maybe he stands on the bed while operating the patient! 

One aspect of our health system is that it is under funded. This financial year, the share of the Ministry of Health of the National Budget is only 9.3 percent and yet by the Abuja Declaration of 2001, African Heads of State and Government pledged to allocate 15 percent of their national budgets to health. In the last financial year, it was 14 percent of the budget and we thought that we were hitting the target, but this year, it has gone down.

Mr Speaker, due to the low budgetary allocation to health in general and maternal health in particular, the existing infrastructure including facilities and equipment are not able to cope with the rising maternal health demands especially in remote and rural areas where the majority of the population lives. 

The implications of this under funding to health are: That up to 60 percent of the positions in referral hospitals are vacant; most rural health units, which are the first and often final contact between the expectant mothers and the national health system are manned by un-trained or hurriedly trained nursing assistants. Only four percent of these health units have required equipment and supplies and can perform all the essential obstetric emergency functions. Few hospitals can manage miscarriages or abortions complications yet this is a major contribution to maternal morbidity and mortality.

Mr Speaker, allow me to also point out that Uganda’s health system has been found to be inaccessible to the women. Whereas it is on paper that basic health services are free in public healthy facilities, nowhere in this country can a delivery take place without a charge on the mother. She has to come with a pair of gloves, a mackintosh, soap and some money for drugs to control bleeding and to many women this is unaffordable.  They either delay to seek maternal care while looking for the money or they don’t come at all and prefer to give birth at the hands of traditional birth attendants or at home with the help of a relative. These sometimes lead to unfortunate maternal deaths.

It is also important to note that nearly 60 percent of mothers who die of childbirth are adolescents between the ages of 13 and 24 years. Government should concentrate on reducing teenage pregnancy by making it possible for all girls to go to school, remain there by law and rigorously implement the laws that prohibit underage marriages.

The issue of abortion is certainly a sensitive one to a number of people. However, the solution is not to bury ones head in the sand and hope that the phenomenon will disappear. While a programme should aim at eliminating the reasons leading to abortion, we should encourage a healthy and unemotional debate about the issue and the ravages caused by unsafe abortions because in the final analysis we have to recognise that unsafe abortions is the third major cause of maternal death.

Some causes of the poor maternal health indicators are to be found in the cultural aspects of our society: Polygamous relationships and large households are some of these; sexual and domestic violence result in unwanted pregnancies, which end into unsafe abortions yet the phenomenon of domestic violence and sexual violence is poorly reported due to social-cultural reasons and the legal vacuum surrounding these issues.

Despite their empowerment the majority of women have no control over reproduction and sexuality.  You cannot decide when and how many children to have and because of the unequal power relations in the home and the community, women suffer social and economic insecurity.  They thus use fertility and children as a form of social and economic security, but it is this large number of children a woman produces and how rapidly she produces them that take a toll on her leading to her death.

Uganda has seen remarkable changes in many development indicators in the past 20 years; and it is only maternal mortality, which has not changed for the better in these years. Maternal and child mortality are the only accurate indicators that show how good or bad a national health system is. Uganda’s spectacular economic growth, appalling housing industry and investments, which are good efforts, we all must admit, but they have not been transformed into real development at the micro-level.

Uganda’s remarkable economic progress has been at the expense of social welfare, especially maternal health, because of the emphasis of economic growth through industries and private sector investment, and yet social expenditure, say on health has been restricted if not reduced.  Spending on maternal health should not be viewed as a concession or expenditure.  It should be looked at as an investment because studies have shown that in rapidly developing countries like the Asian Tigers, social investment was a fulcrum to development. 

The return on investment on health in general is very high.  The economic consequences of maternal death are severe. Research tells us that in Uganda maternal deaths cause a loss of productivity of over US $150 million annually.  And for every mother who dies, four children are rendered vulnerable and 35 other women who survive childbirth are disabled.  This huge maternal problem coupled with the challenges in the health system make maternal health a national emergency, deserving a burning urgency similar to that of building power plants and attracting foreign investors.

Honourable members, I hope this motion will receive the attention and support it deserves from Parliament and the Executive.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

3.16
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu District): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and hon. members. I am one of the few men who supported the causes of maternal health.

Mr Speaker I am a medical doctor and I have also inter-faced with the question of maternal health while handling mothers, some of whom have died in my hands because of a non responsive system.  I, however, rise to second the motion but before that, allow me to make some few remarks.

We are talking about maternal death, which means we are talking about women and girl mothers who die as a result of pregnancy or childbirth related complications and not any other incidental causes. As we know, pregnancy is a physiological condition; it is not a disease and therefore, a mother should not die because of a pregnancy, a child should not also die because of pregnancy or childbirth related complications.  

As we heard from hon. Ssinabulya who moved the motion, Uganda has one of the highest maternal mortality ratios in the world. Like she reported, our maternal mortality ratio, which is a measure of how many mothers die as a result of pregnancy or childbirth related complications, stand at 505 deaths per 100,000 live births. This is one of the highest figures we have on the globe. This translates into 6,000 mothers dying every year in Uganda.  If you do a further calculation it shows everyday we are losing 16 mothers as a result of pregnancy or childbirth related complications.

So it is a very serious matter and that is why we are bringing it to Parliament for us to make a resolution. 16 mothers dying everyday is the equivalent of a mini-bus crashing and all the occupants dying instantly in Uganda everyday.  If this were happening as a road traffic accident, we would call it a calamity.  If it were occurring to high profile people like Members of Parliament dying, God forbid, it would be a catastrophe. But now those are mothers who die, it is casual, it is routine and it is cavalier!

The questions, which we are asking are: Why do these mothers die of pregnancy and childbirths and yet these are not disease? They are normal conditions.  Is there anything that can be done to avert these deaths? These are the questions that we are asking ourselves today.

Mr Speaker and hon. members, what kills the mothers as a result of pregnancy and childbirth is known, and it is largely manageable.  As we heard from the justification, the conditions, which directly kill the mothers, include obstructed labour, high blood pressure complications, severe bleeding, infections and unsafe abortion.  But there are also other attendant factors, which are indirect and they include: adolescent and teenage pregnancies, malaria in pregnancy, malnutrition, HIV/AIDS, harmful and traditional cultural practices, high levels of poverty, non use of family planning services and sometimes inadequate attention from their male spouses.  

It is also known that up to 15 percent of pregnant women will always get complications, which are life threatening.  But the test of a functioning system is how fast the system can be able to address those complications of the mothers.

The reasons why our mothers die are summarised into three delays:  One, mothers usually delay at the community level.  The communities and families delay to identify the risks and complications associated with the mothers in order for them to make a decision to go for health facilities.  

Secondly, when the mothers make a decision to leave their homes to go for a health facility, there are problems in terms of transport and communication. Are there ambulances?  How fast can a mother leave her home and reach a health facility?

The third level of delay is when the mother has reached the health facility, how functional is the health facility in terms of providing this emergency care, say, if one is bleeding and has all those complications involved?  That is where the problems are and that is where we should focus our interventions in order to be able to save the mothers who are dying in this country.

The death of mothers and children is a measure of human development and therefore if Uganda has a high maternal and infant mortality rate, it means that, it is ranked low on the social economic development ladder.  So the question is, why are we not investing sufficiently in the area of maternal health?  If I just go into the figures; the budgetary allocations as we heard last financial year, the allocation to Health was 13.5 percent, which was Ugshs 509 billion, which has reduced to 9.3 percent of the National Budget, which is Ugshs 381 billion.   The Ministry of Health had estimated that it would need Ugshs 721 billion for it to implement what is contained in the Health Sector Strategic Plan for this financial year.  So this means it just received about half of its projections.

When you look at the allocation of resources within the Ministry of Health, we note that sexual and reproductive health received just rightly over one percent of the allocation to the Ministry of Health.  So, it means that the allocation to Ministry of Health has gone down, but also what the Ministry of Health internally allocates to reproductive health is very minimal.  The question of maternal health is just a component of the broader sexual reproductive health.  So it is not surprising that we get these high figures of mothers and children dying.  

The call we are making today is that, we would like all the stakeholders in this country to take the issue of maternal and child health as a priority.  It should be treated as a multi-sectoral issue because it is not only the responsibility of Ministry of Health to deal with maternal health, but involves all the other players like the Ministry of Works and Transport; Ministry of Energy.  They all have a role to play and therefore as we plan for the various sectors, maternal and child health should be part and parcel of the policies and budgets we make.  We also call upon the other stakeholders, including local governments, development partners, civil society, faith based institutions, traditional and cultural institutions and the media, among others, to make the issue of maternal health a priority in this country.

Like I said before, we also call upon fellow men like me to be supportive to this issue of maternal health.  Mr Speaker, why are we emphasising this? It is common for health workers to receive mothers who come in dire conditions in hospitals, even at midnight and beyond.  When you ask them where their husbands are, they tell you they are in the bars drinking or elsewhere “porking” with other men. They only want to come and check on the wives the following day and yet the ladies have to take decisions.  So, we need the support of the male spouses because pregnancy is carried for nine months and therefore the support from the male partners is required right from the beginning up to the time the mother delivers and subsequently when the child is being raised.  

We need to increase resources, which should be put to good use so that they can translate into improvement of the indicators.  We should also have a responsive institutional framework, the functioning system, favourable policies and laws, advocacy and activism on the issue of maternal health and also political support and good will.

Finally, we have best practices and experiences from several countries, which have done significant investments in the area of maternal health and have resulted into increased and accelerated production in maternal mortality and child mortality.  Countries like in Asia, and Sirilanka where they invested in recruitment and deployment of skilled birth attendants and within a short time the maternal mortality significantly reduced.  Therefore, we are saying we should review our programmes in Uganda to make sure that maternal health is a big issue and we invest significantly in it for us to realise the Millennium Development Goals that we are all aspiring to achieve.  

Honourable members, I expect everybody to support this motion and pass it overwhelmingly without any opposition.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in terms of Rule 50, a motion has been moved by hon. Ssinabulya, woman Member for Mityana District and it has been seconded by hon. Baryomunsi, and I do not really need to read all the details.  

The motion is, urging government to make more commitment to improve on maternal health in Uganda.  That is the gist of the motion.  Now since it has been moved and seconded, it is open for debate.  But the debate will be limited to not more than 45 minutes.  The Rule says, not more than an hour, but since we have got the background, I think 45 minutes will be a sufficient time for you to make your contribution to the debate.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga):  Thank you very much for allowing me respond to this motion.  Everything, which has been stated here in this motion, is correct- (Applause) I would also like to say right from the beginning that this government is very committed to the issues of infant mortality and maternal mortality. In 1986 when this government came into power, maternal mortality was at a ratio of 700 per 100,000 live births and now it is at 505 per 100,000 live births.  

As you can see, there is a very significant reduction and I will tell you why. Infant mortality in 1986 was 120 per 1,000 life births. Now as we speak, it is about 88 per 1,000 life births. I agree that those figures compared with the developed world are still high, but when you take the statistics in Africa, these are within what is happening everywhere. (Interruption) 

MR SPEAKER: Well, there is a clarification.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. Mr Minister, now that you agree and concede that the facts stated are true, what have you done to reverse this catastrophic trend? If it is what you are going to say, hon. Minister, I think it would be prudent for you that you wait for some more facts, which you do not know to enrich this motion so that when you are answering, you comprehensively give a solution to this problem.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to quote a kiganda saying that, “nze nsumulula, ate gw’ osiba.”  I was just starting to explain the causes of maternal mortality in this country and the honourable member intervened -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Hon. Minister, I am not talking about the causes which are known, but which solutions are you offering for these problems?

THE SPEAKER: No, please give him time to make his contribution.

DR MALLINGA: What are the causes of maternal mortality in this country? The social causes first: This government has built level III clinics in every sub-county; about 80 per cent of the population is within five kilometres of Level III health centres in this country. At these centres, we have antenatal or prenatal services, midwives to help women deliver and if there are complications -(Interruption)

MRS BETTY OCAN: Mr Speaker, at the moment, we have our women dying. Those Health Centre IIIs which the honourable minister speaks of – I am not sure he has actually been checking on the operation of those Health Centre III’s. If this was not an issue, I am sure a woman would not get up to move this motion. Is the honourable minister talking from an informed point of view like I am right now informing him that we have a big problem? Those Health Centre IIIs are not operational; they are not functional; they are not answering the problems of women. So, do not even waste time on that. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA:  If I am going to talk on the motion, it is better that most of this information – I have been involved in this maternal health business for 25 years. There is not very much information I can be given. So, let me talk. I could not really understand what information the honourable member was giving, but it is a fact that almost every sub-county in this country has a health centre III. The problem we have -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since he is the Minister in charge, let him tell us what his position is and then later you will contribute. He is just telling us his policy on this issue. Let us listen to him; you will come in. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much for your protection, Mr Speaker. I am being derailed by these interruptions when I am trying to make it known to the honourable members what problems we are facing. Number one problem is that we have to educate our people to utilise the health centres for antenatal care. Of all the deliveries in this country, more than 50 per cent do not have antenatal care. Yet, in most places it is within five kilometres. Of the women who go for antenatal care, less than half turn up to deliver in the hospitals. Most of them still deliver at home. Our people are not utilising the resources. If we are going to combat the issue of maternal mortality, basically we have to educate our people to go to health centres for antenatal care -(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 50 (2) in connection with the manner of debating motions, “The Speaker may at the beginning of any debate specify the period that each Member contributing to a debate may be given.” You have already told us it is 45 minutes. It looks like the Minister is about to take them all. May I be clarified as to how we are going to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: I will take care of that. But what you must know is that as far as the mover and seconder of the motion are concerned, there is a problem in the policy. The Minister is now coming here to tell you what is happening so that you compare what you know and what he has said and that will help you to contradict if you have to. That is why I am allowing him more time, but otherwise I will give four minutes to those who will contribute.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I was explaining, we have to educate our people to start using health care centres for antenatal care and delivery. 

Men must also start get involved in the pregnancy of their women. What happens in this country is that a woman gets pregnant and wants transportation to go to a health care centre but the man does not get involved to provide her with transportation of just a bicycle to go for five kilometres to the health care centre. 

A woman goes into labour - sometimes I have had women tell me what happens. The husband has two wives and after one gets pregnant, he migrates to the house of the other one. If she goes into labour at night, she is not supposed to disturb the other woman and the husband in the other house; she stays in the house in labour and some times develops complications, delivers alone while the husband is sleeping in the other house. He does not even wake up; it is unethical for her to go and wake up that man to take her to the health centre.

 Mr Speaker, there are very many issues which I should not go into now but will just summarise some of the points which have been brought up. It is true we are the ones who passed the budget here; did any of you complain that we were under budgeted in the Ministry of Health? No, all we said was “Aye”. So, I appeal to the honourable members - the budget –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable minister with that statement, you may not be considered to be fair in a sense that there are very many expressed constitutional provisions in as far as finance is concerned. An ordinary member here may not increase the budget unless it is proposed by you. You are in charge of the ministry and you should stand here and say, “This is not enough, increase it”. That is when we can handle it rather than for us to ask for an increase when you did not propose it. Wind up please.

DR MALLINGA: There is so much to say; the size of theatres I think has been exaggerated. The theatres, which accompany Health Centre III and IVs can take several people. Budgetary allocation of 9.3 is low; by the Abuja Declaration, in Africa it should be about 15 per cent. I was not in position last time but this time I will be in position to appeal to you.  

Criminal abortion: The honourable member brought it up as being responsible for a significant percentage of maternal death but she did not suggest the solution. The solution is contraception as far as this country is concerned. We should teach contraception starting from high school to universities and tertiary institutions.  

Polygamy is an evil still in our system as I have mentioned. As far as I can see the major cause of maternal mortality, which is postpartum haemorrhage can be resolved; we have blood banks in every regional hospital and there is no shortage of blood reported by any of the institutions. If you have problems, please tell us and we shall address it. Antibiotics are available to cure infections. 

I agree we have a problem, but we do not have problems, which can be resolved overnight. This is a long-term plan; there is no country, which reduces maternal and infant mortality in a short time.  Thank you very much.

3.47
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank very much, Mr speaker. I would like to first of all thank the movers of this motion. It is common knowledge that our human development index in Uganda leaves a lot to be desired and therefore, issues to do with health as articulated by the movers of the motion are a point of concern. It is unfortunate that I do not have a copy of that motion but I have listened quite carefully. 

It was very clear from the motion here that whilst we talk about low development indexes in as far as health is concerned generally, the performance in our country is poor. We do not have to console ourselves and say that after all even a neighbour the other side is low, even the other African country is poor. Therefore, some of the consolations that the honourable Minister was trying to bring out are really not going to help us. 

Much as the performance in health is poor generally, the reproductive health sector is even worse off. Colleagues heard the deplorable under funding within the Ministry of Health yet within the ministry, the reproductive health is given even less than one per cent and the Minister comes here to tell us that this government is very committed to maternal health mortality. 

 Let us agree with the facts; you very well remember, honourable minister, that at the time when we were debating the budgets, member after member did agitate for increased funding to the Ministry of Health. Probably you did not listen very carefully that time. But I would like to appeal to you again and this goes back to the Executive. As the Speaker rightly guided us, Article 93 forbids Private Members from making amendments that impact on the consolidated fund.

But I would like to appeal to government that even if there is any stringent crisis that the country is faced with, please do not look at health as a possible source for cutting certain resources to address such crisis. Because then it would be tantamount to saying that, “Okay, let a few more people die as we solve this problem”, which we do not want to see happen! 

We would like the Abuja declaration to take effect in this country; health sector funding should be no less than 15 per cent. And moreover even that is really at the bare minimum. We need to see how to help reduce on mortality rates in this country. 

Mr Speaker, certain media houses questioned this and I want it cleared. The concern was whether Parliament was contemplating legalising abortion. I want it on the record that this motion is not about legalisation of abortion. This Parliament will not do that. Because for us we know that abortion would actually be like passing a death sentence on somebody who cannot defend himself or herself. So, we are not about legalisation of abortion, but we want maternal health to be improved and abortion has been one of the problems leading to increased maternal mortality.

Mr Speaker, I want to end by saying that much as we have health centre IIIs and health centre IVs, we still have a problem, and Mr Minister I want you to at least concede, of delivery services there. It is one thing to have a centre, but another to get a service from such a centre. Actually certain mothers even shy away from the health centres knowing that after all even if they went there, they will not be served. 

It is also true that the attitude of certain midwives has been wild to the extent that mothers shy away from being abused and harassed. In fact, the harassment that they get from the health centre alone contributes to more psychological stress to the extent that the mother may even fail. I think this motion is really brought out in good faith. I want to thank my colleagues and appeal to the House that we support the motion overwhelmingly. I beg to move. (Applause) 

3.52
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion but maybe let me first of all start on the information I wanted to give the minister when he said that we voted “Aye” when the budget was here. In the Social Services Committee, we looked at the policy statement and the budget, which was there for reproductive health. First of all, they said reproductive health will remain a priority of the Ministry of Health. But when we looked at the priority, we found it was taking less than one per cent and we complained. It was a heated debate and the ministers said because of CHOGM, because of electricity, because of what - and the women continue to die! So, like you have rightly advised us here, the minister should really respect us and acknowledge that we came here after a heated debate as a Social Services Committee. Otherwise, we have always wanted the mothers of this country to have better health. 

We know that when women die, children are also dying. As 16 women die today, about 16 times three children die. So, 48 children have died in a labour ward today. As we talk, even another one has just died -(Laughter)- in this country because of pregnancy related problems. Many children are dying before the age of 21 days because of their sickly mothers, because a mother has died, because a woman has been discharged from the hospital because of overcrowding; she goes home with the baby and they both die.

We know very well that the women are the backbone of agriculture in this country. And they continue to die and government says reproductive health will continue to be number one on the agenda. But we are not seeing a very good policy on this. Health centre IIs are there in some parishes and health centre IIIs are there in some sub-counties but they are not equipped. Nurses and midwives have been trained but they are not recruited to go and work there. 

In disadvantaged districts like Karamoja and my district Bundibugyo, you will find a nursing aid in a health centre III who is not trained to take care of emergency obstetric cases. Let the ministry accept that women are dying and we need an immediate policy to stop our women from dying like insects.

Recently, a whole doctor died in Mulago because of negligence and inaccessible services. If a doctor can die in Mulago National Referral Hospital, what is happening to my district, Bundibugyo? (Interruption) 

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the doctor who died in Mulago died because of negligence? The condition of which the doctor died was a condition we know and has a mortality of almost 99 per cent and that is amniotic fluid embolism, which when one gets it in the course of delivery has a 99 per cent chance of dying. If they do not die, then it takes a long time to recover and it becomes hard to manage. They must have massive transfusion otherwise they develop disseminated Intravesicular Papillopathy – (Laughter)– which means that their blood will not clot. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to mislead the House by saying that the distinguished doctor, who was my doctor - she was a cardiologist - died as a result of negligence?

THE SPEAKER: The difficulty I have in ruling on this is that, she did not tell us which doctor. We don’t know whether you are talking about the same doctor or not.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. However, I am looking at the woman –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up –

MS ALISEMERA: Yes, I am winding up. Many of the women are dying because of inaccessibility to a thing like a glove. She goes to the hospital, and the midwife asks for a glove, which she cannot afford. So, the midwife refuses to touch that woman’s blood. So the woman delivers alone and in the process she tears, and at the end of the day, she gets Rectal Vaginal physiculus, and these women end up having ill health. In fact, as we talk today, we have young girls below the age of eighteen suffering incontiness of urine, incontiness of faeces because of bad labour, due to lack of assistance.

We have just had a conference on health and we have been talking of these issues. So, let us support this motion for the welfare of the women and the children. Thank you.

4.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion whole-heartedly. But first I want to differ from the honourable minister. When he says that our health centre IIIs and health centre IIs are very capable of handling matters that are causing maternal mortality. He says that he agrees with the figure that only 14.2 of the health facilities in this country can provide emergency care. If it is 14.2, it means that it excludes the entire health centre IIs and health centre IIIs, unless if he can tell me some of the hospitals that don’t fall into this 14.2. But if he cannot then I think it is a point of inconsistence. 

I would be happy if the minister like he said that he agrees with the figures, also agree with the position that the level of emergency – besides, before a mother dies, it has to be at emergency level. If it were a normal delivery, it would be easier; she would find help at sub-county health centre III units. But because it is an emergency problem that threatens her heath, and she cannot find those services that is what causes death. 

So, when the honourable minister comes here and tells us things that are so big sounding - our simple minds simply need to known whether these health centre IIIs are able to provide this emergency care. That is the importance of this accessibility thing. Mr Speaker, having said that I want to say that –[Dr Mallinga rose_]

THE SPEAKER: I think you should leave her to develop her point.

MS ALASO: I want to support the position that maternal mortality be made a notable condition. A notable condition is something that should alarm all of us, and it should be reported and reviewed immediately. It costs no additional money. It simply means that we cause awareness and let people report every time a mother dies, “Where did she die from? Did she die on the way or was it in the hospital?” We have done this for Cholera, we did it for Ebola, we have done it for HIV/AIDS, and we have done it on national immunisation days. Why are we not doing it on maternal mortality? It is important that we take the plight of the women very seriously. 

I have always heard arguments to the effect that we are empowering women. But the real measure of women empowerment is a healthy women population. If they don’t deliver, they will not be there to sing and dance for us those dances they do whenever you have campaigns and launching whatever. They have to be healthy, we should have less orphans and less widowed husbands, because if we don’t – and I am actually disappointed. As hon. Jane has said, 16 women die on a dairy basis. That means that the honourable minister should be announcing every day that fellow country men, death has occurred of 16 women, accompanied by 16 children. 

But the reason he does not do that I think is partly because of the attitude we are seeing on the floor here. If we are seriously considering women empowerment, we should first of all be alarmed by the situation. Once we are alarmed, I want to implore my colleagues that the next time the budget for the Ministry of Health comes, it should clearly demonstrate to us the possibility of training more nurses. 

How can you go to a health centre to find a midwife, who has worked through out the day to work on you during the night? We may blame them for being rude, but imagine this nurse has been in the health centre the whole morning, and the whole afternoon, and then wake her up at 3.00 a.m. and say that my wife is coming here to deliver.

The health centre IVs, which the minister is talking about have only one doctor – if they are lucky, sometimes they may not even have any. And if they do not have, who is going to handle these emergencies. We would like to see in the next budget, which you are going to present to this House, now that we have all agreed in the spirit of this motion, showing us more allocation for the training of medical personnel especially midwives, showing us the commitment to deploy them in the rural centres and showing us better facilities.  

Finally, I am glad that I have heard from the honourable minister’s post-mortem report on what killed the cardiologist, because we kept asking in this House, we even moved a motion, but we had not been told until this afternoon. I am happy honourable minister that you have finally informed this country and the people of Teso who are so keen about the death of that lady. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you stand and are given opportunity to contribute, please state your name and constituency for purposes of the Hansard.

4.08
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, I rise to strongly support this motion and to assure the Minister of Health that the motion is not saying that the government is not committed. Definitely government is very committed to maternal health, but the motion says that let us request government to make more commitment. And I think the honourable minister should be the first to support such a motion because about one month ago, I happened to host the Minister of Health in my constituency. We visited one of the referral hospitals (Buhinga hospital) and we discovered a lot of problems related to maternal health. In the first place Buhinga hospital, which is supposed to cater for about six districts: Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kyenjojo, Kamwenge, Kabarole, had only one gynaecologist. 

We also visited a maternity ward and found there only one registered midwife and two enrolled midwives. More to that, we visited a health facility, I think the honourable minister remembers that very well, which was completed about six months ago, but it is not being utilized because of lack of medical facilities. 

So, that is why I was seeking clarification from the honourable minister, whether the minister was actually in support of the motion or not. And I urge the minister to support this motion because it is going to really help his ministry to improve maternal health in this country.

In fact, when the minister came, the staff were complaining that they had problems with traditional birth attendants (TBS). That they force mothers to start pushing before their time - I do not know the terminologies - by the time they come to the hospital, they already have ruptured uteruses and other complications related to birth. 

And in a whole referral hospital, there is no ambulance. You go to Buhinga hospital today, the ambulance is not functioning. So really, Minister of Health, please strongly support this motion and I am very happy with the honourable members this afternoon, for supporting this motion. I strongly support the motion and I urge my brother hon. Malinga to strongly support it because it will move along way to improve maternal health in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion in its entirety. I am saying this because I have been involved in some work in this area. Like the previous speaker stated, if I were the minister, I would have conceded from the very beginning that they have problems that need emergency handling in respect to the deaths of our mothers and of our small kids. 

There are problems in respect to the gloves, which our mothers are supposed to take to hospitals. There are problems in respect to non-functional theatres in these health centre IVs and IIIs that he is talking about; there are problems of education and he has rightly stated out the need of educating our people. There is a problem of over production, because when you over produce, the risk factor increases. These are all problems and the minister should say, “Yes my colleagues, please come over and assist.” I was rather perturbed that he was trying to defend the indefensible. If I were him, I would not have done it. 

But having stated all this, there is an area, which he stated in the motion, which seems to be misunderstood and this is the area of unsafe abortion. The minister talked about criminal abortion. My shadow minister for health said all abortions are illegal. I want to tell the House that our Constitution was so planned. Under Article 22(2) of the Constitution, there are exceptions to abortions, if you read it, and this was done deliberately.

Mr Speaker, what happens when a child is rapped and she conceives? What happens when a child is defiled and she conceives? What happens when there is a risk of infection with HIV/AIDS and the child conceives? Further, what happens when a child is of unsound mind and conceives? Do we allow that child to go ahead and produce a child she cannot take care of? 

These are the parameters, which were being handled by that exception under Article 22(2) of our Constitution. What the minister should have told us is that, he is looking for possibilities of providing for a law to cater for these circumstances, when an unwanted child is conceived, because they are there. 

As hon. Alisemera said, these are the circumstances where children rush to get abortions and end up with uncontrollable urine and faeces because they go to quack doctors. What the minister should provide for are qualified doctors to provide these abortions under the confines of the Constitution. I thank you, Sir.

4.15
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Three months ago, I had a baby boy.  The experience of going through a pregnancy is not a joke. The last time I was in the Committee of Social Services, we said that maternal health had been ignored. And I remember very soundly that when I put up strong words to some members from the Ministry of Defence, the Minister of State for Primary Health Care did say that I was in that state and I had a justification to say what I said, but I said it in the interest of the nation. 

You remember, Mr speaker, that this government is in power because of women, the majority of the support for the Movement Government comes from women. So to learn that the kind of budget it gives to maternal health is that small is very disappointing. I am one of the women who see beyond the Movement that is why we are this other side. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I want to conquer with the minister on one thing. It is indeed disappointing that in this country we are still bribing men to attend maternal health. It is indeed true. In my constituency, for example, if you come with your husband for maternal health, then you are given a mosquito net, and I thought that was unfair, because in the process of making a child, there is no negotiation. The two unite together. But when it comes to that process, one person takes the responsibility. I wish that this House would one day move a motion that for every pregnancy, there should be two people attending antenatal. 

Mr Speaker, the minister is saying that we have come down from 700 out of 100,000 deaths. After 20 years, the statistics just reveals that over a period of ten years, government has succeeded in reducing 10 out of 100 deaths per year. That is very disappointing. This, therefore, tells us that unless there is actual commitment, not verbal commitment, from government, we as mothers will continue to die. It is therefore my humble appeal that in our constituencies, do not let the men leave us behind when we are going. In fact, for me, I put it as a mandate in the house that wherever I am going he must be there because I do not want to negotiate. 

In the African tradition, children belong to the men yet we carry them. Why do you not want to support us while we are going to the antenatal care? It is incumbent upon every man in this House today to ensure that our voters take maternal care very seriously, and attending antenatal care should be a responsibility of the two parties who create a child.

Finally, the attitude of health workers: The honourable minister was touring Arua District and I guess he was informed of what goes on there. The attitude and the professional handling of the mothers still leave a lot to be desired. We know that over this period of 20 years, we have been impoverished each and every the other day, and when you see a dirty mother approaching a clean nurse, the attitude is pathetic. At times, even if you have the gloves, they will not want to touch you because you are dirty. 

To us as representatives of women, it is very disheartening and the whole thing comes down to the poverty crisis. Unless we address that, all what we will be talking here will be just hot air. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.22
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the mover of the motion, and the seconder and I have just a few additions to make, though my colleagues have said most of it. 

But I was surprised when the minister started answering before we debated. I thought he should have waited to get all this, because this motion - I am one of those people behind this motion - was meant to strengthen what the NRM Government has put in place, because we really have all the facilities. Believe me, we have put health centres where they had never been before. The infrastructure is there.  

Now, what we are requesting in good faith is to add a little more facilities to save these mothers. I am one of those mothers and I feel, as my colleague from Arua said, that NRM is in power just because of us women. And for the women on that side, I think they should come this side because this is the side, which really thinks about women’s matters.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring out one point that when we were in a Committee on Commissions, we discovered that gloves and cotton wool are taken as agricultural input, whereby they are taxed and these are essential to a pregnant mother. You must have gloves, cotton wool etcetera. So it is my humble request, as we move to the next financial year, that gloves and cotton wool be exempted from tax. As the minister put it, the health facilities are there and all we need is to find a way of making our people aware so that they could use them. 

I am of the view that the onus of taking note of pregnant women in a community should be charged on the LC I. They should take record of the pregnant women in their villages and encourage them to go to the health facilities. That way, if death occurs, they will be able to ascertain the cause, which should be recorded as the honourable minister said.  

For improvement, I think we have a secretary for health and a secretary for women on these LC structures. Let us use them to handle that. One time I read in the papers that two weeks ago, hon. Mallinga made a statement. I was impressed! Now that we are going to report this case and we have a gender sensitive minister - when he responded I felt like he is slipping away, but I think he will come back to the right track. 

My sister put it that it takes two to make a baby. Every man should be required by law, honourable minister, to take his wife to a health facility for antenatal care, delivery and postnatal care. How many times do you ask your wives to give you those good night things? Why don’t you in the same way be there when they are suffering labour pains? Mr Nyombi is always there when I am in labour. Other men should try to do the same. Honourable members, we have a network, which is the brain behind all this you see, mainly women. I promise we will organise a bigger workshop for sensitising the male Members of Parliament. We will start with the leaders who will then go down to the districts. This will help improve maternal health in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the seconder who have exhaustively talked about the issues. However, I would like to emphasis some points so that we really realise that the issue we are discussing is very important. For your information, reproducing is the most difficult, painful function a woman can perform. Labour pain is the most painful and for you men, who do not know how if feels, it is more painful than a toothache. (Laughter)  So, you can imagine a person in that state, who does not have the necessary facilities. 

Mr Speaker, the minister explained what they are doing. We do not deny that the government is doing something but we are saying let the government do more. We are discussing this in time because you are now preparing the budget for the next financial year. The issues we have raised here should be included in the next budget. For example, in Koboko we were happy when we got an ambulance. However, the ambulance does not have a driver, does not have fuel and it is just stationed there for decoration. Women continue to die. 

Koboko is small but it has very big sub-counties! It is difficult for a woman in labour to come from Nyadri to Kuluva health centre, which is six miles. When you reach Kuluva health centre you do not find any nurses or midwife. You have to go all the way to Koboko health centre IV. There is no doctor in case caesarean cases have to be handled. Mothers are forced to go to Maracha or to Arua. In the process, they either die or deliver dead children. So, these are the issues we are raising here. 

When I was doing my tour during the recess, all the complaints the women made concerned maternal services. Let the services be taken closer to them. Let the health centre IIs be active and be provided with trained midwives to deliver expectant mothers. Reproductive kits should also be provided to all expectant mothers. 

Mr Speaker, I was in one of the constituencies. Within one month nine women died because of complications during labour. These are the issues we are raising. We need more resources to be provided for the reproductive health of the women.  I think we need to put a policy on reproductive health rather than just talking in general terms.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.32
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion. I want to look at maternal health from the education side of life instead of looking at it as a health factor. Girls at a certain age have been dropping out of school because of pregnancy. Many of these would not like to drop out of school but they find themselves pregnant due to a number of reasons and sometimes it is their classmates who impregnate them. Because of fear of not continuing with education, they go for unsafe abortions. At the end of the day, there are many risks involved, including death. 

I feel the Ministry of Education should not pretend and start saying that girls should never get pregnant at school. We do not encourage them but they get pregnant. It is one of the major causes of girls dropping out of school. Can we have a policy that will guide the teachers on re-admission of these girls into schools? Not necessarily in the same school, but to continue with their education. 

There are quite a number of us who will not say so, who would have probably dropped out of school if it had not been because of our supportive parents, who allowed us to go back to school. Some of us are parents of such children. So, I feel the Ministry of Education needs to play a part as we talk to the Ministry of Health to get a policy for these girls to be re-admitted in school. They should be assisted to continue with their education so that we do not lose out on the brains of the future. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have gone beyond the hour, which is specified in the rules. The rules say not more than an hour but we have gone beyond that. Don’t you think I should put the question?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on the motion proposed by -(Ms. Sinabulya rose_)- do you want to wind up?

MS SINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for the overwhelming support they have given the motion. I also thank the minister for accepting that there is a problem. Only that the minister was sort of reactionary in the beginning. I think after listening to the contributions of the Members, he agrees with us all that there is a problem. However, I would have been more comfortable if this motion was committed to the Committee on Social Services because I thought the minister would make mention of the action requested for by this motion. He did not and yet we had given him about a week to look at this motion. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Amendment.

THE SPEAKER:  Amendment at this time when we are going to vote? No. Honourable members, I put the question on the motion moved by hon. Sinabulya and seconded by hon. Baryomunsi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ABDUCTION AND DISAPPEARANCE OF PEOPLE AND OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES MOVED UNDER RULE 43 AND 50 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Beti Kamya indicated to me that she wanted to move the motion not today but tomorrow. So, it is not coming today. We shall consider it tomorrow.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2001

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have been advised that the mover is out of the country. But before I adjourn, I have been advised by the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities that they have completed the report. Members, have you received copies? This is because I was intending to put it on the Order Paper. Some people claimed it should have been handled in September. If the report is in your pigeonholes, please study it. I intend to put it on the Order Paper tomorrow. Otherwise, these other items are business to follow. They will be dealt with tomorrow or the other day.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time we adjourned last week, there was an indication that we would be hearing something about Karamoja and hearing a report from the Karamoja Parliamentary Group. There was an indication that there would be responses to some of the issues raised. I do not know when this will come up.

THE SPEAKER: It had been indicated to me last week that the honourable members wanted to move a motion following the debate we had had on the minister’s statement on Karamoja. But as far as I am concerned, even by the time I came here, I had not seen any copy of that motion and when I receive it, we shall have it. The other one was a general debate. A motion would focus us to the solutions to the problem. When it comes, we shall accord it time on our Order Paper.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 December 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)


