Thursday 7th December, 2000 
                                        
Parliament met at 11:22 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

Clause 22

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, yesterday we stood over clause 22(3). And at the point where we adjourned, there was supposed to be a re-wording of 22(3). The rewording was to be to the effect that there should be a degree, to which certainty should be obtained, with regard to what the police officer, in whose jurisdiction a rally or a meeting will take place, should do. 

I would like to propose, subject to the Minister and the chairperson’ approval, that 22(3) read as follows: “the organisers of the meeting shall give a police officer in charge of the area such information relating to the meeting as he or she may reasonably require and the police officer will issue relevant authorisation thereto.”  

Relevant authorisation is important, so that you have evidence that you have received permission, and if there is any scuffle, you can use that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing the situation warrants you not to give permission? If you say, “shall”, then it means you must give permission, but supposing the circumstances are such that you should not give?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, the “shall” is mandatory in a sense that even if it is positive or negative, let it be communicated officially.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But your formulation will not bring that meaning out. I quite appreciate, but can you help us, chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Chairman, I had a different concern. The import of clause 22(2) is simply to notify the police. So, the policy behind is notification and the amendment, which the Committee proposed in (3), was in light of that notification. That is why we wanted to remove “relating to the meeting as he or she may reasonably require” because once you do that, then you give the discretion to the police officer. He may say he wants some information, which may not even be relevant to the meeting, and he uses it as a reason to fail you. So, that is why we are trying to remove this discretion from the police officer, so that we stick with notification rather than the police officer having the authority to either permit you or to refuse you. So, the amendment of hon. Okumu Ringa would go – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would it be an addition? I think the complaint was that assuming we pass what you have proposed, the clause would remain hanging. We would not really know what happens after, assuming you have fulfilled everything. What is the police officer supposed to do? Is he supposed to keep quiet? He has received, and that is okay, but is it fine or has he got to do something positive?  I think that is the question. Maybe, let us first dispose of this amendment and see whether there is another improvement that we can make on the clause.

MR.OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with your proposal that we could dispose of the amendment by the Committee and look at other considerations later.  But I just want to point out something as the chairperson tries to put together his amendment. 

The effect of the Committee’s amendment was that the police officer should be informed of the time and the place of this meeting. As we have correctly said, this will still leave the police officer without any course of action. Now, if you look at the amendment on clause 22(1), which was passed, that effect has actually been achieved by the notification. The fact that the police officer has been notified, and he is aware that a meeting supposed to take place, has been taken care of in 22(1). 

The present 22(3) in the Bill, in my view, gives an option for the police officer to advise the organisers because it says, “as he or she may reasonably require”.  Why “reasonably require”? When he reasonably requires, he has other meetings in mind, as in 22(2). He may have information about another meeting or he may also have information on other laws, which relate to public meetings, and that is why he would reasonably require more information if he is not fully satisfied. 

My view is that the proposal in the Bill is very adequate, without necessarily empowering the police officer to stop a political organisation from holding a meeting. I really plead with the Committee to consider this and we go with what is in the original Bill.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to recall the contribution made yesterday in the House by hon. Elly Karuhanga, Member for Nyabushozi. He said that maybe we should not put any restrictions on political parties. And let me read the definition of a public meeting: “Public meeting means a meeting attended by more than 20 persons in a public place for the purpose of promoting the interest of a political organisation.”  

I would imagine that a public place would include places like community centres, schools, community halls or municipal halls. I wonder whether we really need to seek permission or even notify the police for that. I thought that we could introduce the concept of a public rally, where people will be invited to come to a place, in this law. There would be loud speakers, and those who support the political organisation, or even those who do not, would come. I think this is strictly where the police would be interested, because the opportunity of breach of the peace in the area would be likely to arise. But for a public meeting in a public place of about 20 people, I think the restriction would be too much. I think we would be overburdening the police. So, as a compromise, I would have thought that we should introduce the concept of public rallies, and that is where we should require police permission. I wish to submit, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we have to accept that in many countries, where you have a meeting of a political nature, the law enforcement agencies are involved. They are involved because at such meetings, there is likelihood that there might be breach of the peace. A public rally is a public meeting. I do not see how you can distinguish a public rally from a public meeting. I think that a public meeting is any meeting where members of the public are invited. It could be a rally, it could be a consultative meeting, it could be anything else, and I think we have to take it in that fold. 

I have no problem with the police being informed, because they have that duty to make sure that those who are participating and those who are around the area where the public meeting is being held are not unduly inconvenienced, because they have their constitutional freedom. 

My problem is with the phrase “reasonably”. “Reasonably” becomes very subjective here. It becomes contentious, because who is going to determine what is reasonable? Is it the policeman who is going to make the decision or another bystander? And who is that bystander? The problem is the likelihood of abuse by the person who is seeking this information. This could lead to controversy. The political party might think that the policeman is being influenced by other issues other than objective issues.  So, if “reasonably” could be concretely understood, then this would not be a bad provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we help this policeman or the parties and detail the kind of information that is expected so that you do not leave it hanging? What is reasonable in Jinja may not be reasonable in Tororo or Masaka, but the law could require some kind of information, which may be required, so that it is definite. I think the fear is that it may vary from party to party. Do we want that difference? If you think we do not, why don’t we then spell out the kind of information a person giving notice should furnish the police officer with?  

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, my problem is really the police, not even the other problems. I do not know how many police stations are in this country. In my area, which is very large, there are only three police stations.  Now, if you have this issue of reporting to the police, you are virtually preventing any public meeting, because police stations are very few. Why don’t we report to the LCs? That is my view. This is tantamount to preventing public meetings, because there are very few police stations in this country. And I know, in my area, we have only three police stations, and there are about two or three sub-counties where there are no police stations.

MR. KAVUMA: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I just want to give very simple information. Police units may be few, but every inch of this country is covered by a police authority. So, the issue of a place where you cannot reach the police cannot arise. 

MR. RUZINDANA: But, Mr. Chairman, we all know that the police have a transport problem. Even for ordinary cases, they always want transport.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Ruzindana, you are going into details. The law is saying that if there is one police station covering three sub-counties, just inform that police station. What they do is not your business, you just inform them. They may attend or they may not attend, that is different, and we are not concerned with that.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, even as an ordinary person, why give me the trouble of travelling such a long distance going to look for permission to organise a public meeting of 20 or 30 people! That is really my problem. It is a practical problem, not a legal one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Anyway, hon. Members, we should not backtrack. First of all, the provision for informing the police was dealt with and now we are no longer dealing with it. We are now dealing with the kind of information. Why should we have to labour about necessity of giving information or not, when actually we have disposed of that issue? We are now dealing with details of the information.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, to get out of this, I propose that we take the amendment as proposed by the Committee and make a proviso to it. This proviso, I am informed, is what hon. Kutesa had in mind. It would read, “…provided the police officer may decline to authorise the holding of the meeting on account of an emergency or in the interest of public health.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why do you restrict it only to two, why don’t you say “good cause”, so that it covers all situations? There are many situations that may fall beyond what you have stated.  

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if you use the expression “good cause”, then you will come back to the problem hon. Mutyaba was raising. It would now be subject to the police officer to determine whether he has a good cause to refuse you from holding your meeting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You should specify it, because “good cause” is not subjective. “Good cause” is objective. If he says, ‘because I do not like this particular party’, that is not a good cause. A good cause must be specified. The test will not be subjective, it will be objective, but when you limit it to two incidences, they may be three or four others.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, this amendment was an improvement on the Committee’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you read it again?

MR. OGALO: Clause 22(3) would read as follows together with the proviso: “The organisers of the meeting shall give a police officer in charge of the area the time, venue and proposed duration of the meeting provided the police officer may decline to authorise the holding of the meeting on account of an emergency or in the interest of public health."

MR. BAGUNYWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the amendment made by the chairman of the Committee, but that leaves out the date. I think we should also include the date. Apart from that, I think the real difficulty is in clause 22(2) of the original Bill. It might give good reason for the police officer to refuse to give you permission to hold a meting. It reads as follows:“No two or more political organisations shall hold a meeting in the same place and time.” 

That might give the police officer a good reason to say, alright, somebody else has already come and they are holding a meeting in the same place. 

My suggestion is that we probably have a very valid procedure. We should have a very definitive procedure, where you take a form to the police officer indicating the date you have, the venue and the time. The police officer will have to endorse your notification, given on a particular date, time and so forth. He can no longer go back and say that there is somebody else. 

Police officers, as we know, may favour one side more than the other, but we have to tie the police officer down. If he accepts your form, you will take your form with you. It would be endorsed, and you would be the only one who would have that place at that time. If we do not do that, we will find a lot of wrangling between two parties, and some of it engineered by the police officer. So, that is my suggestion. The right to give notice should be given to the political party member or whoever is to hold this meeting. He gives it in a form, which the police officer simply has to endorse. In his endorsing, you booked the place, the time, the venue and everything.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I was following the argument, and I am finding little difficulty even with the amendment as it is. The amendment is saying that once time, venue, and the proposed duration of the meeting has been given, the rest is plain sailing, in otherwords, the meeting should go on. Of course we know that there might be other reasons for saying no to the meeting. So, I think it should be understood that this clause is really to be read with other laws in the country, particularly those relating to public interest and security. 

If the police said, yes because there is only one meeting, if I went outside the State House with 20 people and started abusing the President, someone might fight me, and that might cause a breach of the peace. So, that can happen although I am the only one there, one organisation with just a few people. So, let us consider what a good cause is. To me, primarily a good cause is public interest before the police security. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The police are not the easiest people to deal with. I think that anybody who is rendering his human rights, freedom of association and freedom of assembly to the whims of the police is being unrealistic. I would imagine that the sole purpose for giving the police notice would be for the police to know that there is going to be a public meeting in some place, and for them to provide security for that meeting. It is not for them to have the right to agree or not agree that the meeting should take place. It is the duty of the police to provide every citizen of this country with security and to make sure that peace prevails in any situation where there is a public gathering. That, to me, would be the necessary objective for notifying the police, and not to give him power to decide whether or not I should hold that meeting.  

The proviso moved by the hon. Member is even more preposterous. If there is an issue of public health, the Ministry of Health would have already declared that in such and such a place no public meeting shall take place because there is an outbreak of Ebola or such and such a thing. Now, why the hell would the police decide on health, are they experts on public health? Let us not give people things they do not qualify for. So, to me, the proviso is irrelevant. It is preposterous! Even me, who is going to organise that public meeting, should be concerned about the welfare of the society in that area and decide. We are supposed to be reasonable people, and I think that a political leader is reasonable. For anybody to question my integrity and reasonableness is really preposterous. I think we can all make sound judgement, and we should be allowed to do that.  

I agree with the amendment introduced by the Committee, and really for the police to be there they should be given enough time and they must know when this thing is taking place. Although I was not here yesterday, I found sub-clause (2) even more ridiculous. It is physically not possible for two groups, unless the words ‘place’ and ‘time’ are defined differently, to hold the same meeting in the same hall at the same time. It is just not possible. It is a redundant provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okulo Epak, we have been reading newspapers and it has been reported in a neighbouring country that this took place and it has caused confusion. It does happen.

DR. OKULLO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, that fighting is taking place because it is physically impossible to hold meetings in the same place. So, that meeting will not even take place by virtue of that. Anyhow, to me it is harmless, but it is an unnecessary provision. But let me not talk about an issue, which has already been adopted by the House. 

I really accept the spirit, the objective and sensible character of the amendment moved by the Committee, and I would not want to dilute it with any other things like public security, public interest and so on. Public security or utterance of a member against the President in the meeting will not have been heard before the meeting has taken place. So, how are you asking the police to anticipate that somebody is going to make a very scathing remark about the President? That is giving the police too much power, as suggested by the hon. Minister.  

I think we must be serious when we really want to safeguard the interest of the public. I consider any political leader as part of the public. Any political leader has interest in the public, and I would not see that leader endangering the public security while conducting his meeting, in any case he would be the first victim if there were public disorder in the meeting. So, I would support the amendment moved by the Committee as being a little better than any other thing we can anticipate. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to the Committee’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to

Clause 23

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 23 I propose to delete the words “public officer” and replace them with “civil servant”. 

The reason being that, civil servants are closely associated with service delivery of Government and should be excluded from this. On the other hand, “public officer” is too wide and would be excluding people who would contribute, without harm, to the country. For example, a Professor of political science or history cannot publish anything involving matters of political party controversy, and this is absurd.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I would not have much of a problem with this, but the term “traditional public or civil servant” is not really in the Constitution. It is not even defined there. What we have defined under the Constitution is a public officer. For that reason, I would rather use terms, which are known and defined, rather than terms, which are not defined.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, it is true that ‘civil servant’ is not defined in the Constitution, but the meaning of ‘civil servant’ and ‘public officer’ is wider than ‘traditional civil servant’.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, let us vote on it. The proposal by the Committee is to narrow it, and maybe they will define ‘civil servant’. ‘Public officer’ is definitely wider. It includes all those people we know as traditional civil servants and others from other related bodies. So, the issue now to vote on is whether we narrow it or we leave it as it is. 

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Committee, because clause 23 as it is, I would imagine, contravenes the Constitution. Under the Constitution, we have our own fundamental human rights, and one of them is the right of association. These are entrenched rights. They cannot be taken away by the state. This clause was trying to say that because I am a civil servant, I cannot belong to a political organisation. I think this would be subject to challenge, and it would create a problem for the Government and also for us legislators. So, the amendment made by the Committee is a very nice and welcome amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How do you reconcile what you have said and supporting the amendment? Instead of ‘public servant’, they actually say ‘civil servant’. Now, a civil servant does not have a right also!

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I thought they wanted to delete the phrase “public officer” or “traditional civil servant”. That is what I understood.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Assuming that is what you understood, what about the person in UPDF? Why should he not enjoy his constitutional right? So, if that is your argument, why don’t you ask for a deletion?

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, I am a Member of the Committee but I am also finding a little difficulty in supporting that provision. You will notice that under the Constitution, public servants can stand for elections and be elected to elective positions. For example, under Article 80(3), a person elected to Parliament, when he or she is a member of a local government council or holds a public office, shall resign, et cetera. That presupposes that this person must have carried out some political activity, because this particular article does not concern itself with the situation when the Movement is in place only. It is silent. 

So, I am assuming that even when parties come back effectively, a person can stand as a member of DP when he or she is holding a public office.  So, this particular provision will run counter to the basis of this sort of arrangement in the Constitution.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I tend to believe that part of this particular clause would violate the rights of these people to associate, and I would have preferred to delete (a) and leave the rest. Being a member should be no problem because it is their birthright to be members.  However, the problem would to be, being eligible to hold office and speak at public rallies, and engaging in canvassing which would bring you in a situation of conflict of interest between your public office and as a member of a political organisation. Therefore, I would have no problem even about a public officer, provided we delete the element of not belonging, because I think that would be violating their rights as contained in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Has this law been brought for purposes of controlling public servants? Don’t they have their own law to deal with their situation and internal administration so that this only comes to regulate party activities? Why don’t you leave it to other laws dealing with them to handle the situation?

MR. ONGOM: In view of the explanation by hon. Ben Wacha, and the Member representing people with disabilities, and your own explanation, Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment. I move that we delete clause 23 altogether. As you said, there would be other laws in the respective organisations to deal with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, we cannot delete the whole 23 because there are traditional and cultural leaders. Maybe the particular chapter dealing with traditional cultural leaders is well placed, but maybe you can talk about members of UPDF, the police force, Uganda Prisons, public officer. But for traditional cultural leaders, I think there is a constitutional provision, which definitely is being reflected in this one.  

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, in view of what you have just said, why don’t we separate this section and remove the provision dealing with cultural leaders. So, one can become separate and then we proceed, like hon. James Mwandha has suggested, by deleting clause 23(a) and just have a new clause dealing with cultural leaders. I think that would save us the problem of reconciling with the public servant who, under the Constitution, has the right to associate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t you start with cultural leaders, because that is already catered for?

MR. MUTYABA: I do not mind, but at least we should separate the two.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, taking into account what has been debated, if we begun from traditional cultural leaders and then the others, that would be fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, please make the proposed amendment clear to the Members.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: The clause reads, “A member of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Service or a public officer or a traditional or cultural leader shall not…” It goes on to enumerate what they shall not do. The amendment will be to begin at “a traditional or cultural leader shall not”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification on 23(c), which now reads: “A traditional or cultural leader shall not – 
(c) speak in public or publish anything involving matters of political organisation controversy”. I seek clarification on this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When in his house in private conversation, he can speak, but not in public. In his house, on his bed, he can do that.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I seek clarification in terms of the phraseology. What do we mean by “political organisation controversy”?  Can the Minister explain?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually, we have finished dealing with the amendment. I put the question that clause 23, as amended, stands part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 24 in the Bill reads as follows:  
“Notwithstanding anything in this Act, during the period when the movement political system is in force- 
    (a) individual merit shall be the basis of election to any political office and no political organisation and no person on behalf of a political organisation shall sponsor or offer a platform to or in any way campaign for or against a candidate in any presidential or parliamentary election or any other election organised by the Commission;

    (b) no person shall use any symbol, slogan, colour or name identifying any political organisation for the purpose of campaigning for or against any candidate in a presidential or parliamentary election or any other election organised by the Commission.” 

I beg to delete that clause because it is misplaced here. It has nothing to do with internal organisation and regulation of political parties. This is provided for in the electoral law. So, that is why we are moving to have this deleted.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, there is always merit in being explicit. When this Bill becomes law, it will be used by people down in the villages, maybe political operators, but many of them might not be aware of other provisions for such matters. I see no real danger in putting this here. For them, it is just like a little Bible; ‘if you want political organisations, you go to this one’. So, when we put it here, it does not cause any danger to any one, but I have got my own amendments.

MR. BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to draw the attention of the House to Article 72 (3) of the Constitution under which we are enacting this Bill. It says: “Parliament shall by law regulate the financing and functioning of political organisations.”  

When we put a law in place to govern the functioning of political organisations, I think it goes to specify to what extent political activities can be carried out or to what extent political parties can go in carrying out political functions, especially when the Movement political system is in force. So, I think the Minister’s provision under clause 24 is very valid. It is valid to the extent that we are making regulations for political parties to function under the Movement political system.   

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I tend to agree with the chairman of the Committee, because definitely, when you look at this section, it does not belong here. This section deals with the electoral laws, and I think it belongs to another place. Even if it were to be here, when you read it very clearly and specifically, it would also stop a party. If we are holding party elections, we are choosing members of our own party, because I think a position in a party is also a political office, it would require us to use the system of individual merit within the internal machinery of the party. 

It says, “individual merit shall be the basis of election to any political office”. Any political office may mean an office within a party, and I do not think that this is what we wanted. We want to regulate the internal machinery of the parties. You have a political party, but if you are going to elect a person in charge of finance, then it must be on individual merit. Is that what you wanted? So, I think this is wrong. It should not be here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think that there are many things included in this one? Some can be separated from the provision, but he is trying to regulate the kind of activity that cannot be done. For example, no person shall sponsor – sponsoring is an activity - or offer a platform to or in any way campaign – that is also an activity. So, you dissect part of the activities, which have been prohibited here, from other activities.  Otherwise, we would say, “individual merit shall be the basis of election to any political office.” Can that be separated so that we look at various things, which are said here, and see what we can leave out and what we may include? Is it possible?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, the word “public office” in this clause is used in the constitutional sense. A public office is defined on page 158 of the Constitution. It says, “a public office means an office in the public service”. Therefore, an office in a political party internally is not really a public office within the meaning of this expression.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, it is not a public office. The clause talks about a political office.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My question, hon. Minister, was, is it possible to analyse this particular provision. Take out the activities, which you think are prohibiting, rather than rampage those political offices that are within the party and the political offices that are national in a sense.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Since we know the intention of this clause, we should replace “political” with “public”.  That is what I really intended, not the other way round.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to request the Minister to be cautious about bringing provisions from different laws, which are almost similar but varying, and deal with the same subject matter. I think it would be prudent and wise if a provision has been taken care of in another law, to leave it at that, especially, when it is not directly relevant to the Bill before the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But now the problem is that we have two amendments here. There is a notice by the Minister, he wanted to deal with this clause 24, and then there is an amendment for deletion, and then an amendment to amend.  Which is which?  

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, the deletion departs furthest, so I propose that we first of all deal with the deletion.                    

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I have glanced at the Minister’s proposed amendment and it says, “add 24(e)…” He has written about (e), but even in the Bill there is no (c) or (d), so I do not know where (e) comes from. According to the presentation I have, it is (e), unless the hon. Minister wants to amend it, and he has not done so, but nevertheless –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I am going to put the question.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: I wanted to contribute to the deletion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MR. OKULE EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I support the deletion. Hon. Ben Mutyaba has put it very nicely. As a member of a political organisation, when we carry out our own elections to those offices, the very principal you are propounding and trying to ascribe to the Movement applies there. We all belong to the same organisation. So, the judgement is now going to be made on individual merit in our primary elections, in elections to hold political offices in parties –(Interruption)

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, I sorry to interrupt my Colleague, hon. Okulo Epak, but I wanted to raise his attention to the opening statement of clause 24, which says, “Notwithstanding anything in this Act, during the period when the movement political system is in force…” It goes on to list what will apply. One of the basic principles of the Movement political system is individual merit as a basis for assessing any political office. So, this is within the Movement political system. So, individual merit is supposed to apply across the board -(Laughter)

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, irrelevant information and absurd information, unfortunately, comes from the hon. Member. I have already given him permission to give it, but this, I think, can be dismissed for what it is.

If this is imposed here, this requirement, which we know of, which we support, which we have partially enjoyed would actually affect parties. Let the Movement enjoy it and use it for any propaganda or misplaced credits, but if it is put here, it will affect the internal working of parties. So, let us confine it to where it belongs. It does not belong in this place.

Part (b) says, “any elections organised by the Commission.” When parties are adopted, who will organise those elections? It is the same Commission. Now you are telling us that when the Commission organises such elections, we should not use these very things, which separate parties or which identify us. So, we should leave the Movement’s individual merit approach to its elections. We like it very much, but let us confine it to the provision in the Constitution, the provision in the Movement Act, and the provision in the Elections Act, that is where it belongs, not in this. In here, it is definitely an abomination of desolation sitting where it ought not to be.  I thank you.

MS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. One of the advantages of the Movement type of governance is the individual merit system. By trying to impose individual merit on political party systems, we are trying to movementise the political parties -(Laughter). I think we cannot afford to do so, because we are trying to regulate, we are trying to assist political parties so that they can also become popular and accepted by the people of Uganda. Therefore, I do not support the imposition of individual merit on the multiparty political system. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, this Bill is intended to define what parties may do and how they may do it. Because of that, we have go to these provisions and to Article 71, which actually talks about individual merit. This clause says“during the time of the Movement System” so individual merit is constitutional! But I am prepared, if the chairman and hon. Members would agree, to delete all the words “individual merit shall be the basis of election to any political office”. I am prepared to delete all that, because it will then leave out the internal structures of political parties or how they elect their people, but leave the rest of that clause.  

I propose that in clause 24 (a), we delete the words, “individual merit shall be the basis of election to any political office and”. This would answer the objections voiced by the political organisations. We have got our own way of electing our own officers within the parties.  The rest of the clause should remain, because this is only to guide the operations of parties during the time that Movement system is in office. Of course, this by law is an advantage.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if you understood the hon. Minister, he only wishes to remove the first two lines. But when you look at what is left in (a) and (b), you will simply be reproducing what, if I may remind Members, we passed in the Presidential Elections Bill just last week. What he stated here was reproduced in that Bill and you passed it into law. 

I do recall that the Committee had moved an amendment to delete the use of mottos, symbols, slogans, colours, and so on in the Presidential Elections Bill. Unfortunately, I do not have it here, but we retained it. What he will be doing here is actually to do what you did just last week. That is why we are saying that it is misplaced here. If you have already provided for it under another law, and that is the electoral law, why do you provide for it in the internal organisation of political parties?  

MR. STEVEN KAVUMA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This law is going to guide operations, which are very pertinent to the ordinary people. We will be doing them a disservice if we carbon-legislate here and give them a piece of legislation, which they will consider as the consolidated position regarding how they relate to each other in this dangerous, tricky area of politicking, and we are silent about regulating what should be done and what should not be done. 

I think it is prudent, for the sake of clarity and for the sake of protecting our people from harassment and misinformation, for us to give them a clear position in this law, which they will be looking at. Not all of them are like us who will go and look at the electoral law. We are legislating for ordinary people, who may not have the advantage of going to look at all the statutes we have passed. Sir, I want to agree with my Colleague that we pass a law that is going to make life easy for the bulk of the people. 

MR. WACHA BEN: Mr. Speaker, I am intrigued by hon. Kavuma’s statement. Can he now clarify to me, when the Parliamentary Elections Bill comes before this House, will he accept a position where we delete any provision, which relates to this sort of arrangement that he is arguing for because we will have already provided for here?  

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to speculate on what is not on the Floor of the House, but my argument was that we should make life easy for our people. They pick a law, which they know regulates the operation of political organisations, and it is their Bible. There and then they will look at it, and there will be no problem.  Let us know what is happening in all the other laws, but at the same time give the ordinary man and woman of this country an opportunity to understand quickly and easily what we are legislating about.  

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, my understanding of this Bill is that it is catering for two situations. One is that we are legislating for when the parties will be in governance. At the same time, we are legislating for which activities the parties can carry out when the Movement system is in force. Clause 24 looks at what activities are allowed when the Movement system is in force. We are saying that we should separate the internal working of the party, but we should also highlight what parties can do and what they cannot do when the Movement system is in force. 

The Minister’s amendment removes the aspect of the internal working. He said that we do not have to look at the internal working of the party, but what is left here is in consonance with the constitutional provision in Article 73. So, we want to highlight them so that even when a party official gets hold of this Act, he will know about symbols and slogans, for instance. 

I think it is important for any party member to know that during this period, you do not put on your party colours or have slogans, because they will cause commotion when the Movement system is in force. So, I would like to appeal to the chairman of the Committee. These are just highlights, even if they are in other laws, there is no harm for them to be highlighted in this law.  

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I just want a check on, in support of the amendment by the Committee. I am intrigued by this argument about supporting or helping the wanainchi! I think that is really very interesting. You know, we are talking about the internal organisation of a party. To say that the people will not understand when a Movement system is in power that they should not use party symbols and all that, is really another way of introducing part of Article 269 in the Constitution through the back door. In other words, release them but restrict. Let them be incognito. Let the parties be incognito when the Movement is in power. Really, let us be truthful. 

This argument is only to cover up the intention to make parties not appear to be there at all. I think it tantamounts to making the whole Bill useless as far as parties are concerned. On the one side you are saying operate, but in actual sense you will not operate. This is really what you mean. So, I think we should be honest and say that we are releasing them and making it possible for them now to operate, and let them operate, or else we say for the moment let us not give them any chance. 

So, why open and then restrict completely?  That is deceiving people! We are not helping the wanainchi. That is just an argument to hoodwink. 

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whatever differences there are, I think we share one thing in common, namely we do not want confusion. I do not think there is anybody here who would be party to a situation where things are not clear, and therefore, there is confusion and confrontation. Because whenever things are not clear, you overload the police, you overload the agents of the state in trying to clarify the framework. 

My opposition to those who would like to delete is that they are really against what is being proposed in order to create clarity. They are hiding under the argument that what we are putting here is already provided for elsewhere. If that is the real position, then I would like to inform them that even with legislation, I have known situations where people have said, “for avoidance of doubt” and things are repeated. So, I would like to put it squarely to those who want to delete, that they are being party to a situation where there shall be confusion. 

There is a lot of illiteracy in our country, which we are trying to cure through UPE and other mechanisms. There has been historical institutional fluidity in our country, which we are again trying to cure by being as clear as possible. I would like to make a special plea to those who are for deletion. We should not create confusion by being vague. Above all, I want to point out that there are certain amendments, which have been circulated, but when you delete, you may be pre-empting very useful amendments which will make it possible for the multi-partyists and the movementists to co-exist. I oppose the deletion.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Committee has proposed the deletion of this clause. The Minister stood up and said that he wanted to improve on it by making certain amendments, and he intends to make other amendments. If we delete the clause, the question of amending does not arise. If we leave it, then we can improve on the provision. So, I want this to be clear, so that when you vote, you know what you are voting for. So, I put the question to the proposal to delete these particular provisions.  

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is an amendment by the Minister that we delete the first two lines in part (a).  I now put the question to this proposal.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, I request you to look at clause 24. I would like to move that after the first line, which reads, “Notwithstanding anything in this Act”, we insert the words, “and in conformity with Article 73 of the Constitution”, and then the rest will go on. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you explain why you are doing this?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I am adding “in conformity with Article 73” because that is going to be the reason for other amendments that I will propose.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I was merely suggesting that it would help us understand the reason for this addition if the Minister went ahead and moved other amendments, because he says they are interrelated.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You prefer all the amendments to be read?

MR. ONGOM: Yes, so that we do not vote in isolation.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, Sir, and I am indebted to hon. Ongom. The other amendment will be 24(c). It would read as follows: “24. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, and in conformity with Article 73 of the Constitution, during the period when the Movement political system is in force-  (c)A political party or a political organisation may not hold a public meeting”.  

I also want to add 24(d) to read as follows: “A political party or organisation may: 
    (a) own newspapers, radio stations and organise indoor seminars at national and district levels.  
    (b) subject to section 20 of this Act and the provisions of any other law for the time being force, raise funds from any sympathisers. 
    (c) hold national executive committee meetings and national council meetings, and delegates’ conferences.
    (d) It may open offices at national headquarters.
    (e) Subject to Article 73(2) of the Constitution, no political party or organisation or any member thereof may carry on any activities that may interfere with the adopted political system for the time being in force.”  

In this last one, the adopted political system is in fact neutral. Supposing now Parliament became multi-party, still the law would hold to prevent the movementists from doing anything to disrupt the multi-party system. This is what I want to move, Sir.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First of all, I would like you to note that there are other amendments from hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Lukyamuzi and Dr. Okulo Epak. But let us first deal with these first amendments by the Minister.

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have problems with the Minister’s amendment. First of all, I find it difficult to differentiate between a public meeting and delegates’ conferences. I wish the Minister could draw a very clear distinction, because as far as I know, both of them are public meetings.

Secondly, I do not see how a political organisation or a party can hold a delegates’ conference without opening branch offices. Delegates to party conferences come right from the grassroots. It is really inconceivable that a Minister or a lawyer can provide for this kind of situation –(Interjection)- and also head of a party.  I think these amendments should be shelved, and maybe we discuss the amendment by hon. Omara Atubo first, because these ones, to me, are inconsistent and irrelevant. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I also have a problem with the use of the words 'public meetings', particularly when you go to the definition of a public meeting. Let me, for the second time, read out that definition: "Public meeting means a meeting attended by more than 20 persons in a public place for the purpose of promoting the interests of a political organisation".  I do not know how many people would be in a national executive committee? I do not even know how many would be in a national council.  It would seem to me that should these organs have more than 20 people meeting. (Interruption)

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Mwandha that when we were debating clause 3, the Committee amended this particular definition. The amendment that was adopted reads, " Public meeting means a meeting to which the public is generally invited and is held in a public place for purposes of clause 22 of the Bill". 

MR. MWANDHA: I appreciate that information. I was not here when that particular amendment was made. In other words, the new definition is in line with the proposed amendment under 24 (c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, because the executive meetings are catered for and are permitted, delegates’ conferences are permitted and are provided for in the Act. So, that should not bother you, because they are authorised meetings. When they deal with this one, I think they are dealing with meetings other than those provided for in the law.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether this House realises that the heart of the whole Political Organisation's Bill is here. This amendment, which is before us, is the crux of the whole matter. You may say that what we have done in the other provisions were really preliminaries. This is the fundamental provision, and I call upon my Colleagues in this House to address ourselves very honestly to what parties should do and what they should not do. 

We should know whether you are serious that by Article 269 of the Constitution lapsing or naturally fading away because of the referendum, you are not smuggling the provisions of Article 269 of the Constitution into this law and actually making it worse for parties. This is my concern. Are we moving from the frying pan into the fire? I think you are taking us from a worse situation than we have been in, in Article 269 of the Constitution. 

How can this House pass a provision that political organisations may not hold public meetings?  Then what are political organisations for if you are not allowing them to hold public meetings? It is as if you are saying, 'yes, hon. Omara Atubo, you are allowed to eat food, you have a right to eat food, you have a right to feed yourself, but you are not allowed to dig, and worse even, you are not allowed to open your mouth.’ ‘You are allowed to eat, there is food there on the table, you can go to the hotel, but for goodness' sake, do not open your mouth.’ 

Have we reached this stage of lying to the people of Uganda, of deceiving the people of Uganda that we have the freedom of association, that parties are being allowed to exist, but they do not do the following. You literally end up by saying parties should not do anything! 

Like hon. Mwandha has said, how are going to organise delegates’ conferences without party branches, without activities at the grassroots? Who is going to appoint these delegates? The delegates do come from the grassroots. And you are asking for internal democracy, there is a provision in the Constitution about parties having internal democracy. Internal democracy means that if you are having a delegates’ conference, it is from the grassroots. The people must start emerging from the village to the parish, and those people are elected up to district levels, and then they come for the delegates’ conference. Now you are saying, 'do not a hold a public meeting'! (Interruption)

MR. RWABITA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like hon. Omara Atubo to reconcile two aspects. When you allow political parties to open offices at the grassroots, how do you reconcile that with Article 73 (2) of the Constitution? This Article is not only meant for the Movement Government, it is also meant for any adopted political system. For example, suppose there was a Government run by a political party and the Movement system is in opposition, would the political party Government allow the Movement to open grassroot offices and to have public rallies? 

Let us be objective, because it is not only one sided. It is meant for any political system in place.  So, now when the Movement is in place, if you allow the other parties to open up grassroot offices, there will be confusion. That is why I think the amendment allows certain offices up to the district level, and then allows you to have delegates’ conferences. Otherwise, if you open it up at the grassroots, then there is no way the other Government in office can perform, because it will get a lot of interference.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, let me wind up. First of all, I do not want to pre-empt my amendment. It will come in on the issue of opening branch offices. Secondly, let me also inform you that, if the multi-party system or the multi-parties were to win any election, one of the first things that a multi-party president or a multi-party parliament should do is to re-visit all the provisions in this Constitution regarding political systems. They should delete what is totally unnecessary, like the movement system, and we leave only the multi-party political system. That is what should be done. Let me inform you that as far as I am concerned, this House should make parties free enough to operate, even under the so-called Movement political system. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are going to be guided by Article 73(2), and we will deal with each proposed amendment separately, so that you measure it with Article 73(2). That is how we are going to handle these amendments, not omnibus.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With reference to the good words spoken by hon. Okello-Okello, namely that the Minister’s submission should be collectively discussed, and also vis-à-vis the remarks made by hon. Omara Atubo, that the crux of the matter of this Bill is the amendment as presented by hon. Mayanja Nkangi, would it not be prudent for us, as representatives of the people, who are seriously concerned about the freedoms of people, to say something about this provision?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Who has prevented you? When you stand and I recognise you, I will give you the Floor, and this is exactly what we are doing. So, what is procedural?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I just want to seek some clarification from the Minister. Article 269 (e) of the Constitution says:“269. On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with article 73 of this Constitution, political activities may continue except- 
carrying on any activities that may interfere with the movement political system for the time being in force.”  

The Minister’s amendment, 24 (e), reads: “Subject to Article 73(2) of the Constitution, no political parties or political organisation or any member thereof may carry on any activities that may interfere with the adopted political system for the time being in force.”  

Now, the Minister had submitted earlier that Article 269 is falling by the wayside, but his clause 24 (e) is actually reproducing Article 269 (e). So, how does he reconcile this with his earlier statement?  

The second issue is (c), which bars political parties from holding public rallies. The proposed amendment in 24(c) says: “A political organisation may not hold a public meeting” 

We have already re-defined a public meeting in clause 3.  The Minister has said that 269 is falling by the way side, and yet here in 24(c), he is simply lifting Article 269(c) and bringing it in the Bill. How far does he reconcile this with his earlier statement that 269 falls by the wayside when we make provisions under Article 73?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me also explain my understanding of this provision. The restrictions, which have been constitutional, are going to cease the moment we pass this law. Any restriction we now make will not be constitutional, but will rather be statutory, that is the difference. You will not be saying that the constitutional provision refers to this and the other. And it is not easy to amend the Constitution but it is easy to amend a statute. So, as we have said, you have to ask, ‘does this measure to Article 73(2)?’ If it does not measure, then you reject it. I think that is what we should we do. Otherwise, restrictions will cease to be constitutional and will become statutory.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will start from where you have ended. My interpretation of the reason for putting this law in place is that the limitations we had in the Constitution were perceived as being excessive. So, now we review those restrictions and make them as limited as possible. That is how I understand Article 73.  Article 73 is not supposed to be there in order to stifle the operations of political organisations. It is supposed to be there as an enabling Article, to make it possible for the political organisations in place to operate.  That is where I agree with you entirely; how does such and such a restriction make it impossible for the movement to operate. Let me elaborate. 

The Minister, in his amendment, very generously says that political organisations may do five other things.  Sir, I worked in a political office as a senior member of a political party for almost 16 years. When the movement came into place, I worked in the same office from 1985 until 1995.  We had our own newspaper, we were organising in-door seminars at national and district levels, we cannot therefore say thank you to the Minister for that. We had funds from sympathisers, so we cannot say ‘thank you, Sir’. We were holding our national meetings and leaders’ meetings ever so often. So, there is nothing new. We had our office in Uganda House open, it is still open, so we cannot bow and say ‘thank you, Sir’. We still felt stifled as we still feel stifled now, why? We could not reach the grassroots. 

The question I am posing before you now is, how does holding a public meeting interfere with the operations of the Movement? A public meeting of 20 people! Each one of us here holds meetings ever so often, and we who profess multi-partyism are holding such meetings, have we ever interfered with the operations of the Movement? Why are we making a law, which makes us look ridiculous? We are telling the whole world yes, the Political Organisations Bill is now going to open up political party activities, and then cowardly you come and say, ‘do not hold public meetings’. Meetings Of 20 people! We cannot be serious!  We are undoing everything, which we have systematically been doing in the last two days, with this one sub-section in this clause 24.  

I do not see anything wrong with me going to my village called Anyeke in Oyam and calling people to my compound, when they are more than 20, and I always do it. I always do it with the full knowledge of the LCs, and I do not interfere with the operations of the Prime Minister or the Minister of Justice or of the Minister of Defence in the Movement Government. I do not! Holding meetings does not do anything. If they become chaotic, the police will handle that. I thank you, Sir.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you. Mr. Chairman, the Minister has very generously said that political parties can hold delegates’ conferences, and I think hon. Okello-Okello referred to this. Can the Minister clarify to me how parties will arrive at a delegates’ conference? Who are going to attend and how they are going to select these members to come to the delegates’ conference without the other lower level meetings taking place? I would like this clarification before I vote. I hope he can tell me how we can arrive at the delegates’ conference and elect members to the delegates’ conference without holding meetings and even opening branches. Can the Minister explain this to me so that I am comfortable, because it makes me uncomfortable?

MR. MED KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all I want to agree with your interpretation that 269 will fall by the wayside. But there is nothing stopping Government from bringing something similar. The question is, is that what we want to do? I think our argument should be as to whether what Government is offering is good enough. That should be the argument, because there is nothing stopping Government from bringing something similar to what is in the Constitution. And as you rightly said, it will be statutory. So, Parliament should confine itself to whether that goes far enough, as required by Article 73.  I think that should be the debate. 

Having said that, I am disturbed by the proposed clause 24(e). I appreciate that part of it is in the Constitution, as my chairman said, which is going to fall by the wayside according to the Minister. But what is unfortunate about this proposal is that it is so general and so wide. If the Minister had consulted the Committee, as should normally have been the case, we would have defined what constitutes ‘interfering’. When you bring it as it is here, it is rather blanket, and I think this is not good for democracy. I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I join the previous speakers in saying that the crux of the matter for this Bill lies in the amendment proposals by the Minister of Justice. If we are not deceiving the public, if we are seriously saying that we are removing Article 269 as stated in the Constitution, whatever we put in place should be seen to be different from what we have been talking about as an absurdity with reference to that provision. Today, the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council is working out modalities for constituting a delegates’ conference so that they have a new Mufti. At the grassroots in Butambala, in Masaka, in Rakai people are busy electing representatives so that they can form a basis for constituting a meaningful delegates’ conference.  

The Minister tells us, with reference to clause 24(d), that political parties can own radio stations. Are you telling us that each political party formed, in order for it to have an influence in the country, it must own a radio station? What the Minister is saying is that when the political party owns or operates a radio station, then it can cause impact on the ground. One could equally say that for the political party to cause impact, it should be seen to own a radio station. If a priest is baptising a baby, in order for the priest to baptise many more babies, he does the baptism in the open in church so that everyone can enter. But you are telling us to baptise the child in a closed area so that many people do not witness the baptism exercise. So anyone who wants many more people to be baptised should give access to the church so that many more people can come up and develop a desire for baptism. 

There is no justification at all in the ‘science’ given to us by the Movement side, that when the Movement is in Government, holding of a public meeting can cause disharmony. There is no justification! You are only saying that if the Movement is in power and you hold a public meeting, you are going to have a scuffle. In fact, you cause a greater scuffle by suffocating people. Do you know why people are in the bush today in Uganda? If you took trouble to do some research, you would find out that many of these people in the bush do not have very strong reasons, but they go under the cover of being suffocated.  People cannot talk! You make them come out of the bush by opening ground for people to articulate their views. It is not by suffocating them that you are going to cause change. So, I strongly say that there is no sound reason for us to say that when the Movement is in power and you create ground for public meetings, there is going to be a problem. 

I want to end on one very strong note. If you are seriously admiring the point I made recently, namely that democracy among other things implies institutional building, I want to tell you that you are now building institutions using the taxpayers’ money on the side of the Movement. Even if the Movement is in power, if you are mindful about the future of Uganda, you should take trouble to equally develop institutions in the political party camp, because you never know what comes tomorrow if you are seriously addressing the issue of political investment in democracy.  Thank you very much.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, this clause 24 is the core of the Bill, and it seems the Committee had not harmonised with the Minister. Can I propose that this clause is stood over and then the Committee and the Minister harmonise and then come back to us? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is the consensus.

Clause 25

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to delete this clause and rewrite it to read as follows: “where a political party does not comply with the provisions of this Act, the Registrar General may require compliance. If, however, the party persists in non-compliance, the Registrar General may apply to the High Court for an order winding up the political party or organisation.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25 as amended agreed to

Clause 26

MR. OGALO: Immediately after 26(2), insert the following new sub-clause (3) and renumber accordingly: “notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1) and (2) above, where a matter touches on the interpretation of the Constitution, any aggrieved party may petition the Constitutional Court” 

And I would like to rephrase (3) to read: “The Chief Justice may, in consultation with the Attorney General, make rules of court to regulate the procedure in the High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Nkangi Mayanja): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I wish to move a Motion under Rule 108(1). The Rule reads as follows: “If any Member desires to delete or amend any provision contained in a Bill as reported from a Committee of the whole House or to introduce any new provisions in the Bill, he or she may, at any time before a Member rises to move the Third Reading of the Bill, move that the Bill be recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular amendment or amendments.”  Maybe I will wait for the report first. I thank you.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Nkangi Mayanja): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Political Organisations Bill, clauses 23, 24, 25, 26, and stood over clause 24, but has passed the others.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Nkangi Mayanja): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Okello-Okello, we shall continue with the clauses up to the end, and then the final report of what we have done will be made and we shall adopt it. After we have adopted that report, that is after the conclusion of the Committee stage and before the Motion for a Third Reading is made, if you have any recommittal, that is when you will bring it up, but allow us to continue up to the end. Thank you. We now come to the end of the morning session. The proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 1.15 p.m.)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

Clause 27 agreed to

Clause 28 agreed to

Clause 29

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete clause 29(1), (2) and (3). This is because the non-compliance, which had been criminalised, can be dealt with by the Registrar General and the orders of the court. False statements are punishable under the Penal Code Act. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: I propose to delete clause 29(4), (5) and (6) because with the complete decriminalisation of the Bill, these clauses are no longer necessary.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to

Clause 30

MR. OGALO: I propose that we delete clause 30 and replace it with the following: “30. (1) Upon the court making an order winding up a political party pursuant to section 25, the court shall make such orders as appear just and equitable for this disposition of property, assets, rights and liabilities of a political party or organisation 

(2) The Registrar General shall not apply for an order winding up a political party if there is an appeal pending in respect of such matter.”  

The reasons for these are that the Attorney General is a Cabinet Minister by virtue of Article 119 of the Constitution, and he is the principle legal advisor of the Government he serves. He represents Government in court, so he cannot be the one to take proceedings against a party or organisation in court.  

Secondly, the fact that he is a Cabinet Minister makes him partisan. He has an interest in the Government he serves, and as such, he may not be impartial in matters relating to his political rivals. By reason of the fact that the Attorney General represents Government in courts of law, he is placed in a position of conflict of interest when he is called upon to bring proceedings for winding up a political rival. On the other hand, the Registrar General is a civil servant, who is called upon to serve whatever Government is in power by reason of his statutory duties as a civil servant. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to

Clause 31

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete clause 31 and replace it with the following: “The Registrar General may designate any official to carry out any functions conferred upon him by this Act.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to

Clause 32

MR. OGALO: In the Committee, we had provided for clause 32 (1) to be deleted and replaced with the following: “The Minister may with the approval of Parliament by statutory instrument make regulations for registration of political parties” 

And we move to delete (2). The Minister has –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us start with the first one.

MR. OGALO: Okay, the reason for our amendment is that Article 269 placed restrictions on political parties under a transitional arrangement. Those restrictions were not intended to be permanent. So, to enact the regulations spelt out in 32(2) would be to continue with the Article, which is meant to expire with the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The regulations should only be for legislation. He cannot make regulations for other things.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, that is why I am saying that we are trying to now merge the suggestion with the amendment of the Minister so that we go beyond mere registration of political parties.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now read the merged clause so that we see what it says.

MR. OGALO: “The Minister shall, in consultation with the Registrar General and with the approval of Parliament, make regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to

Clause 33

MR. OGALO: I propose to delete the words “with the approval of Cabinet”, appearing in clause 33, and replace them with the words “approval by Parliament”. The reason for this is that the law is enacted by Parliament and such amendments should be with the approval of the body which made the law and not Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have dealt with this issue in other Bills and similar reasons were advanced. We have, however, said that since this really depends on changes in the value of the shilling, we leave it to the Minister. I think that is what happened in other Bills, which we have passed, with these currency points.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if it is for consistency with the other Bills, which we have passed in this House, unless there are other objections, I have no objection at all.

Clause 33, agreed to

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall go back to what we stood over, namely clause 20. There was also clause 24, where the Ministers were to meet with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to find out a solution. But we also stood over clause 20, and I saw an amendment by hon. Omara Atubo. Let us deal with the original 20 and see how to proceed. This was about money from foreign places.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, when we stood over clause 20, and I think hon. Kutesa had said something about what I may call developmental loans. That was actually what was worrying him. It was about how a political party should be able to borrow money from certain institutions, banks for instance, for purposes of putting up buildings, for example. But he is not here, and I do not know whether anybody else is prepared to carry on that argument.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, he marketed his ideas. I think his idea also included differentiating between banks here and other banks. Do you call Barclays Bank, Uganda a foreign bank? Can a party borrow from such a bank? I think that is what he was trying to say, but if he is not here and nobody is taking it up. What do we do?

MR. NKANGI: Well, on the Government side, we are prepared to add a sub-clause to that clause to read as follows: “(1) Financial institutions registered in Uganda shall not be regarded as foreign for this purpose.  

Secondly, since we are coming back to clause 24, we could agree to stand over the issue of developmental loans for parties, so that maybe hon. Kutesa could say something later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we agree that the Minister and the Committee will handle both 20 and 24. We normally handle schedules after we have finished with the clauses, but what do we do in this situation, do we just resume and then adjourn?

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I think this schedule here is not controversial, and I think we can handle it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, if it is not controversial, then let us stick to our rules and wait for tomorrow. Since these are mere schedules, the best thing to do is to wait for tomorrow and we shall dispose of the matter.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I seek your guidance with reference to clause 20. I already alerted you that I was moving an amendment. Do I also have to go to the Committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because we stood over clause 20 and you are trying to improve clause 20 by amendment. So, I think you should go to the Committee. Once it is sorted out there, I think we shall not have a problem.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, with due respect to the Chair, I am talking about two different amendments. There is one to be moved by hon. Omara Atubo and I am seconding it, and there is one I want to move and hon. Omara Atubo is seconding it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not think it makes a difference. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 27 to 32 of the Political Organisations Bill, 1998 and passed them with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not been able to proceed very far with this Bill, but last week I told you about the human rights reports, which you had received, and the chairman said he was ready with the report. We have a report here, and I think you have copies, don’t you think we can utilise this time to consider the report? So, I think let us adjust our Order Paper to include this. 

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, the item that we are just about to start tackling is honestly a very important one that affects most of us who are still interested in coming back to this Parliament. I think it would only be fair to allow us go and read this thing, internalise it, so that we can come and meaningfully participate in this debate. We all do not understand at the same pace. Some of us understand slowly. So, we need a bit of time to go home, internalise this, and then we come back. I beg your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, on this matter -(Interjections)-I withdraw if it is a different issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ogalo Wandera): Mr. Speaker, Article 52(2) of the Constitution of Uganda requires the Uganda Human Rights Commission to submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country.  In accordance with that provision, the commission did submit its annual report for the year 1997 in July 1998.  

The Committee considered the report and held discussions with the following: 
    • The Director General of Internal Security Organisation;
    • The Director of Public Prosecutions; 
    • The Inspector General of Police; 
    • The Registrar of the High Court; 
    • The Commissioner of Prisons.  

The Directorate of Military Intelligence was invited but did not send a representative. No reasons were given to the Committee for their failure to send representatives.  

(A) FACTORS NEGATIVELY AFFECTING THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN UGANDA

The following factors were identified by the Human Rights Commission to be affecting the protection and promotion of human rights in the country:  

1.Armed conflict in certain parts of the country  
The rights to life and personal liberty have been violated. Killings, abduction, defilement and forcing children into rebel ranks by Kony rebels in the northern parts of the country, has been one of the gravest violations of human rights.  

It is understood that in the western parts of Uganda, where ADF has been operating, people have been killed, maimed, displaced and property destroyed. Children have been sold into slavery and have been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Civilians have been displaced, many lives lost, movement restricted and property destroyed.

2.Lack of facilities and funds for detained persons.  
Police cells do not meet the minimum standards of health and cleanliness. Suspects sleep on bare floors and the old colonial system of using buckets as toilets is still very much in use.  

Central and local administration prisons are overcrowded, leading to over use of essential facilities such as toilets and bathrooms. This in turn leads to inmates contracting diseases like cough, chest complaints, scabies, dysentery and tuberculosis.

3. Delays in the administration of Justice  
Almost no police station in the country adheres with the constitutional provision requiring suspects to be produced in court within 48 hours. 

Over 65 percent of all prison inmates are on remand, with a large percentage awaiting High Court sessions.  

4.Delays in removing outdated laws and making new ones. 
The Constitution provides for the making of new laws to enhance human rights. The new laws are expected in the following areas: 
    (i) Redress of social, economic and educational imbalances within the society; 
    (ii) control in the spread of infections or contagious diseases;  
    (iii) care and treatment of persons of unsound mind, drug addicts and alcoholics; 
    (iv) compulsory basic or primary education; 
    (v) inheritance law; 
    (vi) equal opportunities; 
    (vii) protection of rights of persons with disabilities;
    (viii) access to information.

The Law Reform Commission has identified laws inconsistent with the Constitution, which have not been specifically repealed.  

5. Street Children 
Since the 1980s, there has been an increase of children who live on the streets. Though sometimes they spend a few days in police cells or remand homes, no remedial action is taken on their plight and they end up returning to the streets.

6. Poverty  
Most of our citizens are not enjoying most of the social and economic rights guaranteed by the Constitution. Many citizens do not enjoy the necessities of life, like sufficient food, clean water, permanent shelter, adequate clothing and health facilities. 

Unemployment is on the increase, as the private sector cannot absorb school leavers and the youth. Structural adjustment programmes imposed retrenchment programmes in the public sector and left workers’ terminal benefits unpaid hence inability to start a fresh life. Poverty undermines both democracy and enjoyment of human rights. 

    7.  Corruption.  
Corruption has enriched a few corrupt officers and misdirected funds meant to improve the lot of the ordinary people. It has hindered the development of social services, which are essential for realisation of people’s economic, social and cultural rights.  

    8.  Abuse of office.  
This takes various forms, including discrimination through nepotism or on the basis of ethnicity or region, oppression and suppression of workers and employees, and outright misuse of public resources at the control of a public servant. 

9. Ignorance and illiteracy 
 Forty five percent of the Ugandan population is illiterate. Many people are ignorant of their rights and duties and of the contents of Constitution. This undermines respect for human rights, the rule of law and democracy.

10. Constitution restriction on certain activities of political parties  
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was ratified by Uganda in 1995. Under the covenant, restriction on the freedom of association can be imposed by law on the grounds only of: 
    (a) national security 
    (b) public safety or order
    (c) protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

Controversy and tension has been created by Article 269 of the Constitution, which restricts the activities of political parties. Backers of political parties argue that these restrictions impinge on their right to freely associate for political reasons.

(B) FACTORS POSITIVELY AFFECTING HUMAN RIGHTS

The Human Rights Commission also identified factors that positively influenced respect for human rights in Uganda or that served as a clear manifestation of the slow but steadily increasing human rights awareness. They are:

    1.  Free, fair and regular elections 
A culture of free, fair and regular elections is steadily emerging. However, there is need to enforce electoral laws, strengthen voter education, and inculcate in contestants a culture of losing honourably.

2. The independent Media
The press and the electronic media have enjoyed a measure of freedom and independence, which they continue to utilise to protect and promote human rights of the individual.

3.  Role of the civil society
Civil society has grown steadily and increased in strength. Organisations, which are independent, have sprung up throughout Uganda of Government, some of which have made an impact on human rights awareness and education.   

4. Women’s struggle for equality
There was collaboration between women judges and women Members of Parliament in the struggle against domestic violence. This, plus other moves, did sensitise the community on domestic violence.

5. The Children Statute
This was launched on the 1st August 1997. It is a landmark in the protection of children’s rights.  

6. Decentralisation
The enactment of the Local Government Act in 1997 decentralises power in accordance with the Constitution.  Every district council is required to have established human rights committees. This gives the Uganda Human Rights Commission an official organ in the districts with which it can co-operate. Further affirmative action in the said law, in respect of women and persons with disabilities, will promote and protect rights of women and persons with disabilities.

7. Military-Civilian relations
These have continued to be relatively good in those parts of the country where there is peace and security.  Discipline in the army in those areas is good and soldiers who breach army discipline are brought before the law and punished if found guilty.

8. The active role of Parliament
Parliament jealously defended and exhibited its constitutional independence. It showed courage in checking executive excesses. It has enacted enabling laws, which implement the Constitution and which promote human rights and good governance. Parliament in this respect has been in the forefront of protecting the Constitution.

(C) FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. The right to life, personal liberty, property and respect for human dignity is guaranteed by Articles 22, 23, 24 and 26 of the Constitution. Armed conflict in the north and western Uganda has led to a violation of these rights. To apportion blame is to miss the point. What is important is to identify and address the root cause of the conflict. This obligation lies with the Executive arm of Government.

The committee is of the considered view that the military option alone will not bring about peace.

Uganda’s assistance to SPLA encourages the Sudanese Government to arm and support rebellion in Uganda.  This leads to violation of human rights. Uganda must choose protection of the fundamental rights of Ugandans or support for oppressed people of Southern Sudan. The Committee is of the view that painful as it may be, the time has come to cease support for SPLA. This will lead to meaningful peaceful dialogue.

It will be recalled that dialogue brought an end to the rebellion in Teso. The same mechanism can be put in effect in respect of Kony and ADF. Even if these groups have caused untold suffering for so many years, there are still people within those groups to whom Government can talk. Whether they have a political agenda or not is beside the point.  What is important is the protection of fundamental human rights. It is costly, but it is worth it.

    2. (i) Lack of funds directly leads to violation of the rights of detained persons. Companies contracted to supply food to suspects in police cells have stopped doing so because of domestic arrears. Furthermore, the budgetary provision for food is inadequate while there is none for bedding. Many of the police cells were constructed in colonial and post independence era. The number of suspects has increased, leading to overcrowding hence poor hygienic conditions in the cells.  

The Committee recommends a revisit of the budgetary process. The practice of increasing by certain percentages without examining whether the original allocation was proper is erroneous. The Committee is of the view that the police force is central in protecting human rights. Police cells must therefore not be de-humanising centres.

(ii) Central and Local Government prisons were designed for detention of a few suspects. The numbers have increased. This leads to unhygienic conditions causing diseases in all prisons. It is also for the same reason that prisoners are detained together, without regard to those on remand, convicts, the sick, and the mentally sick. Juveniles are mixed with adults, contravening Article 34(6) of the Constitution of Uganda. The Article provides as follows:
“A child offender who is kept in lawful custody or detention shall be kept separately from adult offenders”.
 
For the last five years, no funds have been allocated for bedding of prisoners, and prisoners eat one meal a day, moreover of a very poor quality. This is because of inadequate funding. Prisoners have relied on the good will of the District Medical Officers to provide some part-time staff for medical service. The 1980 decision for prisons to have their own medical service was never put in effect. It is time to establish a prison medical service.

    3. (i) When the Inspector General of Police appeared before the Committee, he gave the following as reasons for holding suspects beyond the constitutional limit of 48 hours:
    a. Inadequate funding of training programmes which leads to insufficient training. He said officers come out of training without being fully aware of the law.
 
    b. There are individual weaknesses among some policemen who disregard the law.

    c. The torture culture in the community where complainants want to see suspects held for long periods.

    d. Lack of transport facilities. This is a problem up country. Suspects are arrested and there is need to trace witnesses before taking suspects to court.

    e. Inadequate number of experts both from within Police and Government departments, for example handwriting experts and chemists.

    f. Policemen stationed in police posts away from urban centres tend to take the law in their hands.

    g. Where there is need for identification parade, detention may take longer.

    h. Geographical spread, for example, Kibaale, Hoima and Masindi share one Chief Magistrates’ Court in Hoima.

    i. Inadequate staffing. There are some serious cases, which cannot be handled by constables or middle cadre officers.

The Committee is unable to agree with any of the above reasons as being valid for breaching the Constitution.  These are weaknesses rather than reasons to justify violation of a right.

The Committee recommends that the set educational standards for police officers be adhered to during recruitment and training. Facilities should be expanded and salary increased from the present shillings 70,000 per month for police officers. Police officers who break the law or disregard the Constitution in any respect should be prosecuted.  

The Committee was informed that the Judiciary has not performed as expected because of the following reasons:

    (a) The old criminal procedures, which allow a case to be held in a Magistrates’ court for a year before coming up for trial in the High Court

    (b) Lack of judges to handle capital cases, which have shoot up. An example is treason. Cases have gone up from 110 to 200 within one year.

    (c) Ban by the Ministry of Public Service on recruitment made it difficult to secure additional staff.

    (d) Protracted periods of investigating, especially in treason cases.

    (e) Inadequate budgetary provisions.

    (f) Failure of expert witnesses to appear at court sessions, leading adjournments to another session.

    (g) Appointment of judges to Commissions of inquiry, which has created a backlog of cases. 

    (h) Lack of physical facilities, for example court rooms.

The High Court building was meant to sit six judges, but now they are 25. This means sharing facilities and thereby creating a backlog of cases. The Committee has considered the reasons advanced by the Chief Registrar of the High Court and finds them valid.  

The Committee makes the following recommendations: 
    (i) There should be co-ordination between the Police, Director of Public Prosecutions and Uganda Law Society to enable them understand how each works.

(ii) Lifting the ban on recruitment. If one secretary types work for three judges, judgements will inevitably be delayed.

(iii) The re-introduction of the summary of evidence procedure, as the current system is cumbersome and time wasting.

(iv) Revisiting the budgetary process.

(v) Amend the Local Government Act to enable magistrates handle inquiry matters currently confined to judges, under the Act.

    4. The Law Reform Commission has identified laws that would appear inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution. The Uganda Human Rights Commission identified these in their report as the following:

    (a) The Marriage Act.
    (b) The Marriage and Divorce of Mohammedans.
    (c) The Hindu Marriage and Divorce Act.
    (d) The Divorce Act.
    (e) The Customary Marriage (Registration) Decree.
    (f) The Succession Act.
    (g) The Succession Act (Amendment) Decree.
    (h) The Habitual Criminals (Preventive Detention) Act
    (i) The Prisons Act
    (j) The Police Statute
    (k) The Criminal Procedure Code Act
    (l) The Public Order and Security Act
    (m) The Emergency Powers Act
    (n) The Penal Code Act
    (o) The Press and Journalist Statute
    (p) The Trial on Indictments Decree
    (q) The Karamoja (maintenance of Public Orders) Regulations.
    (r) Land Acquisition Act
    (s) The National Resistance Army Statute
    (t) Administrator General’s Act.

    (i) The Committee recommends that the Minister of Justice examines the said laws and introduces legislation in Parliament for possible repeal.

(ii) As indicated above, the Constitution provides for the making of new laws to enhance human rights, which the Executive arm of Government has not introduced in Parliament. The department of Legislative Counsel should identify these and bring it to the attention of the office of the Clerk to Parliament so that pressure is put on the Executive to have them brought before Parliament.

5.Street children are a result of a breakdown of a family structure and community life, civil wars, internal displacement and uncared for orphans. 

It is the finding of the Committee that little is being done by Government to address this problem.  Government has left this matter to non-governmental organisations with no coherent policy.

Article 34 (1) of the Constitution reads as follows:

“Subject to laws enacted in their best interests, children shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or those entitled by law to bring them up.”

Article 34(7) reads as follows: 
“ The law shall accord special protection to orphans and other vulnerable children.”

It is the considered view of the Committee that Government has failed the country in this regard. The Committee recommends introduction of regulations that make provisions for special protection of street children.

6. The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Human Rights Commission that in order to fight poverty, there is need to develop a welfare state.

7. Although the Human rights Commission addressed the question of corruption and abuse of office, this would ordinarily be addressed by the Inspector General of Government, who is required by law to submit annual reports to Parliament. It would be more appropriate for Parliament to express itself on the issue of corruption when considering the report of the Inspector General of Government.  The Committee is of the view that the report of the Inspector General of Government would be more comprehensive in this respect and Parliament would debate the issue from a more informed position.

8.Article 269 of the Constitution was meant to be a transitional provision. The Constituent Assembly noted that political parties might at some stage, have had a negative effect on the politics of Uganda. Party activities were consequently restricted and parties barred from holding delegates’ conferences, public rallies and opening or operating party branches. These provisions, which froze political activity, were to continue until Parliament made a law under Article 73 of the Constitution. The big debate, which this report brings out, is whether such restrictions are still justified.

Article 36 of the Constitution reads as follows: “Minorities have a right to participate in decision-making processes and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans and programmes.”  

If this is read together with the above argument, then any regulations made by Parliament under Article 73 must be such as to allow this minority to participate in the decision making process.

Finally, the Committee has studied the factors positively affecting human rights and recommends increased efforts by key players in those areas mentioned. The Committee recognises the positive contribution players in those institutions have made to improve the human rights in Uganda.

The Committee recommends that the Uganda Human Rights Commission annually recognises those efforts by awards to individuals who have made great contributions to improvement of human rights.

The Committee recommends that the Uganda Human Rights Commission seeks explanations about alleged violation of human rights from the heads of departments where they are said to have occurred. Those explanations, denials or otherwise should form part of the report submitted to Parliament.

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAGALANA TOM (Bunya South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee very much for such an elaborate report. Essentially, this report gives us a picture of what is happening in the nation. I will begin with the poverty levels in this nation.  

Poverty in this country is very alarming. When you look at the conditions of the common man, you wonder what is happening. And yet when you look around, there is what the President calls ‘building the middle class’. I call that witchcraft to this nation. Building of the middle class is witchcraft to this nation, because you cannot build a middle class in a nation where people cannot even afford a living.  So, when we are talking about the laws and policies in this nation, we need to think very seriously about some of the statements that are made. Sometimes they appear political and not social or economical.

In those days, the economic emancipation of the people was found in education, now a person from a very poor rural family has no opportunity of climbing to the middle class because he cannot pay fees for a higher institution of learning. When he qualifies at HSC, he cannot join an NTC, he cannot join a technical college, and he cannot join a university. So, we are entrenching the dictatorship of the middle class over the rural poor, and I anticipate a revolution, and this revolution may be disastrous. I anticipate that. People will pick up arms to overthrow what is being built to oppress and cheat these poor masses.

Looking at rights, especially the right to education, we should lift this issue of the law regulating fees on tertiary and higher institutions of learning. I call upon this Parliament to review this and make recommendations to the Executive. If my constituents were hearing me, I would tell them that in the presidential election tag this to your votes. Tag the issue of free higher education and university education, so that even the poor will be able to join the middle class through education. 

When I was being elected to Parliament, I came from a grass-thatched house, my parents lived in a grass-thatched house, but my redeemer was the B.A degree I got. That is what people looked at and they said ‘go to Parliament’. But now how will other people manage to join the middle class being preached about if education is being barred to only those who can pay. I have not even joined the middle class yet!  Though I am on the road to that class, I have to advocate for those who have not joined this middle class.   

Another issue concerns the rights of women. We are talking about the emancipation of the woman, but when you look at the Government programmes, we are using the women as a political tool for advancement of political interests. What programmes are there to emancipate the woman in the Ministry of Gender and Community Development? What programmes do they have? Somebody will tell you that we have a thousand bicycles and these bicycles are going to the parish woman mobiliser. What benefit will the bicycles be to the parish?  It is the sub-county woman mobiliser getting the bicycle.  What benefit will the bicycle be to the others in the sub-county? 

Sometimes we neglect what other Governments have achieved, but I want you to look back and see a point from the UPC Government.  I am a movementist, I am not a UPC, but I borrow points from UPC for political reasons. They had what they called the NUYO organisation during the 70s and the 60s. This helped this country to emancipate the youth because they used to distribute seeds, hoes, and train the youth. That is why many of you who are here were NUYO people - (Laughter) - I am sorry for alleging, but I say this because many of you paid fees from these programs. You got the political enlightenment out of this.  So, if it is to alleviate the poor plight of women, Government should come up with programs related to those of NUYO  (Interruption)

MS. NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, hon. Tom Bagalana, for giving way. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank hon. Bagalana for his support towards women’s emancipation. I would like to give him some information, because when he was articulating his point, he did not appreciate anything Government has done towards this struggle of women’s emancipation. I just wanted to inform him that even before the NRC, there were some efforts made by the Government to make sure that women assess decision-making levels. Once women are in the decision-making levels, once they have enough voices, they can strategize. 

I can give you an example. I finished Makerere University at a time when NRC had passed an Act providing for the creation of women councils. I went to my village and contested and become the chairperson of the women’s council, but they thought that if I remained there I would miss a position at the national women council. So they pushed me up to national women’s council, and I am a product of a provision in the Women Council Statute. I am now here advocating for more women to come up -(Interjections)- If I could be protected, Mr. Speaker. I am giving hon. Tom Bagalana some information.  

I really understand the problem the Ministry of Gender is facing. I think it is not right for us to sit here and say that Government is using women to get votes, when there are examples of women who have come up and they have contributed to this nation. Thank you very much.

MR. BAGALANA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving me information. If I were a married woman, I would appreciate four things, to get me pregnant, to help me deliver, and even to nurture my child. You do not just make me pregnant and leave me there. This is what the Movement has done - (Laughter)- it has produced the women emancipation program and left women there –(Interruption). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up please.

MR. BAGALANA: Mr. Speaker, if you could give me two minutes to wind up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. We have five minutes for each speaker and you have gone beyond.

MR. BAGALANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   

DR. NYEKO PEN’MOGI (Kilak County, Gulu) Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee for this very good report. I am particularly happy with the factors negatively affecting the protection and promotion of human rights in Uganda. The first one, armed conflicts in certain parts of the country, is very correct. 

I represent a county, which is heavily infested by the rebels. My people are displaced. They are staying in camps. I have four sub-counties in my county and in three sub-counties, the whole population, about forty thousand people, are staying in one camp. That means I have three big camps holding between thirty to forty five thousand people. 

Unfortunately, some politicians came from the Movement Secretariat in 1998 to one of the camps, fortunately I was also there, and they got very excited when they saw close to ten thousand people coming to listen to them. They said, ‘oh, Dr. Nyeko, if you come and spend one or two nights here, you can convert everybody to the Movement’.  Then I said ‘no, that is not the case, these people you see coming to listen to you do not sleep in their small houses. At night they go and sleep under the trees. These people have nothing to eat. If an opposition politician also comes here and stays for one or two days, he would convert everybody to the opposition side. This is a fact, because it is very easy to tell these people ‘look, you have been neglected. There is a plan to finish you off’. And it is very difficult to tell these people to work with the Government.  

So, I want to mention all that, because some of the reports, which may come from the field to the Secretariat, give the impression that we are doing nothing to bring people to the Movement. But this report clearly shows the problems some of us are facing when we talk to the people. That was a very small point I wanted to mention. I thought it was important to correct the reports by somebody to the Secretariat – (laughter).  

I also want to say something on the role of the independent press. “The press and electronic media have enjoyed a measure of freedom and independence, which they continue to utilise to protect and promote human rights of the individual”. I think here, it may also be necessary, for the benefit of the press, to mention that they are also using this freedom to violate the privacy of some individuals. I think it is important for the Committee to note this, because much as they have that freedom, sometimes they violate the privacy of some individuals.  

I was also disappointed with number 7, when you talk about military and civilian relations – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are restricted by the time.

DR. NYEKO: Sir, I am sorry. Give me a minute. Although they talked about relatively good relations in those parts where there is peace and security, I would have wanted to know the relation between the army and civilians in those areas where there is no peace and there is no security.  

I would like to agree with this report when they talk about assistance to SPLA. I think it is time for this Government to think very seriously whether it is necessary to assist SPLA. NRM stayed in the bush for about five years and then they came out. SPLA has been fighting for the last 20 years. If they cannot manage to succeed, they should be left on their own. We know for sure, even amongst the SPLA themselves, the major tribe like the Dinka are already suppressing the other smaller tribes. That is why, in most cases, you find that those other fighting forces from smaller tribes go back to Government at one stage, and then come back to the SPLA, and go back to the Government. So, I think it is high time those who are responsible for our foreign policy start considering this.  It may not be worthwhile to assist SPLA.  I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (Mr. Amama Mbabazi)): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am most grateful to this Parliament for the support they have given to my people in their most critical hour of need.  I rise on the point the report raised on page 7, which my immediate predecessor has talked about. This point is on the question of SPLA and the insinuation in the report that Government has been supporting SPLA and as a consequence, the Sudan Government has acted in retaliation. With your permission and the understanding of the House, I felt that I could be given the opportunity to explain our policy on the matter and the steps, which have been taken, on the situation in the Sudan.  

Of course I know everyone knows that the civil war in Southern Sudan pre-dates this Government. The civil war in Southern Sudan started in 1955, just before Sudan got its independence on 1st January 1956. Apart from a short period between 1972 and 1983, this civil war has raged on. Therefore, for approximately 40 years, this war has been going on. Therefore, it is not correct, and I think it is a simplistic approach, to suggest that the Uganda Government has a hand in the goings on in Sudan, in terms of this civil war.  

I would like to state that the regional organisation code, the Inter-governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), sometime ago established a mechanism for resolving the conflict in the Sudan. A four-country team of mediators was set up, chaired by President Moi of Kenya, and Uganda is a member just like Ethiopia and Eritrea. 

I would like to state very clearly that IGAD recognises that this civil war in the Sudan has got internal causes.  It has in fact declared what we call DOP (Declaration of Principles) about this war, which has been the basis of mediation by the IGAD mediation committee. And these remaining principles are the question of the region and the state in Sudan, and the question of self-determination. 

I would like to assure this House that the Uganda Government does not, in any way, in any partisan way, relate to the Sudan’s question on these matters. And as a matter of fact, our neutrality on these questions is well recognised even by the Sudan Government itself. The Sudan Government accepts Uganda Government as a neutral mediator in this civil war in Southern Sudan. It is true that before we have fronted two points:

    1. Like the rest of the region, we understand the causes of the conflicts in Southern Sudan, and that in fact we hold a lot of sympathy for the fighting and for the people that have taken up arms there. 
  
    2. That when the Sudan decided, after the coup of June 30th 1989, to engage in acts of destabilisation of Uganda by supporting acts of terrorism in Uganda, we indeed occasionally acted against the Sudan, especially in hot pursuit against those terrorist elements that used Southern Sudan as a base to destabilise northern Uganda. And in hot pursuit, as we are entitled to do under Chapter 51 of the United Nations Charter, we have indeed occasionally clashed with Sudanese authorities. This has happened when they come out in support of the Kony forces that seek refuge in Sudan having come into Uganda and committed the crimes that the Committee has so ably described on page 1 and 2 of the report.  

We have stated over and over again that we are ready for normalisation of relations with Sudan. Indeed, Uganda Government has signed a number of agreements with Sudan with a view to normalising relations. The latest agreement was the Nairobi Accord of December 1999. This Accord was supposed to restore relations with Sudan on three conditions:

    1. On the part of the Uganda Government, we were supposed to free the prisoners of war who we were holding here. And indeed the Uganda Government performed its part of the bargain. We freed all the 72 Sudanese prisoners of war who we had been holding for several years, who had been captured by the UPDF in the border area.

The Sudan Government was supposed to end acts of terrorism, to end the act of supporting particularly the LRA. They were particularly required to disarm and disband the LRA  –(Mr. Okello-Okello rose_)  Can I finish this point first?  

Parliament, I am sure, should have been following the efforts that we have been making very closely, including the last meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Libya, Sudan and Uganda met. It was agreed that as a first step towards disarmament and dismantling the LRA, the LRA would be moved 1,000 kilometres away from the border (Interruption)  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to also thank the hon. Minister. I have always read about these prisoners of war from Sudan, but at the same time authorities here have always denied any war with the Sudan. I would like to know from the hon. Minister whose prisoners of war these were. Have you ever fought any war with the Sudan Government?  I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am not at all convinced by the remarks made by the hon. Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs, especially in regard to the reported positive attempt to improve relations between Uganda and the Sudan. I have got evidence on the ground, with reference to Lubaga South, which I represent here in Parliament, that we have an influx of very rich Sudanese living in Lubaga South. They stay in Ben Kiwanuka Zone, in Lule Zone, in Kayanja Zone, in Kabusu Zone, in Najja. Evidence to that effect, in terms of protests, has already been published in the New Vision. This appeared two days ago. 

Would the Minister clarify to us whether, as a result of normalising the relations between the two countries, it has been resolved that some of the people from Sudan settle in Uganda? We are jealous and we must protect our country. It is not a dumping ground where people come, go, and stay like that. The taxpayers I represent are protesting, and they need an explanation in serious terms.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank the hon. Members for raising these points of clarification. In answer to hon. Okello-Okello, in the Nairobi Agreement we described the release of prisoners of war. The Uganda Government interpreted that to mean those who were captured in the course of battle. And 114 Sudanese were captured in the course of battle with UPDF at the border area. I told this to Parliament at that time, and I am sure you recall. So, they were called prisoners of war, even though obviously a state of war does not exist between the Sudan and us. That is a narrow technical definition of that particular group of people.

I am sorry I did not follow hon. Lukyamuzi’s question, but of course, I had not had the opportunity to congratulate him on getting married recently. And as someone who is emerging from the honeymoon, I will give him time to put his question more clearly -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is no time for that.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: Any other time. So, Mr. Speaker, I was saying that at the last meeting, we agreed on the LRA issue. And our people were optimistic that at long last, it appeared we were moving in the right direction on the question of LRA.

The other condition had been that all the abducted children must be released, with specific reference to the Aboke girls and other abductees whose identity and location was known. These are people who have been abducted, are inside Sudan, and we know where they are. They are inside LRA camps, which are inside Sudanese military camps.

At the meeting in Winninpeg, it was agreed that there would be a massive international effort to try and end this question of abductions. It was a condition for the implementation of normalising our relations under the Nairobi Accord. I am sorry to report to this House that the Sudan Government has not been able to meet its part of the bargain.  

We set up a committee comprising of Egypt, Libya, Canada, Uganda, Sudan, UNICEF and other NGOs. They went to Sudan.  We sent a team of Ugandans, including the concerned parents of the abducted children, people from Government, and the Headmistress of Aboke Girls. They went to Sudan and waited in Khartoum, but they were not able to locate these people because the Sudan Government did not allow them to do so. 

What I am trying to say is that, Uganda Government has done everything it can to try and normalise relations with the Sudan, but unfortunately the Sudan Government has done everything it can not to allow the normalisation of relations. I would like to assure this House that our efforts still continue. The Libyan initiative we have had together with Egypt still continues. We have agreed with the Libyans that we were going to have another meeting this month to try and move that process which had stalled because of the inaction of the Sudanese Government.

Therefore, in response to the point being made here, I want to state to this House and to the country that the Government of Uganda has had no desire at all to have the kind of relations we have with the Sudan. On the contrary, the Government of Uganda has only reacted to the actions of the Sudan Government. I think this Parliament should support the efforts of Government to try and normalise relations, and where relations have not been normalised, to support the Executive’s action to protect Uganda. Everything that has been done has been done indeed to protect Uganda, including the pursuit that we have been engaged in.  

The SPLA started fighting before we took power. This SPLA obviously does not depend on us. SPLA controls four times the size of the territory of Uganda, and it is not true that Uganda gives them territorial support, because they actually do not need it. So, I think it is really simplistic to think that by Uganda denouncing SPLA, for example, we shall have peace at the border. As long as there is war in the Sudan, you should expect this kind of problem coming from our border. I thank you.

MS. KIRASO BEATRICE (Women Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman for this report, and I also want to thank the Human Rights Commission for having brought out some of these points, most of which are not very good. They are not very attractive. But when they come out, and we debate them, and they are known, then I think it gives us a chance to address them.  

My main point is on poverty, because I think it is poverty, which is the root of most of the problems, which we have. And of course, it includes the perception or the way Government looks at some of these programmes. In other countries, when the economy is growing they have to prepare for it, knowing very well that the crime rate will go up when economies grow. It follows that the crime rate goes up when you embrace these structural adjustment programmes. 

The Committee talked about people who were retrenched, but then there is the fact that the gap between the rich and the poor has greatly increased, and these very poor people have resorted to hopelessness. There is a lot of hooliganism around, and there is a lot of unethical and inhuman behaviour because of embracing these kinds of programmes. People want to work but they have nothing to do. The Committee talks about unemployment, so we should have prepared for this kind of situation.  

When somebody says that officers still get 70,000/=, and these are officers who are dealing with criminals who have embezzled billions and billions of Government money, I see a vicious circle. I do not see what else we would expect other than corruption. We have said that the number and the size of prisons is still the same as it was in the 60s and yet the economy has grown and the population has grown. So, it is as if this country is not planning in all directions. When we are planning, we should also plan for increased crime rate. 

I get worried when they say that there is one Chief Magistrate for the three districts of Kibale, Hoima and Masindi. Lately I have been hearing a lot of appointments of magistrates and judges. I do not know where those people are going and what they are doing. When His Excellency the President said that there was corruption in the Judiciary, everybody came up in arms. It is as if he had said something very sacrilegious. But this report brings out very well the fact that the Judiciary has not performed as expected. So, I think we are looking at a vicious circle, because each of these things affect each other.  

On the positive aspects, the Committee recognises some factors, which have positively affected human rights, but I am afraid they were not well articulated. They have been put here, but to me they have been put in a narrow form. When you talk of free, fair and regular elections in the kind of framework that we are talking about, where a big number of our people are very poor, are the elections really free and fair? Maybe we should go a little bit further. We should not just pick these things and put them on paper, we should go a bit further.  

Has the independent media actually been independent? Is it acting positively, given the framework in which we are operating? I will not talk about civil society, but I will talk about the women's struggle for equality. And I would like to inform the chairperson that the women's struggle goes beyond domestic violence. For God's sake, you cannot only say that there was collaboration in the struggle against domestic violence! Two sentences on the women struggle! There is more to it than domestic violence. There is a right to co-own property, which we have been talking about, there is a right to education by the girl child, there is a right to basic maternity facilities - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when you are reading this report of the Committee, know that it is reporting on another report. So, it is necessary for you to internalise the report. These are summaries of their observations on the report itself.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what I am saying. The Committee should have also pointed at the very salient features, which the commission left out of their report. That is exactly what I am saying. I am saying that the Committee should not have just duplicated to us or condensed for us the report of the commission, which I also read very well. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OBEDMOTH GERALD (Youth Representative, Northern): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate. My main area of discussion is on lack of facilities and funds for detained persons. The Committee did point out that police cells do not meet minimum standards of health and cleanliness. I am a little bit surprised, because the very policemen who protect these detained persons do not have toilet facilities, let alone houses. Police use kavera to defecate, so the Human Rights Commission should have first been concerned with the conditions of these policemen who protect these suspects. 

I hope Government will look into the welfare of the police. On many occasions, the police has been blamed for corruption. I do not support the idea that the police must be corrupt, but these are people who have been receiving bribes of 1,000 or 2,000 shillings. They have never had access to millions of shillings. You cannot make a hungry dog protect good meat, but that is exactly what the Government of Uganda is doing. It is making hungry dogs protect good meat. I hope the Human Rights Commission will look into the improvement of the welfare of the police force before they could - (Interruption)

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, even when you have bad meat, you cannot actually have a hungry dog to protect it. It will eat it.

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The issue about the welfare of our police has been discussed at various levels in this country. I wish to inform Members that recently while hon. Matembe, Minister of Ethics and Integrity, was in Busia some wise policeman stood up and asked her a question. He asked, 'hon. Minister, it is true we have been taking bribes and from midnight tonight we are going to stop taking the bribes, but how are the needs, which have been fulfilled by these bribes, going to be fulfilled?' The Minister did not have an answer. 

MR. OBEDMOTH: I thank you for that information, but I am left wondering why the Vice President gave me that information. I had expected the Vice President to come up and tell me what they are going to do for these policemen. They should have come up with a programme. But now you are in charge, and you are lamenting like me who is in the corridor, then -(Laughter)

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, I was waiting for him to speak so that I get an opportunity, but I just wanted to make that technical correction in his submission. Actually, this august House did set up the Sebutinde Commission, which has actually come out with a very good report. That report goes beyond talking about corruption. It has recommended a number of measures that must be made to institutionally overhaul the whole police. I want to assure the Member on the Floor that with his contribution, we should be able to come up with ways and means of improving the police in a holistic manner. I thank you.  

MR. OBEDMOTH: Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like to leave that matter of the police, since the Vice President has promised that something will be done on that.  

I would like to repeat one of the longest views I have ever held. I fundamentally believe that there is no corruption in this country. What exists here is a revolutionary method of creating a middle class. Today there are two emerging groups within the Movement. One of the groups is the Movement for the contented people, and the other, from the list of the people I see on the task force, is the Movement for the disgruntled, the frustrated, the retrenched, the de-mobilised, former prisoners, the poor and the forgotten Ugandan farmers.  

What is splitting the Movement is nothing else but the fact that we do not have equal access to resources. We have liberalised everything, and when you fall out of the way in a long line, there is nobody to grab you and put you back on the main stream. There is no shock absorber for people who fall out of the main stream of the economy, and that is exactly what is happening. The moment you are retrenched, you have no alternative.  

People used to live well in the rural areas because there were co-operative societies that used to give loans to farmers and they used to spray farmers’ crops. All this is gone. Agriculture is no longer a lucrative business in the countryside where the majority of Ugandans live. And here we are talking about poverty eradication. There are several programmes, you see PAP and all kinds of funds being given by ADB and World Bank to deal with poverty and to try to deal with the effects of structural adjustment, but the poverty in the countryside is increasing.  

The people of northern Uganda used to be a very proud group of people who you could not even take a bribe to vote. Now, because of the level of poverty, 200 shillings is enough to excite a voter to change his mind. Are we building a democratic and stable society where people are so poor and can easily vote because of 50 shillings! Are we building a stable Uganda where people are so poor and can no longer send their children beyond primary seven after they have completed with UPE? (Interruption)  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I just want to say that this country died and these are all indicators of that atrophy. For example, whereas we were surrounded by water, we could not even flush very important facets. 

So, basically this country died. But now having died, measures have been taken to address all forms of atrophy. If you consider poverty itself, for example, it has been reduced to 46 per cent. Those figures refer to those people who are under absolute poverty. Where are we transiting from? We are transiting from minus, not even from zero, but from minus, and from minus you come to zero. From zero you begin the journey. The point I want to make is that we are on the journey to recovery. The situation is still difficult, but there are empirical indicators of recovery as indicated by even independent observers. So, that point must be appreciated. I thank you.  

MR. OBEDMOTH: I wish to thank the Prime Minister for that information. It is not that I do not appreciate or I think that Government does not have several programmes for poverty eradication, but these programmes are so many, and the impact they are having on society is very minimal. I do not know how long it will take us to recover before so many of us are dead because of poverty.

Lastly, I would like to wind up with comments on the issue of women emancipation. I heard a lot voices of sympathy when the Minister in charge of Luwero was appreciating how women in Uganda have benefited. To me, this programme Government has for the women of Uganda has never benefited the rural women or the common women. I am not talking about the ones who can afford to speak English like the way we speak here. I do not see the benefits these women get from somebody being elected to a women’s council. How does this change the life of a common rural woman? (Interruption) 

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, hon. Obedmoth knows that the woman of Uganda, like any other Ugandan, benefits when there is a borehole, a protected spring, and a good road to take her to the hospital to give birth to the young brother of hon. Obedmoth. She benefits when there is free media and she can listen to the radio so that she learns what is going on in the country. She has benefited from functional adult literacy. Is hon. Obedmoth in order to really deceive all of us that the woman of Uganda in the rural areas is not benefiting from the programmes of Government?  She is getting technology.  We know she was even more on the minus end. She was on the minus and more than the men of this country, and also because of culture, which is ingrained in the gender of hon. Obedmoth. We have to do more with his support. Is he in order now to say that nothing has been done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think this is a problem of approach or assessment. His way of assessing is different from yours - (Laughter)  

MR. OBEDMOTH: Mr. Speaker, as I wind up, all that that the Vice-President has enumerated lacks in my constituency in northern Uganda. And I am speaking from the practical experience of the suffering of women of northern Uganda who do not have access to maternity care or to good health. In fact, where I come from, the nearest health centre is 42 kilometres away, and women move on wheelbarrows to go to the health centre. I recently took hon. Wabudeya there, and she is my witness. We saw the suffering of my women (Interruption).  

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Obedmoth. While I appreciate that there are many areas of this country which still need extra services, I also want to assure the Members of this House that I have personally participated in an effort to make sure that hon. Obedmoth’s village gets a health centre facilitated, so that the women stop walking the 42 kilometres. So, the programmes are on, and I am very sure that the distance for those women has drastically reduced. You are very aware, hon. Obedmoth.  

MR. OBEDMOTH: Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude with the right of women to co-own property. I come from northern Uganda –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Obedmoth, you are now developing another point when actually you should be winding up. And this point will generate more information yet you have five minutes. I will not allow that. We are actually going to consider that issue. It came up recently, when we were considering a Bill, and I think they accepted to take it for another debate somewhere. Why don’t you reserve your point?

MR. OBEDIMOTH: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SAM KUTESA (Mawogola county, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to congratulate the Human Rights Commission for its report and the Committee for the summary and observations they have made on that report.  

I want to address myself only to the issue of funding. It is all very well for the Human Rights Commission to sit in their offices, receive complaints from those people who can come there, and maybe adjudicate on them. It is very well for the Human Rights Commission to write an annual report and submit it to this House as is required by law. All that is very well. It is also very well for us to sit here and debate this. But I think one of the crucial roles of the Human Rights Commission ought to be the education of society about human rights. The Human Rights Commission has not performed this role, in my opinion. So, we are really catering for those who know their rights and can come to them for adjudication. 

I also believe that it is not the Human Rights Commission that has failed in its role. The funding for the Human Rights Commission to carry out that role has been inadequate. I think it is a matter that we need to look into. We can talk about these rights being enshrined in our Constitution, but how many people in our society know our Constitution? (Interruption)  

MS FIONA EGUNYU: Thank you, hon. Kutesa, for giving way.  I would like to bring some information to the attention of the hon. Member. Whereas he is saying that the Commission and all of us have failed in educating people on their rights, there is a difference between knowing your rights and not being able to actually enforce them.  It is the enforcement, which is lacking. Everybody knows what is wrong, everybody knows why our human rights have been abused, the problem has been the enforcement, and enforcement means economic empowerment. I thank you.

MR. KUTESA: Well, I take the information by hon. Fiona Egunyu, but I will disagree with her that everybody knows his or her rights and that the problem is only enforcement. I think one would state, without any fear of contradiction, that the majority of our people do not know their rights, particularly in the villages. You talk about rights of women here I really do not believe that 50 per cent of the women of Uganda know their rights. Even domestic violence, which has been spearheaded recently by the press and the educated elite, is taken for granted in the villages. If a woman is not beaten, they think that the man is not in charge or she is not loved. Those are seated out there. Those are problems that need to be addressed. 

Women are purchased by what is called bride price. If I paid ten cows for you and you come to my home, how can you talk? You must accept my orders and that is that. I certainly know it exists in my own constituency. I do not know about your constituencies, but the point I am making is that if we want to increase observance of human rights, the starting point is making sure that there is awareness of these rights. I think the Human Rights Commission should be funded sufficiently to carry out that role. If they just sit in the Kampala offices, they will only hear those complaints that have been brought to them by a lady who has been to FIDA. If FIDA has referred a matter to them, then they will know. And then some men, who know a bit of their rights, will just go and adjudicate on those ones and the majority of our people will not.  

This report said that the Local Government Act created a committee on human rights in every district. I want to ask hon. Members, you all come from districts, how effective are your human rights committees in your districts? In my case, it is not there. I think we found it expensive in Sembabule and we did not create that committee. So, the Human Rights Commission is not represented in the local government as is alleged or as is intended by law.  Why? I believe, again, it is funding.  

The other matter I want to talk about is with regard to the administration of justice. It is all very well for us, from top to bottom, to condemn the Judiciary, to condemn the Police, to condemn the Prosecution Department, to condemn the Prisons.  The amount of work that is required to be carried out from when you receive information about a suspect to the time when you prosecute him, to the time when the judge or magistrate delivers his judgement will be lengthened or shortened depending on the facilities available in that process. You can say the judges are delaying cases, yes they may be delaying cases, but what are the reasons? Do you think a judge wakes up and sits and says ‘I do not want to hear cases today’? No, the fact of the matter is that actually they have an overload. Even the Criminal Investigation Department has an overload. 

I am not saying there is no corruption. There may be corruption, and in fact there is some corruption, but that is not the basic problem. The basic problem is facilities. Sometimes you go to court, you find people holding papers in their hands without files. They are not funded. You ask for a file, they say the file is missing. The registry is manual. Computerisation of the judiciary is necessary. Judgements are written down. If you get a judgement from a judge today, for example, and if you want to appeal, for you to get the record typed out, you as an Attorney has to go and find some money. You have to find money, take it to court to have the record typed to be able to file your appeal, because there are no funds. 

How many State Attorneys are there in the investigation department or the prosecution department? Every State Attorney would rather be in private practice because they are not well paid. Even in civil litigation here, I do not understand why we cannot find ways of raising money. I think that you can raise money, for example, for the civil litigation from Solicitor General’s Department. We lawyers, when we win cases, we get costs and fees. The State Attorney, when he wins a case against you, never claims anything. Why? He is a lawyer like you, he should collect fees, he should get costs from the other side, and that would be an incentive for him to maybe do more work. 

So, I think that while we talk about the ills in our society, it is true that we do not have enough money. It is true that we have a lot of pressing problems to attend to, but let us not blame society for its deeds only. Let us also think about how we can correct and enable them to achieve greater heights in their course of work. I think the Human Rights Commission should be funded to make sure that people get awareness about human rights. I think the entire machinery of the administration of justice ought to be sufficiently funded if we are going to have human rights observed. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the Commission and the Committee for giving us their reports.  

On page 10, the Committee says it was informed that the Judiciary had not performed as expected because of some reasons, which they have given here. They also gave some recommendations. One of the recommendations that I thought should be put in this report is that the powers of the judges should be shared with the other magistrates like the chief magistrates and the grade one magistrates.  This would speed up cases, which are pending and untried.  Prisoners are crowded in the prison wards not because of lack of facilities, but because many offences, for instance capital offences, are all heard by the judges and many of the judges are on commissions. The more judges are appointed, the more they are sent on commissions.  You can find some suspects in prisons who have not been tried. There are even those who have pleaded guilty but their fate has not been decided, and there are those who have not pleaded guilty but they have not been tried just because the trial judge is on a commission. 

Magistrates should be given some of the powers of the judges. This can be done through an amendment of the Magistrates Court Act, which could give them more powers to try cases like rape or defilement. The Chief Magistrate or a grade one magistrate can try these cases. Afterall, the qualifications of a Chief Magistrate and a judge are the same. They are lawyers. Some judges have LLB and not even Masters. Why can’t a Chief Magistrate or a grade one magistrate try cases like rape, defilement, armed robbery? They can try these cases to reduce the workload on the judges’ benches. The Commission should advise the right authorities in the Judiciary to amend the Magistrates Court Act. 

Why pile cases on a judge and yet the judges are few?  Maybe there is a fear, and some treason cases should be given to particular judges, I do not understand. But this is the simplest way to reduce costs. If you appoint more judges, you are appointing more Ministers, because the emoluments of a judge are equivalent to a Minister, and we are saying that there are no funds. You are talking about appointing more judges, lifting the ban on recruitment, but where are you going to get the money?  The simplest way is to give more powers to the lower courts so that they can reduce the workload for the judges. This is the simplest contribution I want to make on the issue of the Judiciary. I thank you.

MR. MULASSANYI DAVID (Rubanda West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to thank the Committee for this report because this it gives us an opportunity to talk about the points that they have raised.  

I would like to talk about the congestion in prisons.  This report is about human rights. People have their human rights, whether they are prisoners or they are free. Prisoners must also be considered and be given at least a reasonable amount of food and respectable bedding in the prison. Congestion in the prisons curtails human rights. This happens in spite of the fact that we passed a certain law in this House recently, that instead of congesting the prisons some prisoners can serve their sentences in the community. I do not know whether that Act was consented to. I do not know whether it is being implemented, but it is in place. This would go a long way in the decongesting of the prisons, and, therefore, contributes to the consideration of people’s human rights.  

Another way out was to increase the remuneration of the judges and the whole judicial department. The idea behind this was to reduce on corruption and also to speed up on the judgement of cases. When the salaries of the judicial department were raised, there were a lot of complaints from Mulago and from Makerere because those quarters thought that they deserved more than the judges. Unfortunately, the Government discovered that it had overshot and it could not reverse the trend because it would be unconstitutional. It was not possible to raise the salaries of professors and doctors to the same level because money would not be found. So, there was a kind of stalemate. 

It is unfortunate now that we were being told that the Judiciary cannot cope with the amount of work on their hands. It is now even difficult to recruit more personnel in the department because of the amount of money that is needed for each individual. If I can digress here, people were recommending that salaries of teachers should be raised because of the nature of their work. There was always the argument that the teachers are so many so even if you increased their salary by one shilling, the aggregate would be colossal, and we would not be able to afford that. 

So, in the same way, when we increased salaries in the Judiciary, it meant that we could only accommodate a few. Therefore it works against further recruitment to Judiciary. So, personnel will always be lacking. I think the way out is for the Judiciary personnel to run ten times faster in order to remain in the same place. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Human Rights Commission so far has given us three reports. The report, which we are considering is for 1997. We received the report of 1998. Last week I received another report of 1999. We are supposed to consider all these reports, so for those of you who have not had opportunity to make a contribution today, you will have the opportunity. I will keep record of the contributions on the other reports.  In fact, a lot of what you have said has improved, because I had the opportunity to read the 1990 report. There has been progress. So, maybe if you get the opportunity to read these, some of the points, which you have been raising, may not arise. 

It is time to pronounce ourselves on this particular report of 1997, so that we decide what to do after this.  Definitely I will keep the records of those who have contributed and they will not contribute again, save the chairperson. So, I put the question that we adopt the report of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today we have dealt with the Political Organisations Bill, and there are two clauses that we had referred to the Committee and the Minister. Because of this report, I do not think the Committee and the Minister have been able to meet, therefore this means they will have to meet tomorrow or another day to slash out the differences. Because of this, it would appear that the Political Organisations Bill will come before this House again on Tuesday. 

Tomorrow we are supposed to have a meeting, therefore the business, which we can consider for tomorrow, may either be the Budget Bill or NPART. These are small Bills, so I appeal to you to go and study the various reports concerning these two Bills, so that tomorrow when you have a motion for second reading of either, you are in a position to expeditiously deal with the business.  

Meanwhile, you have a standing invitation by Her Excellency the Vice President for a thanksgiving ceremony in Kigulu South. You are expected to be at the venue at 1.30 p.m tomorrow. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.am.

(The House rose at 5.04 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 08th December 2000 at 10.00 a.m)



