Wednesday, 5 December 2007

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you.  There is a small adjustment to our Order Paper to allow hon. Odit and the honourable member for Bunya to make brief statements. Unfortunately, they are not here. Well, we shall adjust when they come. We can proceed with another item.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.36
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a matter of public importance regarding Mayuge Sugar Industries Ltd. There is an investor who got a licence from the Uganda Investment Authority in November 2005 to put up a sugar factory in Mayuge District. Now there was a court injunction that was slapped in his face by court. Fortunately, when this matter was raised in the High Court, he won this case and the injunction was removed.  

It is now to my disappointment and the disappointment of the people of Mayuge District that as we talk now, about two ministers have gone to the investor and the people of Mayuge telling them that this factory should not be built at the site where it is supposed to be built. My question, especially to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, is whether this is true. If it is true, then maybe I need to know why, because the matter was resolved in court. 

Since we are looking for investors and creating employment for our people, the people of Mayuge District would be so willing to have this factory in place and solve some of the problems of income generation and employment. So, if this is true, does it mean that the courts of law have to have their orders slapped by the Executive? Is this true, Mr Speaker?  Thank you.  

2.38
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. It is a pity that the Minister in charge of Tourism is not here. If he had been given notice, of course he would have been here. 

As you know, there is a major workshop on budgeting and most honourable Members of Parliament, development partners and other people are there, and I did open it on behalf of His Excellency the President. However, I am aware of that matter. The point is that we made a policy and according to that policy, these factories should not be near each other because it causes problems; they compete wrongly for out-growers. We had a major discussion but since there is a court order –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, to help you; as I gather from the honourable member, he is telling you that this issue went as an issue of dispute before a court of law between one interested partner against another. The court ruled that there was no substance in raising this matter in court and the man is free to start. So he is asking: in view of the court’s decision, can you now talk about a policy when the court has adjudicated in the manner it has?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, this is where I was heading. I was giving a background because many members are not aware. If they are aware, I can sit down and keep quiet. 

Since there is a court order - we just read about it in the papers - I have directed the minister in charge of general duties, who is a very competent lawyer, to get that court order and we shall take the necessary action. We cannot defy a court order; when we get that court order, we are going to comply at once. However, Adolf is here, he can add or subtract with your permission.  

2.41
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, of course there is no way we can defy a court order. The rules of the game are very clear, but that court order must be served on us in order for us to see it, verify it and obey it. We cannot start implementing a court order just on the basis of reports from papers. So, as the Prime Minister has said, I have instituted a mechanism to search for the court order, study it and advise him on how we shall implement it. But if hon. Okupa has the order now, I would be glad to have it served on us.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Honourable members, about two Cabinet ministers have gone to Mayuge District and threatened Mayuge Sugar Industries Ltd. saying the Office of the Prime Minister had ordered them to stop this man from construction. That is why I asked whether this is true. Hon. Gagawala went the other day and hon. Semakula went yesterday and said, “We have instructions”. Hon. Gagawala had a letter and these fellows were not served. So, let us try to be fair to the people of Mayuge District. If it means injustice is always for Mayuge District, I think we have suffered enough and we want justice in this country.  

THE SPEAKER: What I gather is that the court order cannot be served on you because you are not a party to the litigation. The parties to the litigation are the two people interested in the industry, the existing party who is carrying out the industrial production and the new one who was granted license to build. So, the order is between the two. One was saying, “Do not build there” and went to court. The court said, “Nonsense, there is no merit” and dismissed his appeal to the court for assistance. Despite that, the government has gone in to say, “Please, do not build”.  I think that is the complaint.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: This has been a longstanding matter and I am certain that those ministers were not aware of the standing court order. If they persisted to act like that when they were aware of the court order, then of course I will not hesitate to take the appropriate action. (Laughter) As I said, honourable doctor Adolf Mwesige is going to handle that matter. (Laughter) We cannot defy court orders. 

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister says that the ministers were not aware about the latest developments. Can we, therefore, assume that they lied when they said that your office is the one which sent them? Because we have been informed by the honourable member that one of them went with a letter saying that it was the Prime Minster’s Office which sent them to stop the construction; were they therefore lying? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will give the Rt hon. Prime Minister the benefit of doubt, that you are looking for the text of the order, but there is also the urgency of disposing of this matter of respecting court orders.  I think by Tuesday you will have got a copy and on Tuesday come with a comprehensive response to the matter raised here. 

2.45
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County North, Apac):  Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to raise this question, which is a statutory requirement. Every year before cotton buying commences, there is a requirement in the law that indicative prices should be announced. When the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) is announcing this, it should be doing that in consultation with the Minister of Agriculture and that of Trade. 

All along, Parliament has been kept abreast with the developments. This year, we have not been informed and the cotton buying season started on the 1st of November. In my own district, the residual cooperative society, called Lango Cooperative Union, is based in my constituency. The only news we got was an instruction from the Minister of Agriculture that the Inspector General of Police should cause the arrest of the General Manager of Lango Cooperative Union on the 10th of November. We would want this House to cause the Minister of Agriculture to explain his action because it does not augur well with us. Investors have invested heavily in Lango for production of organic cotton; when the season for buying commences, they are being frustrated. 

Could the Prime Minister cause his minister to really explain to this House why he instructed the Inspector General of Police to arrest the general manager of a private union? This man is actually now out on bond and is hiding somewhere in Kampala, other than being available to buy cotton from the farmers. I thank you.

PROF NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish hon. Odit had drawn this to my attention instead of coming here because I would have caused them to act earlier than today. So, I am directing honourable doctor Adolf Mwesige to cause these ministers to do what you have asked them to do. I thank you. 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, because of the urgency of this crisis, and because Christmas is approaching, could the Prime Minister be kind enough to disclose when this action will be caused?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us expect the answer tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

MR WACHA: Maybe when the answer is coming, the Prime Minister will also help and answer as to when ministers started instructing the Inspector General of Police to arrest individuals who are not directly connected with their offices. 

PROF NSIBAMBI: One, Mr Speaker, the timeframe you have given us is too short because – (Interjections) – No, the ministers may wish to check on these matters. You see what I mean?  So, I think today is –(Interjections)– Please, you are not the Speaker. I was appealing to the Speaker because as you know, I am a very efficient technocratic Prime Minister. So, what I was suggesting is that when they are unable to comply, they will explain. 

Secondly, hon. Ben Wacha, you have not heard their explanation and I think you should not anticipate. You should not assume that they acted wrongly. You cannot assume when they have not explained. 

MR WACHA: Sir, I just asked the Prime Minister to come and tell us as to when ministers started acting that way. 

PROF NSIBAMBI: They can, from time to time, ask the Inspector General of Police to cause people to comply. (Interjection)- Yes, to comply with correct decisions of Government. They can! I have no doubt about it and I have done it before -(Laughter) - and I will continue.  If I acted wrongly, they can take us to court. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, let us expect the response tomorrow. If there is some problem, they will tell us, because I assume the ministers are here or they are deputised by some people. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT IN APPRECIATION OF THE EFFORTS OF THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE OF UGANDA IN HOSTING THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM), 2007 AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES

2.51
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, complying with the ruling that you made, I had the opportunity last evening to meet with a cross-section of members of this House and we panel beat the motion that I presented here. We have come out with a more acceptable motion, deleting many sections of the previous one. There are copies already circulated and if I can read the new one - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mind giving me a copy, please? Thank you.

MR OKECHO: The motion now says, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament in appreciation of the efforts of the government and the people of Uganda in hosting the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2007 and other associated activities.” It is moved under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure. It reads:

“WHEREAS the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) comprising Heads of Government of 53 countries is one of the most prestigious gatherings in the international arena;

AND WHEREAS at CHOGM 2005 held in Valetta, Malta, Uganda was confirmed as the host of CHOGM 2007;

AWARE that 48 member countries of the Commonwealth, 36 of which were represented by their heads of state or Government, were hosted in Uganda for CHOGM 2007;

CONSCIOUS of the fact that the Commonwealth Business Forum, the Commonwealth Youth Forum, the Commonwealth People’s Forum and other events were held alongside the CHOGM 2007;

NOTING that the Parliament of Uganda was greatly honoured by the historic visit of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II of United Kingdom and the Head of the Commonwealth, and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh;

BEARING in mind that the Heads of Government, in the Kampala Declaration on Transforming Societies to Achieve Political, Economic and Human Development, re-affirmed the Commonwealth commitment to raise standards and achieve a more equitable international society free of poverty, ignorance and disease through economic, political and human transformation;

NOTING that the President of Uganda is the CHOGM Chairperson-in-Office until 2009;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the Heads of Government reconstituted the membership of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group on the Harare Declaration, commonly known as (CMAG), to include Uganda as a Chairperson-in-Office;

APPRECIATING that all the events associated with CHOGM 2007, such as the Women Ministers’ Meeting, the Youth Forum, the Business Forum and the People’s Forum were indicative of popular participation;

REALISING that as a result of Uganda hosting CHOGM, the people of Uganda stand to benefit from international exposure, a boost in the country’s image and increased tourism;

NOW, THEREFORE this motion is moved that Parliament resolve as follows: 

1.	That Parliament thanks the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the government and the people of Uganda for successfully hosting CHOGM 2007 and proffers its best wishes to His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as he embarks on his task as Chairperson-in-Office.  

2.	That the people of Uganda thank Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, members of the royal family and all Heads of State and Government for coming to Uganda and participating in CHOGM 2007. 

3. 	That Parliament appreciates the efforts of Government in hosting CHOGM 2007 peacefully and thanks the people of Uganda for their support.

4. 	That copies of this Resolution be circulated to His Excellency the President of Uganda as the Chairperson-in-Office of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Head of the Commonwealth, and the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth for onward transmission to the member states.”

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before we say anything, there are some protocol corrections which should be effected. On the second last paragraph on page 1, I think you want to use United Kingdom but you have to say “Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II of United Kingdom and Northern Ireland”. These are the proper titles if you use United Kingdom. For Prince Philip, if you have used Her Majesty, his title should be “His Royal Highness, Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh”.

MS MARGARET MUHANGA: Another correction on page 3, the first paragraph, where it says “That the people of Uganda thank Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, members of the royal family…” Maybe we should say “members of the royal family of England”. If you leave it like that, maybe it is the royal family of Toro. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, yesterday I think we adjourned to enable you look at this. Is that the position, hon. Banyenzaki?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the amendment I had moved yesterday will be catered for. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the general consensus was that we avoid issues of finance, which will have to be audited because Government has an obligation to account for the use of funds given to it. They say that if you include it here before the audit, you may not - I think that was the reason why you agreed to have time to look at it. Otherwise, your amendment is valid. We are not just insisting, but good governance requires the government to account for funds.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, my amendment to the motion was not requesting for an audit; it was actually that the substantial amount of money spent in the preparation of CHOGM be accounted for at the earliest time possible in line with good governance and accountability. 

Much as this is regularly done, you are aware that the people of Uganda are demanding for accountability of the sums of money that we voted for these activities. You are aware, even in preparation when we were voting money for these CHOGM activities, there is money we borrowed - if I could use the word “borrow” - from some other activities like road networks in rural areas that we need to reimburse to those programmes. If it means that I move another motion in line with this, then I am giving oral notice for a motion to demand for accountability. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you think Government has to be reminded that it has to account when actually good governance expects the government to account, you can bring that motion tomorrow and we debate it so that it is on record. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

3.03
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good we have had a second occasion to put on record our views and appreciation for this successful CHOGM. When we bear in mind that we need more than 100 years to have a repeat of CHOGM in Uganda, it becomes obvious that those of us who are present should be really happy to be part of this history. There are certain facts which you cannot avoid; the next CHOGM coming to Uganda will find all of us present dead. There is no way 100 years from now, we will all be alive. Equally, a rose is a rose –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are scaring members. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I am sorry if anybody is being scared. Can the honourable members live with the reality that the end will come anyway?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue we are trying to find out – hon. Okupa was one of the people who sat – is if that is the text which you agreed to. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I did participate and we were about eight people who sat. Of course, there is one thing which we did not agreed to, but I see it here and I was waiting possibly to seek guidance towards the end. I was just leaving it to members to first debate, but if I can raise it, then I can go ahead.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry to interrupt my senior colleague; I want to get clarification on the difference between No. 1 on page 2 and No.3 on page 3. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us clear this first. I am not so clear with what you call No. 1 on page 2. Can you read it please?

MR KYANJO: Number 1 reads: “That Parliament thanks the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the government and the people of Uganda for successfully hosting CHOGM 2007 and proffers its best wishes to His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as he embarks on his task as Chairperson-in-Office.” 

Number 3 says, “That Parliament appreciates the efforts of Government in hosting CHOGM 2007 peacefully and thanks the people of Uganda for their support.” 

I only want to get properly educated on the difference between these two.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, the first one thanks and congratulates the President for successfully hosting CHOGM and also wishes him the best of times as Chairperson-in-Office. We kind of commend him for that. The third one –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Go through the whole of it; it does the same job in a simpler form on the second occasion.

THE SPEAKER: The first one is directed to the President as chairperson - the chair as occupied by one person. The other one deals with other people. 

MR OKECHO: In the third point, the Parliament appreciates the efforts of Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received a note here that our standby generator has developed a technical problem and it is not able to run - It indicates reverse power and they have called technical people. There is a problem with our support generator. Please, go on and finish what you wanted to say.

MR OKECHO: The team agreed that there was peaceful hosting of this CHOGM and that needed to be raised somewhere in the resolutions. That is why we included number 3. Also, there was some kind of unanimous support from the people of Uganda in this whole exercise. So, they wanted that point to be raised and that is why we have number 3. 

The first one really focuses more on the President and his having been made Chairperson of the Commonwealth for the next two years. I do not think there is any problem. I mean, even if it includes people, this can also be a point of emphasis. There is no problem with that, hon. Kyanjo.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, this is simply for the sake of the owners of this language. I would be more comfortable if this section was transplanted to the second one so that it is hosted there comfortably; we talk about the President and his titles and then we go on and talk about Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda in the second one. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I thought that paragraph 4 of the resolution, which appears on page 3, would also take into consideration the Commonwealth protocol. Therefore, Her Majesty the Queen would come first, then the President, who is the chairperson, and lastly the Secretary General of the Commonwealth. If that is understandably agreed, then I would propose that number 1 becomes number 2 while number 2 becomes number 1. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, he is raising a protocol issue that you start with the patron.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL CO-OPERATION)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, if you read No.4, you will realise who will do this transmission; the President of Uganda, who is the chairperson of the Summit, will receive it and transmit it to the patron of the Commonwealth. So, No.4 as it is sounds okay. That is the point I want to make, Sir. Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Musumba needs to help us further on the issue of protocol. He has just talked about transmission; he needs to help us understand whether we start with the Head of the Commonwealth, then H.E. the President and lastly, the Secretary General; or we start with H.E. the President as the chairperson. We need to be helped there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think hon. Reagan Okumu’s concern was protocol, in the sense of whom to start with. He is not concerned with the details on how you send and who sends. What he said was, “whom do you mention first?” I think he tried to say that we start with the patron, Her Majesty the Queen. But does it really matter?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is a good idea for this House to get to a compromise and consensus so that we have a record that we are all part of. Being part of history calls for us to be conscious of our own position in that history. I do not want to emphasize the importance of CHOGM, but I want to emphasize the importance – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I thought that we would first finish up with the issue of protocol before the honourable professor comes in. The clarifications, which you are seeking – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is better to finish one issue before moving on to another. Honourable members, do we agree that we adopt hon. Reagan’s recommendation that because of protocol, the listing follows what he has suggested?  

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, I think we have been competently advised by the Minister of Foreign Affairs who is in charge of protocol.

THE SPEAKER: No, while the Minister of Foreign Affairs is concerned with who is going to deliver, we are not concerned with what is going to be delivered but who should come first according to protocol.

MR OKECHO: Sir, since it does not make any substantive change to this line-up, I would not mind going by his suggestion. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you talk about CHOGM, you are talking about 53 countries, at the apex of which is Her Majesty the Queen. This is the protocol and it is clear. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, protocol matters in this country are managed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to the best of my knowledge as a former foreign service officer. So, the advice and guidance of the Minister of Foreign Affairs on this matter should be instructive and he should –(Interjections)- Yes, protocol matters are guided by Foreign Affairs. The Minister of Foreign Affairs should come and guide the House. If he cannot, then we give him time to consult because this is a serious matter. This text will go out and that is why protocol is very crucial on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Musumba was very clear. His concern is on who is going to deliver, which is administrative, but we are talking about protocol in CHOGM. His concern was who is going to carry this to the other, but we are talking about the setup in the CHOGM. Hon. Musumba, can you please assist us.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is true that CHOGM matters are very particular about protocol, and I trust that a motion like this one should have had a direct input of our technical people who set out the protocol. However, when it comes to the Commonwealth, the Queen actually comes first. Whether that means that we have to substantially change what is written here or not is what I do not understand. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, when we talk about giving out copies of a resolution of Parliament, then we should bear in mind that resolutions of Parliament are communicated to the people concerned by the Clerk to Parliament; that is what is done. Any resolution we make here is directed to the person concerned by the Clerk to Parliament. Why should we really waste a lot of time on this?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, it is my humble request that we push this matter back to the committee for thorough consultations. We are bound to be embarrassed by our own resolution just tomorrow. Does it matter if we waited for this resolution to come back tomorrow when it is properly patched?

MR OKUPA: Before the mover of the motion comes in, Mr Speaker, there is another serious thing that I want to help you on. It relates to point No. 2, and that is why I earlier on said that there are things which I think we needed to correct – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow us dispose of the issue on table now? The issue on the table now is number 4?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, they are a bit related, but if that is your wish, then let it be so. 

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable members, we must make a decision. If it is your motion, you stand up and tell us what you want.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, on point 2-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want the mover of the motion to state his position.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, you have really, through this discussion, given us some guidance. The distribution of this motion will be done by the Clerk to Parliament and he will send it to all the people who are indicated here. So, I do not see any problem with just naming the people, regardless of the order in which these people are named; unless you are saying that we adhere to the proposal that was suggested by hon. Reagan. 

Mr Speaker, with the advice of a few colleagues, including hon. Reagan Okumu, I will concur with his proposal that the Queen comes first and I think we should end there. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the position is that it has been refined to follow the proposal by hon. Okumu Reagan.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All these efforts are welcome. I think anyone observing our togetherness is recognising that building a state is a joint effort and no one should be left outside.

Mr Speaker, allow me comment on three elements in this motion. One is the historical importance of CHOGM, including the historical success of CHOGM held in Kampala. There were people who were sceptical, there were people who thought we were not prepared, yet success came and actually seemed to come easily, which is commendable. I think that is a good record and people in the countryside who were glued to televisions and those who listened to radios all seem to be appreciative of the success, which is good for Uganda.

Secondly, I would like to commend the behaviour of Ugandans in Kampala and along Entebbe Road. With these many delegations, we did not have a hitch and people waved and welcomed all of them. To me, this must be recorded as a commendation to our people. The usual congestion in Kampala disappeared, and the usual disorder that we tend to have disappeared. This was a great commendation to our country and therefore a major point for congratulation. 

Mr Speaker, the very sequence of events and the very performance at the opening, including the play by Mr Alex Mukulu, showed that there is a lot of talent in this country, which we tend to take for granted or even ignore. The capacity we have in this country is greater than we seem to be aware of. Only when a challenge comes does it seem to come to the fore and comes out very clearly.

Lastly, I would like to comment on those who were sceptical that CHOGM would not take place –(Interjections)- I do not care who it was; we all know some of them, but success at the end of the day came to all of us. 

On hon. Ssekikubo, Mr Speaker, I really commend you for your tolerance of some of us. (Laughter) I want to put it on record that this is great tolerance and -(Interjections)- I end my comments by making that remark.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I thought that the purpose of this debate, with your guidance as well, was to unite the entire House, which by far we had gone on to achieve. So, I thought it was improper for the Minister to continue attacking some members who might be members of this House or people in this country at large. 

Is the honourable minister in order to point out my name as a point of attack, to expose me and to ridicule me, going to the extent of saying that you must be a very persistent and tolerant Speaker, when in actual fact I must also commend you for tolerating such professors –(Laughter)– who are bent on taking this country down? Is the honourable member in order to say that I am extremely irreparable when as a professor he knows how he has caused this Parliament problems? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I will abide with the decision in the statement that I made at the conclusion of the debate yesterday, that we should not turn this Chamber into a bazaar meeting.

MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What was very contentious yesterday related to the issue of logistics and accountability. Since that has been deleted and issues of protocol have been rectified, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on the motion moved by hon. Okecho and seconded by the Prime Minister and Prof. Kabwegyere.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I must say that I have been impressed by the harmony in which this matter has eventually been handled, and this is what it should be. We should be able to sit together without compromising our principles. Thank you very much, honourable members.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON:
(a) THE OPERATION OF RULE 25 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE.
(b) CREATION FOR A SEPARATE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: I hope the members really read this report because they got the copies yesterday. You could summarise so that we see how we proceed.

3.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report was circulated yesterday to the members. It is being made under Rule 149 1(b) of our Rules of Procedure. 

Two matters were referred to the committee: to review Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure and examine whether the rule should be amended. The second issue was to consider the merits of establishing a new committee on East African Affairs.

Our current Rule 25 provides as follows: “Every last sitting day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the House regarding the government business of the succeeding week.” The amendment, which had been proposed, states: “Every last sitting day of the week, the Speaker of Parliament shall make a statement in the House regarding the Parliamentary Business of the succeeding week.” 

The justification for the proposed amendment was that the Speaker is the chairman of the Business Committee of Parliament, which is mandated to determine the business of Parliament in accordance with Rule 151. The business of Parliament includes private members’ business and is therefore wider than Government business.  

The committee did study the proposed amendment and also examined precedents and the practice in other jurisdictions, particularly the Commonwealth, and found that the proposed amendment was not well conceived. We found that in the Commonwealth, it is the Leader of Government Business who actually indicates the business that is to follow the succeeding week. The Speaker, as chairman of the Business Committee, determines the order of business. In fact, the Business Committee does not even bind the Speaker because constitutionally, the Speaker has the role to determine the business of the House.

What Rule 25 requires is for the Prime Minister, as Leader of Government Business created under Article 108(a) – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am seeking guidance, Mr Speaker. As the chairman is reading, we are really getting mixed up; are you giving a summary or not? 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I was trying to proceed by summarising; but if it is the view of the members that I read the text - the text is short - I can read it.  We therefore came to the conclusion that there is no need to amend Rule 25. We think the rule should stay as it is.  

Regarding the creation of the new Parliamentary Committee on East African Affairs, we received a presentation from EALA members and other members to the effect that the issues of the East African Community had not been given adequate attention and therefore there was need to create a new committee on East African Affairs. As you can see from Paragraph 2(ii) on page 3 and 4, they gave a number of key result areas where they felt that this specific committee should be focusing. 

We did review the proposal and held interviews with the Minister for East African Affairs and members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Our conclusion was that the Committee on Foreign Affairs can continue handling this function comfortably, particularly in view of the fact that the committee as presently constituted is a result of the restructuring. Originally, we had the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. It was broken down to have the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Presidential Affairs.  

On the mandate of the current committee, the first item is the East African Community matters, then bi-lateral and inter-governmental affairs and then missions abroad. So, we felt that to cut the mandate of the committee on East African Affairs further by isolating East African Community matters would leave the Committee on Foreign Affairs with very little to do. It was our conclusion therefore that the East African Community matters should be handled by the current Committee on Foreign Affairs.  

Mr Speaker, we recommend that to focus on the specific mandate of East Africa, we should rename the committee “the Committee on Foreign and East African Affairs.” I beg to move and recommend that the House adopts the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much Chairman and Members of the committee for the report. It is now open for you to debate and see how we proceed.

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, Sir. When I proposed that the Speaker should indicate the business, there are two reasons why I did so. First of all, he does not conduct his business in an ad hoc manner, as is insinuated on page 3 by this report. They were saying that when I announce the business, this helps in ensuring that the business in the House is not conducted in an ad hoc manner. When the Speaker announces the business to be carried out, he does not do it in an ad hoc manner.

Secondly, the Speaker has even the right to alter the business depending upon the urgency of the matters. So often, many of you and many of us from the government go to him and mention to him that this is an urgent matter. For example, the other time we had the problem of Ebola – and I regret to inform you that one doctor has died. Initially, the minister was not going to give a statement. He was not because we had to discuss that matter in Cabinet today and also work out the financial requirements. But we agreed to postpone this to Friday where I shall chair the cabinet meeting because today we had a major workshop on the budget. I rang the Speaker at short notice to alter the Order Paper to enable hon. Otaala to make that important statement. 

It is in this light that I request you to allow the conducting of business as it is being conducted very ably by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker.

We have a Business Committee, we sit there, the business is agreed upon but the contingent element is ubiquitous therefore, we alter it very frequently. Hence, my request that we amend this rule and allow the conducting of business as the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker have so ably conducted it, taking into account our urgent demands. I thank you.

3.40
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The Prime Minister has been on record stating that he is the most efficient and technocratic Prime Minister that Uganda has ever had. Constitutionally, the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business, the Speaker is the leader of the legislature and he would ordinarily not be able to determine what Government business for the following week would be.

We want to believe in the description of our Prime Minister as being efficient and technocratic to the extent that - for me, I do concur with the recommendation of the committee that the Prime Minister, Leader of Government takes charge of what was proposed as per Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure.

As the Prime Minister has stated, just in case there are other amendments, issues of emergency nature which would require some alteration, I think the Speaker has been very effective. Just in case you have as Leader of Government Business announced the programme for the following week and there arises some emergency which would require an alteration of programme the Speaker would then take it up.

I think the recommendation of the committee is in good faith. Let the Leader of Government Business take charge and direct us on what Government’s business for next week is. That is my opinion about Rule 25. 

Then the issue of the Committee on East African Affairs, I also want to believe that actually the Committee on Foreign Affairs has been doing its job. Just to probably emphasise the concerns for the need for East African community issues to be handled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we can incorporate those areas - I mean increase its mandate. Let it also try to focus on the concerns raised by Members of the EALA. To me, amending even the name of the Committee on Foreign Affairs would not add more value because really it is still dealing with foreign affairs issues. 	I think the Committee on Foreign Affairs should remain as it is in nomenclature but then impress it upon the committee to put more concerns over coverage of the East African Community issues. I beg to submit.

3.43
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman and the committee for a report well presented and written. Under the Constitution of Uganda, there is a provision for separation of powers between the three arms of Government: the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive. I do know that in our country this has been adhered to to a certain extent although in certain cases there has been a tendency of mixing up issues.

Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure is crystal clear. It gives the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, the responsibility of providing us, the House, Government business to follow. Therefore, for the Rt hon. Prime Minister to think this is going to be a duty of our Speaker, who is the head of a different institution, different from the Executive, is mixing up issues.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The amendment sought to be introduced is stated on page 2 of the report. The importance of this amendment is not to confer the duty of Government business on the Speaker, because it is not possible. The amendment is to request the Speaker to announce parliamentary business in entirety including private Members’ business. So, it is not correct that the function of announcing Government business is now being conferred on the Speaker. I thought I should make that clear.

THE SPEAKER: But I would like to request you Members that when you are dealing with this particular issue, deal with Rule 151. Rule 151 provides: “It shall be the function of the Business Committee, subject to Rule 22, to arrange the business of each meeting and the order in which it shall be taken; except that the powers of the committee shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Speaker to determine the order of business in Parliament and in particular the Speaker’s power to give priority to Government business as required by clause (4) (a) of Article 94 of the Constitution.”  

The problem you may face with this arrangement is with 25. Can the Leader of Government Business announce the business that cannot be contained within what has been done under Rule 151? Is it possible that he says, “Next week, we shall have this business and the other” when the Business Committee has already exercised its powers under Rule 151 and made arrangements?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I think the attempted amendment is redundant. I do understand that in the Business Committee, which you chair, a representative of the government attends all meetings and in that meeting, it is the responsibility of that representative of Government to bring Government business that has been going on. I know this because I was once a chairperson of a committee and I sat on the Business Committee.  

Now, I believe that Rule 25 is a way of announcing to the House, and this I think is the responsibility of Government. We know very well that the business in this House is passed by the Business Committee over a long period of time. The Business Committee does not sit on a weekly basis; at least that is not the practice. Rule 25, therefore, makes it incumbent upon the Leader of Government Business to come to this House and say, “Look, we are ready with the following business for the following week” and this will be done in tandem with what is decided in the Business Committee. 

So, I think what the Rt hon. Prime Minister was trying to defend here does not hold water. I do not think the amendment is necessary in any way and I pray that the House considers the recommendation of the committee to stay the amendment until such a time when we shall feel it necessary to change this rule.

The second issue, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I want to give my colleague information that the Prime Minister is represented in the Business Committee. Now, before issues come from the Business Committee to the Floor of the House as order of business to be conducted, the Prime Minister would have added an input. Therefore, there is nothing new for the Leader of Government Business to announce here, which will not have been part of the decisions already taken by the Business Committee. All he says would be merely a repetition.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for the information. But as I observed earlier, business that is conducted in Parliament is passed by the Business Committee for a period of time. What Rule 25 is talking about is business for the succeeding week - that is the following week. And many times, we have seen Government coming here to say that they are not yet ready. The Prime Minister may want to deny this, but the Hansard is very clear; ministers have come here and when it is time for them to present reports -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: But suppose he announces the business and he is not ready, what is going to happen?

MR AMURIAT: Then we shall know what kind of Prime Minister we are dealing with. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the problem of informing the House on a weekly basis is cured by Rule 26, which says: “A Weekly Order Paper, including relevant documents, shall be made and distributed to every Member through his or her pigeonhole and where possible, electronically”. So, if it is a question of information to Members, that is handled by Rule 26.

MR AMURIAT: Well, it is good that my lawyer friend is raising this. I am not a lawyer, but I understand English and I think these rules are written in plain English not any other language. 

The responsibility of writing the weekly Order Paper is not given to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, and everybody in this House knows that this is also not being observed strictly; yet at the same time, it will be very difficult to bind Government on matters that they may not be ready to present in the House. I think that would be unfair to my colleagues on the opposite side. 

So, I would like to insist that we maintain Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure and we implore my good friend, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, to come here every last day of the week to give us information on what the government may be ready to present in the following week.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to get clarification from my colleague. My understanding is that, in this House, we have Government business and private Member’s business, and I understand that the Prime Minister handles Government business. But to prepare the Order Paper, you also need the business of private Members. How will the Prime Minister handle the issue of private Members in this case? 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I want to help my colleague. Government business should be handled by Government under the leadership of the Rt hon. Prime Minister. The other business will be handled by the Clerk’s Office in conjunction with the Speaker’s Office. 

Finally on this point, I think Government should not divorce its responsibility, they cannot hand it over to anybody else. By the Rt hon. Prime Minister coming to make a commitment here every week, it in a way binds Government to be able to conduct business on the Floor of this House on behalf of the state.

The second issue that I want to briefly comment on is the issue of a proposal for a new committee to be formed. I would like to partly support the proposal by the committee, which states in very clear terms, that it is their inner feeling that there is no necessity for having a separate committee for East African affairs. I think they are right in saying that. What was spelt out in the submissions by our friends in the East African Parliament can adequately be handled by the Foreign Affairs Committee. 

I also disagree with the committee on their attempt to rename this committee: Foreign and East African Affairs Committee. By the fact that the word “Foreign” is used, it adequately covers even East African affairs. Probably what it does not cover are the affairs of the state of Uganda, but –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, there was a time when there was a Ministry of Foreign Affairs and another called Ministry for Regional Co-operation. I do not know why they separated them.

MR AMURIAT:  Well, I think it was found unnecessary and that is why it no longer exists. What the government was telling us is that, there is no need for such a ministry. 

In summary, what I am saying is that I do not think it is in the interest of this Parliament for committee work to be duplicated across committees. We run the risk of duplication if we add a separate committee handling East African affairs. 

So, my prayer to you, dear colleagues and, Mr Speaker, is that we maintain matters of East African affairs under the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, don’t you see that when you talk of East Africa, you include Uganda; will Uganda’s affairs then be handled in the Committee on Foreign Affairs?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I know that all the other committees of Parliament, including the Committee on Science and Technology that I sit on, focus on programmes relating to the well being of our country, Uganda. So, Ugandan affairs are adequately handled even in the other committees, and I would like to still insist, Sir, that there is no need for us to have a separate committee at this time.

MRS TUMA: I would like to give Members this information, which I think is very important. The reason why this committee is needed is because we want to focus further on our affairs so that we can be able to implement decisions. Once we have a special committee, it will spend more time and more work will be done to make sure that our ideals are fulfilled.

3.59
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I will only comment on the proposal to amend Rule 25. First of all, I have thought and I cannot find any ill that this particular proposal is trying to cure. 

Secondly, I think we should not lose sight of the fact that the provision of our Rule 25 is a direct replica of the same rule in a number of other Commonwealth countries and the committee has rightly indicated.

Thirdly, I think we should not read Rule 25 in isolation. When reading Rule 25, we should take into consideration Rule 22, which is order of business; that is the order of daily business what we call the Order Paper. Then we should take into consideration of Rule 23, which is procedure of business, which talks about Government business, private Members business, days on which these businesses are conducted: that is Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday for Government business and the first two  hours of seating on Thursday, to be left aside for private Members business. It also tells you what type of business each business is. 

Then, let me read 25, which is in contention. I will read 25 and 26 together. Our Constitution states that the Leader of Government Business is the Prime Minister. Both our Constitution and our rules state that this House will devote the greater part of its time to Government business. 

Our Constitution, although it does not state it, makes a distinction between Government and Parliament as a legislature. Both institutions have their leadership. The leader of Parliament is the Speaker. The person who represents the other arm of Government in this House is the Prime Minister. The only person who knows what type of business is in the back of Government, therefore, is the Prime Minister. It will be asking too much of us to ask the Speaker to start running into various ministries and various departments of Government and coming out and telling us what Government is going to bring to us in the following week. 

Therefore, what Rule 26 is talking about is that after Government has decided on what it wants to bring into this House for the following week, and after the Leader of the Opposition under Rule 23 has also indicated the private Members business, then under Rule 26, the weekly Order Paper will be circulated to Members of Parliament. That is what is being said only. 

Rule 151 is a general arrangement of business for the whole sitting of a meeting, and most of those businesses are derived from Government. That is why the Leader of Government Business is represented there right now by the Government Chief Whip. I am a Member of the Business Committee; I know that every time you sit on that Chair, Sir, you ask the Government Chief Whip, “What do we have?” It is the Government Chief Whip who will come out and say, “We have this and this and that.” She even says this business is with this committee. So, it is not by accident that these various rules are put in that order. 

Now, the suggested amendment, somebody has to tell me, what is it supposed to cure? The only thing that I think it is supposed to cure is the inadequacy, which has been exhibited in the operationalisation of Rule 25. It is not going to enhance anything. It is going to complicate the life of the Speaker and it is going to complicate our lives because we will now start running to the Speaker to find out from him what Government is going to bring to Parliament. 

4.05
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report and secondly, I want to say that I support the recommendation on page 3 that recommends that Rule 25 should remain as it is, as the explanations have been given. 

My second point is whether to create a new committee for East Africa or not. Mr Speaker, honourable members agree that the issues of the East African Community are actually quite important at the moment, especially as we go ahead with the process of integration. My only concern is, I think the committee is aware that the Committee on Foreign Affairs is a home to a number of other parliamentary groups. We have the East African Legislative Assembly and we also have the Pan African Parliament, whose activities should also be emphasised at the moment and it should be handled just the way the integration of East Africa is being done.

Now, changing the name of the Foreign Affairs Committee, I think would create some problems. What would you do with the Pan African Parliament? What would you do with the Inter-Parliamentary Union? What would you do with CPA? I would like, therefore, to propose that the Committee on Foreign Affairs remains as the Committee on Foreign Affairs and it will handle all other matters. What I think is the problem is maybe getting clerks of Parliament who should be helping these other committees. 

The Pan African Parliament, of which I happen to be a Member, really lacks a clerk who should handle the affairs of that group and I am sure it should be the same for the CPA, and for the Inter-Parliamentary Union. I think what our Parliament should do is to ensure that we re-organise at the administrative level so that these committees can be given adequate attention. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I am seeking guidance from you as to whether we are dealing with one amendment at a time or whether we are dealing with both. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we were dealing with the report because Members realised that they may not be given opportunity to address themselves on Rule 25. But eventually, when we vote on this report, in one way or the other, we shall separate the decisions because they are not related.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Sir. I am going to make my comments on the proposal to establish a committee to deal with the East African Community affairs. When the original three countries decided to appoint ministers in charge of the East African Community, they took it collectively; they all decided that we should have this minister. I think the point was that we want to move in harmony with the other sister countries within the East African Community. 

We are now five. I do not know whether the other parliaments for the other sister countries are also in the process of establishing committees in charge of East African affairs. I want the chairperson of the committee to inform us whether when the Members of the East African Community Parliament appeared before them, they told them that the other parliaments are actually also in a process of establishing such committees, so that we can have harmony. 

The five parliaments can have harmony; if there are committees of foreign affairs from the five countries, they can come and meet. That is how we are moving in defence co-operation. So, if the other parliaments are not really taking this as a serious issue, I think even the Ugandan Parliament can still do further consultations.

The second point about that is that, I know this committee has some small financial implications. If you establish a committee, you will have a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, you will have clerks and you will have other people who will be facilitating the committee. So, did we do thorough homework to really convince ourselves that what we are going into is something that will benefit us and one that the Committee on Foreign Affairs is currently not handling?
 
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker, I just want to give information for the benefit of the House. The previous speaker wanted to know whether the other countries have established committees. By virtue of being vice-chairperson of the committee, I have been interacting with Members of Parliament from the other sister countries and what I know is that, a decision was taken to put in place the ministries, and that has been done by the three countries. We hope the other two will also join. But as far as the committees are concerned, that has not yet been put in place and the work of the East African Community in the other countries is being handled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, since we do still have that obligation of liaising with our colleagues from the other four sister countries, let us continue doing so, then the committee will come back and inform us whether we have a consensus on the establishment of this committee, and by that we will be transacting our business in harmony with the other sister countries of the East African Community. I thank you. 

4.13
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the committee’s report, but I am also aware that H.E the President appointed a Minister of Foreign Affairs, who is a full cabinet minister.  We also have the Minister in charge of the East African Affairs, who is also a full minister, and none of them is subordinate to the other, although we have a minister in charge of International Relations and another in charge of Regional Co-operation. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the fears expressed by hon. Toskin that if you rename this committee, the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the East African Community, at the end of it you will have a situation where those two areas are not covered by the committee’s new name. I wanted to propose that in order to make it possible for the committee to operate and be able to deal with these two senior ministers (the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister in charge of the East African Affairs) without the Minister of Foreign Affairs appearing to be in charge of the East African Affairs ministry, the committee should be renamed the committee of international relations. It will cover all of them. It will be impressing but it will remain one committee and the leadership will remain the same. I wish to propose. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I think those who wanted to contribute have finished, and it is time for us to decide on what to do. There are two recommendations: one is to maintain Rule 25 so that the Leader of Government Business always says “Next week, Government Business will be this and that,” of course, depending on the availability of space on the business. Because if business spills over, he may announce what will be business, when it cannot be accommodated due to failure to complete the work of this week. But that will be taken care of. 

The other is that, we maintain a Committee on Foreign Affairs, to handle matters of the East African co-operation. The other question is whether we change the name or not. 

Now, let us start with the issue on Rule 25. I think since this is an amendment, we should go to the furthest; that is the one which wants to strike out Rule 25. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: We now come to creating a new committee. I think what goes furthest, because currently the Foreign Affairs Committee has been handling it, is the amendment that wants to cut some of its mandate. I put a question on the creation of a separate committee from the existing committee. 

(Question put and consensus not attained.)

THE SPEAKER: Do we really have to put up our hands? 

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

(Question negatived)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 2007

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PUBLIC SERVICE) (Mrs Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007” be read for a second time.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has been seconded, please proceed.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007” is in line with Article 165 and 166 of the Constitution and it is providing for operationalisation of those articles.  It has five parts:  

Part (I) is preliminary; the interpretations of arts.  

Part (II) provides for the composition of appointment of members of the commission, removal of the member of the commission from office, oaths of its members as well as the seal and remuneration of the members.  

Part (III) provides for the functions to be performed by the chairperson of the commission and his deputy or her deputy, the secretary and other staff of the commission. It includes the provisions related to the independence of the commission, the oaths required to be taken by members of the commission and the secretariat before assuming the office.  

This part also provides for the immunity of members and staff of the commission and also provides for the expenses and how they should be made.  

Part (IV) of the Bill deals with general duties with general matters.

Part (V) of the Bill, clause 28 to clause 36 deals with miscellaneous matters particularly on improper influence and disclosure of information of the commission. It also provides for the protection of staff of the commission.  

Clause 34 in particular empowers the commission to make regulations by statutory instrument for effective and efficient performance of its functions under the Constitution. I beg to move.

4.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr William Wopuwa): Mr Speaker, the committee examined the Bill which was brought before this House on 28 August 2006, and I want to thank the Ministry of Public Service, the Public Service Commission and all those people we interacted with in examining the Bill.  

The committee received and examined the Bill and attended to account inputs by various stakeholders.

This Bill has been long overdue because other service organisations (the Education Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission), which came later on already have a law putting them in place.  

I have with me here, the areas we have proposed for amendment.

In conclusion, I will take this opportunity to thank all those who have assisted the committee with valuable information.

THE SPEAKER: And you have the amendments? So, if you have the amendments, can we have a debate on what the minister has said before I put the question on the motion for second reading?

4.24
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, you will notice that hardly anybody wants to stand up to debate because there is hardly anything to debate in this report; it is straight forward. Even the proposed amendments are actually editing mistakes and trying to correct what went wrong. That is why there is not much to debate. 

I only point out that the committee should also realise that even the index is part of the Bill.  They should have looked at the index under Part (II) Rule 4 and amended removal or vacation of office, not removal or vacation of office, as appears in the index.  Otherwise, there is hardly anything to amend.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled –(Interruption)

4.25
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): There is a proposal I wanted to make, Mr Speaker, on Clause 4 of the Bill. It is about the grounds for the removal. Sub clause (2), a member of the commission may be removed from the office by the president only for inability to perform the functions of his or her office, arising from misbehaviour or misconduct or incompetence. I think it would be prudent to add “Abuse of office” as another ground, to be more specific.  

THE SPEAKER: So at committee stage you propose to make that amendment.

MR LUKWAGO: Alright. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 2007

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr William Wopuwa): Mr Speaker, clause 2 on interpretation. We propose that we amend the following definition to read as follows:
“Public officer shall have the meaning assigned to it by Article 175(a) and 257(i) (x) of the Constitution.”  
Justification: To be consistent with the provisions of the Constitution. 

Then the term “Public Service” also be amended to have the meaning assigned to it by Article 175(b) and 257(i) (y) of the Constitution in order to be more specific. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments by the committee in respect of “public officer”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on “public service”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to Clause 3 sub section (2), to delete the words “and has relevant experience” appearing at the end of the provision.
 
Justification: To conform to Article 165 (3) of the Constitution.

Then clause 3(4), delete the opening clause up to the Constitution. 
Justification: To conform to the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the first proposed amendment.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the second proposed amendment.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose the renumbering of Clause 4 as follows: Sub clause (4) to replace sub clause (6); sub clause (3) to be renumbered to sub clause (4); and sub clause (5) to be renumbered as sub clause (5). 
Justification: For logical arrangement of the paragraphs. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. 

MR LUKWAGO: Amendment of the proposed amendment; why do we not – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Of the proposed amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: The proposed amendment. The proposed amendment is about rearranging the sub clause, but I would wish to add that sub clause (2) of clause 1 be amended to add paragraph (d): “Abuse of office” as another ground.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. which clause are you talking about?

MR LUKWAGO: Sub clause (2) of clause 4.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. So you want to introduce an amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: An amendment, to add another paragraph (d) to read “Abuse of office” in addition to these other grounds spelt out.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you want to add another ground?

MR LUKWAGO: Another ground.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, Mr Chairman.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, Article 169 clause (9) of the Constitution provides the condition under which a member is supposed to be removed from the Public Service Commission and abuse of office is not part of it. Therefore, if you add it, it will be unconstitutional because it will contravene the provision of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. You will be doing more than what the Constitution allows you to do? (Laughter)

So, I put the question that the proposed amendment by the committee on clause 4 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, on clause 5 sub section (3), we propose that the provision be redrafted to read as follows: “A person appointed by the commission shall subscribe to the office prescribed under sub section (1) (a) and (b) of this section as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act.”
Justification: For clarity and to avoid repetition. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that the provision be redrafted to read as follows: The chairperson, the deputy chairperson and members of the commission shall be paid salaries and allowances at such rates as from to time prescribed by the Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers Act or any other applicable legislation. Justification: To be specific because salaries and allowances are usually paid for services rendered. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, on clause 8 (a) we propose redrafting the provision to read as follows: “…to advise the president in the performance of his/her function related to the establishment of offices in the public service as provided for under Article 171 of the Constitution.” 
Justification: To conform to the provisions of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok

MR WOPUWA: Then clause 8(b), add the following words at the end of the sentence: “…as provided for under Article 172 of the Constitution.”
Justification: To conform to the provision of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman-(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, with 9, if there are no proposed amendments I just put the question.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, clause 10 sub section (2) (a), we propose that they delete the words “…to the minister who shall forward…” appearing in line two and three.  
Justification: The commission should be free to consult with the President.

Then Clause 10(2) –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. Any contribution to that? They want direct access to the President. So this is not objected to? Okay, honourable minister, you have no objection?

MRS SEZI: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the proposed amendments.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, to redraft the provision to read, “…submitted within three months after the commencement of the subsequent financial year.” 
Justification: To be more specific.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR WOPUWA: Clause 11, the heading there should read, “Functions of the Chairperson.” Justification: The deputy chairperson performs the same duties as the chairperson.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Clause 11(1)(d), delete the words “and other staff”. Justification, because the chairperson cannot supervise other staff as well; it is the duty of the secretary to the commission. 

Mr Chairman, there is also another amendment proposed. Sub-clause (2), redraft the provision to begin, “In the absence of the chairperson, the deputy chairperson shall perform the functions of the chairperson and perform such other duties as the chairperson shall assign to him or her from time to time.” Justification, for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to proposed amendments on Clause 11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that Clause 12 be deleted. Justification, to avoid repetition in clause 13.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh! Why do you close 12 instead of closing 13? Why should 12 be the victim? (Laughter)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, it came first. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: It came first; that is what we call anticipation. You are anticipating that we are going to Clause 13, but if the two are doing the same work why do you not start with what you have.

Okay, the proposal is that we delete Clause 12 because we are going to pass 13. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that at the head note substitute the word “secretary” with the word “secretariat”. Justification, the secretariat includes the secretary.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR WOPUWA: Clause 14(a) sub clause (1)(b), delete the words “and other supporting staff of”. Justification, to avoid repetition.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: In (b) sub clause (1)(c), substitute, “the existing provision” with the following words, “management and control of the staff of the secretariat.” Justification, to be more specific. 

Then in (c), add another provision (d) to read as follows: “General administration and management of the financial and other resources of the commission”. Justification, to cater for the administration and financial management of the commission. 

(d), renumber (d) to become (e) and it should read as follows: “Implementation of the policies of the government.” Justification, for proper implementation of Government policies. 

(e)sub clauses (3) and (4) are deleted. Justification, the mode of removal is similar to that of other public officers.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16

MR WOPUWA: Clause 16(i), we propose that we add the following words at the end of the provision: “in addition to official oath and other oath of secrecy.” Justification, the secretary also swears official oath and oath of secrecy. 

Now, Clause 16(ii), substitute the word “may” with the word “shall”. Justification, the provision to be binding on the person taking the oath.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments to clause 16.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18

MR WOPUWA: Sub clause (3), Mr Chairman, we propose that it should be deleted. Justification, the provision will be difficult to implement.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that clauses 19,20,21,24 and 26 should be deleted because these provisions are catered for by the public service regulations. They deal with day to day operations of the commission and those are covered under Regulations.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question to the proposed amendments of deleting clauses 19,20,21,24 and 26. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 agreed to.

 Clause 23 agreed to.

 Clause 25 agreed to.
 
Clause 27 agreed to. 

Clause 28 agreed to. 

Clause 29 agreed to.

 Clause 30 agreed to. 

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 31

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 31 stand part of the Bill. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I have reservations about sub-clause (1) of clause 31, which provides that no proceedings shall be brought in any court on the ground that any provisions of this Act have not been complied with. Of course there is a provision in sub-clause (2) –

THE CHAIRMAN: First of all there is a proposal - I think of an amendment - which you did not bring out because I see here that they are deleting the 31 as it stands there and they are substituting it with another one. Is that not the case?

MR LUKWAGO: No, they are not substituting; they are proposing to insert another clause after 31. If there were a proposal that they –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. It is all right.

MR LUKWAGO: I am moving an amendment, Mr Chairman, that sub-clause (1) be deleted because to oust court’s jurisdiction to determine questions arising out of this Act or to restrict the jurisdiction of the court to only matters as provided for in sub-clause (2) would be unconstitutional in my opinion. People have got rights; those who are aggrieved by the decisions of the committee or by any clause in this Act should seek redress in courts of law. So, why stop them from going to court? It would be fair and just to delete this clause to let people go to court to have their matters determined in the way they deem fit and to leave courts with jurisdiction to determine issues arising out of this Act. That is my proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, what is the position?

MRS SEZI: Mr Chairman, the issue of getting recourse to court is provided for in the Public Service Bill, which we tabled yesterday. But the commission has a different way of operating. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is that suppose we do not pass the Bill, which you have referred to (Laughter)

MRS SEZI: No, I am hoping –

THE CHAIRMAN: Our rules prevent us from anticipating and that is, I think, rule 68.

MR WOPUWA: Clause 31, we are adding 32: right of appeal. It provides for a person aggrieved by the decision of the approved Public Service Commission to make an appeal. The appeal is provided for in the Public Service Act, which has not yet been amended, which provides for the Public Service Commission to constitute a tribunal. So the right of appeal is provided for in the one we are bringing but it is also provided for under the Public Service Act, which is still in operation because the one that is coming, which was laid on the Table yesterday, is merely amending the other one. But there is a law in place that provides for an appeal for somebody who is not satisfied with the decision of the Public Service Commission. 

Like it is with the district service commissions, if a person is not satisfied with the decision of the district service commission, he appeals to the Public Service Commission. So when we were discussing we asked that if somebody is not satisfied with the decision of the Public Service Commission, whom does he appeal to? When you look at the Public Service Act, it provides for appeal and the formation of a tribunal. So we inserted 32, which specifically said that the person aggrieved by that decision has a right to appeal and I am going to bring it as an amendment; then we can dispose it of, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: They are saying that they have a domestic manner of dealing with their grievances rather than this other typical high court way. It happens –

MR LUKWAGO: Allow me, Mr Speaker, to explain this. In situations where you are not satisfied with that internal disciplinary process, you have got a right to access court. So if you are absolutely barred from seeking court redress and you are only limited to seeking for, probably, some redress internally by way of an appeal to a tribunal, I think it is in a way impinging on peoples’ rights to seek redress in ordinary courts of law. 

My view is that yes, that process is there; you can appeal to a tribunal and that is a different provision, which is being proposed. We are not even sure whether the proposed amendment will pass because it is not provided for in the original Bill. It is an amendment proposed by the committee and it is coming after this. And I am saying, Mr Chairman, that much as there is that room for one to go up to that tribunal to appeal, still one should be given that opportunity to go to courts of law to challenge whatever decision that can be taken by the commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean you are suggesting parallel jurisdiction?

MR LUKWAGO: No, it would not be parallel jurisdiction, Mr Chairman, because here you can appeal to the tribunal. In case you are not satisfied with the decision of the tribunal, what do you do?

THE CHAIRMAN: You appeal to the High Court.

MR LUKWAGO: No, here there is an absolute bar that matters to do – you know, it says that no proceedings shall be brought in any court on the grounds that any provision of this Act has not been complied with. This is an absolute bar, and it is bound to create confusion as to the matters that can even be entertained by the tribunal. Because a tribunal is restricted to grievances brought by individual public officers against the decision taken by the commission but it is not as such in respect to violation of the Act; as matters concerning with violation of the provisions of the Bill are out rightly barred from being entertained by courts of law. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, where the tribunal has not complied and makes a decision, there are other measures, what we call prerogative measures, which you take so that the decision made is cancelled. These are the decisions which we apply where tribunals have not applied the proper rules. They are there. And you apply to the High Court.

MR LUKWAGO: In making legislations of this nature, we need to know the mischief you are intending to curb. Where is the mischief you are trying to curb by allowing people to go to court? If we may understand the mischief probably we would support the clause as it is but I do not see any mischief that would be created if one is allowed to access court. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether it is normal to make laws stopping people who agree to seek redress in court. Is it normal? If there is already some procedure that we should take elsewhere, why do we not keep quiet and drop this one because this one really looks very dictatorial of Parliament to make a law that, “You cannot go to court however much you agree”. I think it is not fair.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I need you to guide me. I tend to agree with hon. Lukwago subject to your assisting me to interpret Article 42 of the Constitution. Article 42 of the Constitution says on the right to just and fair treatment in administrative decisions: “Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her.”

That is why I tend to be persuaded by hon. Lukwago although normally I do not agree with him politically. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think there is a difference. When the tribunal set up to deal with this matter does not follow the law or it does not follow natural justice; you appeal so that the other court can order this tribunal to follow the procedure. But it is not that all matters have to go to – there are what we call domestic tribunals that handle the matters of this kind. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, first of all, we also looked at the law setting up other service commissions: Health Service Commission, Education Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, this clause is included. One, they want to give the mechanism so that the Public Service Commission has the opportunity to exhaust avenues available first, but after the tribunal has handled a case and somebody is not satisfied, he is definitely free to go to court. So, the arrangement here is administrative, to allow processes to take place, but also that when we are reading this one we need to read it alongside the Public Service Act, which covers most of the details here. 

This one is only giving the Public Service Commission the legal entity to exist and its operations, but the one that deals with the day to day conduct of civil servants - how they go for disciplinary appeal - is covered under the Public Service Act, which is going to be amended when it comes here. There is already a law in place that deals with all the details. 

We are also aware because we have children, we have our citizens and voters who want also to benefit from the law and get fair judgement but we thought it is better to follow what is already there and do it well. Mr Chairman, that is our position as a committee and we beg hon. Lukwago and the others to support us so that we conclude this one and when the Public Service Act will come –(Interjection)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, hon. Lukwago asked a question as to what the intended amendment wanted to cure and I think it was a pertinent question. When he was talking about the right to a hearing and all that, he did not think about the other side where he would experience people trying to paralyse the working of the commission. They can decide to put the work to a standstill. If there is a tribunal, which is handling that and the tribunal is not the end of it, hon. Lukwago, do you not think there could be that scenario where people can gang up to make sure that they make the work very difficult? I think this is what the provision is curing. 

Of course, as the chairman has explained, it is not close ended. After the tribunal, somebody who is not satisfied is free to quote the provision of the Constitution, which the Prime Minister has dealt with. I was thinking about that other scenario where people always come up to make sure that things do not move, to their own benefit. So we have to make a provision to safeguard that scenario.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the end of the day every decision of a commission pleases somebody and displeases the other. So for this commission to work properly we must have these tribunals. This other provision 32 cures your fears. We call these courts of equity. We have them with industrial courts; we have them even in the UPDF. This is just to make the work – hon. Lukwago you know a little bit more than me in law really, I think let us make our commission work and that is the essence of this particular Bill; it is not closed, I beg that you agree with the committee and we move. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the chairman of the committee whether going to court is a human right. If it is a human right, why are we taking it away from people? 

MR BYARUGABA: Human rights, Mr Chairman, are not absolute. That is why they are limited by these administrative arrangements.

THE CHAIRMAN: You remember when we made the Constitution I think in 1995, there were matters where we said we establish tribunals. When it came to land, I think we said a land tribunal should be established. When these land tribunals were established you could not go to the normal court, you would go to these tribunals. So there are times when you are aggrieved and you do not have to go to the ordinary court but you go to the other side – so long as they practice natural justice and practice other things, but there are instances where this happens. 

MR KAWANGA: I want to caution honourable members to avoid any provision, which prevents you from going to court especially the suggestion that going to court is going to prevent certain things from happening. If certain things are to be prevented from happening so that justice is done, that should be done. I do not want to create the impression that courts are there to prevent normal things from happening. The question is, if somebody wants to question a procedure and he is going to court, we should avoid preventing him from going there.

Two, tribunals also have their very big limitations. They are handled by Ugandans like us. There is nothing sacrosanct about them. In fact whenever they have failed, we have ended up going back to the courts. So, really I see no harm in just forgetting about this clause and leave it open for whoever wants to go to court to go to court and whoever does not want to go to court can go elsewhere. But we should avoid a situation of preventing people from going to court to seek redress.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, we have exhaustibly debated it. There is an amendment by hon. Lukwago; and I put the question to it. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: But we should examine it because we have been talking about this and this and others did not even know the examples. But anyway, the decision is no.

Clause 31

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 31 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman when the committee looked at this clause and read the contents of the Public Service Act, we recommended that it would be a repetition and, therefore, clause 32 should be deleted. Justification: it is already provided for under the Public service Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. So I put the question that clause 32 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, deleted.

Clause 33

MR WOPUWA: Clause 33: delete the words, “…responsible for public service”. Justification: to avoid repetition because the minister is already defined in the interpretation of the clause. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

The second schedule, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007”, and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi): Mr Speaker I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole house be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The proposal is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Bill entitled “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007”, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 2007

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007”, be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled “The Public Service Commission Bill, 2007”, be read a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION ACT, 2007

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. The Bill is passed. 

Honourable members, this afternoon, hon. Francis Epetait approached me. He wanted to make a report on the situation in Bundibugyo but we had agreed that because he was going to prepare a statement, he makes the statement tomorrow. However, while I was here, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister sent me a note to the effect that hon. Bataringaya had a statement to make on the same matter in Bundibugyo. Since that is the case, I think the matter is urgent and that both of them should make their statements rather than giving one side and not the other. And since we have disposed this business earlier than expected, let me allow the first person who applied to make his report then we can hear from the minister from the area.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

5.10
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am constrained that I have not been able to get copies because somehow we had agreed that this would be handled tomorrow as has been explained. But I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to make a very brief report on what is unfolding especially in the Bundibugyo area. 

Since the hon. Minister of State for Primary Health Care made a statement in Parliament yesterday, the Ebola epidemic has taken a serious trend that has even directly affected family members of some of the members of staff in Parliament. A number of deaths have occurred and one of the dead happens to be an uncle to a staff in the Leader of the Opposition’s office. We have just been informed that in the last 12 hours alone, 3 medical workers from Bundibugyo District have died, namely, Dr Kule Jonah, who was a senior medical doctor attached to Nyaukaye trading centre. I think as we speak now he is being laid to rest. Also, Dr Joshua Kule; and a senior midwife by the names of Peruth Tabiita popularly known as Rose Bulimpikya passed away. I have made a report only of the medical workers. 

Dear colleagues, these people have lost their lives in a fight to defend others and before I continue, I beg that for the lives so far lost of both the medical workers and other patients in the Bundibugyo area and all those who have succumbed to the Ebola epidemic, we rise up and observe a moment of silence.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, as we speak now, the medical superintendent of Bundibugyo Hospital, Dr Sesanga Stephen is critically ill and is being attended to in his house at the hospital quarters in Bundibugyo. As Members may be aware, highly contagious disease outbreaks need prompt interventions at an early stage lest they take epidemic proportions. Besides the Ebola epidemic, we are also faced with a problem of Bubonic Plague and Meningitis in the West Nile region, Cholera in Hoima and in Buliisa, Yellow Fever and Hepatitis in Kitgum. All these are to us a big cause to worry. It is tragic and regrettable that our country is beleaguered with a number of epidemics to date, many of which in our opinion could have been averted, if only we cared to listen to alarm bells from the various districts as those reports started trickling in.  

What will be left of our country if emergency action is not taken now, to control the said epidemics? The degree of response to the said epidemics is, in our view, not satisfactory, just to say the least. The Opposition recommends that the Ministry of Health urgently tables an intervention plan for each of the said epidemics, detailing the financial, logistical, human resource and drug or vaccines and other medical supplies requirements.

We also strongly demand that once that is done, the Ministry of Finance - let me say Government - should expeditiously release funds. There is nothing else we are waiting for because these are very contagious epidemics. With this free movement, who knows, the next victim may be here in this House or anywhere in Kampala, God forbid! The required finances should be immediately released to enable the Ministry of Health undertake the normal duty of controlling these epidemics.

We also urge Government to recognise and appreciate the efforts of those who are at the frontline of fighting these epidemics to the extent that we still urge Government to compensate those health workers and support staff who have dedicated their lives towards saving others. This should not only be for those who have lost their lives during this recent epidemic, but should also cover those who succumbed in the 2001 outbreak. 

Mr Speaker, this is just a short report but I think we really need to focus much of our attention as a country, to controlling this epidemic, lest there will be nobody to speak for us. I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, honourable minister. 

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Cos Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, my statement is in regard to the deaths that have already occurred. I concur with my colleague on what he has said. Yesterday evening at around seven, we lost Dr Yona Kule. He was a Medical Officer in charge of Nyaukaye Centre IV and he was in touch with the other people who died. He was just treating them. Then this morning at around 8.00 a.m. Joshua Kule, a senior clinical officer in Bundibugyo Hospital also died. This is the person whose photo appeared yesterday in The New Vision. This afternoon, the Matron, Rose Bulimpikya, a senior matron of Bundibugyo Hospital, also passed away. Peruth Tabiita, a nursing assistant also working in Bundibugyo Hospital, passed away. 

Mr Speaker, the four are the health workers who have been in touch with the other people – the 17 people who have so far died. What happened is that the disease started with high grade fever and the doctors thought that it was Pyrexia of Unknown Origin (PUO) and it also had some signs of diarrhoea and headache. But it hid the other side of the haemorrhagic bleeding, which is one of the signs of Ebola. So, these people continued treating it like that. 

Some of our people in one of the villages in Kikyo believed in some of the local issues such as witchcraft and things like that. That was in August and September, and when samples were taken, they first showed negative, as reported by the Ministry of Health. Eventually when the samples were sent to Atlanta, the CDC confirmed that it was Ebola, but of course these health workers had already been in touch with the other patients who died. 

So, these ones who have died are not new cases. They are already people who got in touch; for instance, Yona Kule is a member of the family of the first victims who died. There is also Muhindo Jeremiah who died a week ago; he was a brother-in-law of the family that first lost someone, so he shared the bed sheets and the mattress of his sister. Kule Yona had also come to rescue his cousin. Joshua Kule is also related to the same family, and of course Rose Bulimpikya, being a Matron in the Hospital, she was just attending to these people in form of people having fever of an unknown origin. Also Dr Sesanga, who my colleague mentioned, who is a medical superintendent in Bundibugyo district was attending to these people in form of the Pyrexia of Unknown Origin (PUO). 

Having confirmed that it was Ebola, immediately the government has taken serious measures. Already we have the Medicines San Frontier, an NGO from France, we have the World Health Organisation and we have also the team from the headquarters of the Ministry of Health. We have two isolation centres because I was there, one at Bundibugyo Hospital and another one in Kikyo, the other constituency where the first victims were, which is in Bugendera County. So, there is an isolation camp there.

There are no new cases yet. Even yesterday, the business man who died called Maipeni, this Maipeni was a father-in-law of the other group. He went for burial, interacted with them, stayed there; and then he left. After the incubation period, it started and he died yesterday. But he was a relative to the other group. So that is the situation. 

What the teams are doing is that having isolated the victims, they are also tracking the others who were in contact with these medical people to be isolated too. Otherwise, there are no more new cases so far. The deaths, which have occurred, are for those people who contracted the disease some time back. The Government is in control.

Dr Johan died yesterday at Mulago Hospital – this is where he was. We have been in touch with Government to enable the movement of the body to Bundibugyo.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much hon. Bataringaya. Certainly I sympathise with the people of Bundibugyo District and my heart goes out to the families that have lost their dear ones. You have said that the government is in control but I am very sure that Government cannot be in control of people’s fears; certainly not. 

So what is the situation like in Bundibugyo as far as economic activities are concerned? Is it possible for people to go about their business? I am asking this question because I was about to propose that something in terms of emergency be done, not only in as far as medical treatment is concerned, but also Prof. Kabwegyere’s ministry may need to move in and support the people who may not be engaged fully in economic activities. Members may sneer at me, but I feel it is necessary to know whether the people in Bundibugyo are going about their business like people elsewhere that the disease has not reached yet.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is an obvious question; when there is a crisis of that kind where people are dying, the people are panicky, and when they are panicky, I need not tell you that in such a situation you cannot concentrate or work. People are in fear and they cannot move freely, so they are naturally affected.

MR AMURIAT: This then brings me to the next thought. Wouldn’t this House consider it prudent to call on the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness – what are these people going to eat? If they are not going to engage in economic activities – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Ministry of Health is currently in charge of the situation. It must be coordinating with the other ministries to tell them the problems that they are facing. The minister in charge of disaster will certainly be briefed by the Minister of Health and will decide on what action to take. What has been stated today emphasises what was said yesterday. Yesterday we agreed that this is a serious matter where Parliament should collaborate with the other agencies to ensure that the matter is arrested and that appropriate action is taken.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it is sad that the late Kule passed away. But in yesterday’s photo, the cousin to the deceased was seen attending to the sick Kule with bare hands, whom we are now told has passed away. So I think the Member’s concern is: what emergency measures can we rush in to help to avert the crisis from spilling over? 

THE SPEAKER: I think your position was that everything possible should be done to arrest the situation. But now with this report from hon. Epetait and the minister, it is evident that this is a very serious matter where Government and other agencies should take appropriate action to avert the situation.

MR BATALINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I had not yet completed. When I said that the government is in control, I meant that there are already task forces in Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese and Kyenjojo districts. All the health workers are on alert. For the case of Bundibugyo, we already have WHO in place, as I already said, to isolate victims and Government has already provided funding for the health workers and for other necessary logistics. 

Finally, the Minister of Health left for Bundibugyo this morning with another team from the WHO. I think when he comes back he will make another statement here at an appropriate time. That is what I wanted to tell the House about the current situation.

5.29
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to add my voice to those who have spoken before me to state that the Ebola scourge is really a worrying one. Like my colleagues have stated, our health workers are in panic. They have witnessed in the past that when they sacrifice their lives, nothing is done in the event of dying in such conditions; so most of them have started running away from the hospitals. 

This morning, one of the doctors called me from Bwera Hospital to tell me that they had suspected cases of Ebola and that the health workers are not willing to attend to them because of panic. When I rung the District Director of Health Services, he told me that they were expecting to receive the protective wear from the ministry and he was called to Kabarole to go and receive the protective wear. But I would imagine that even the protective wear will not be enough in a situation where someone has to sacrifice life knowing that when he or she dies, nothing will go to his family in terms of compensation. 

So, what my colleague hon. Epetait is talking about is that we must come up with mechanisms of looking at the families of our health workers who die in the struggle of saving the lives of the Ugandans. Otherwise, when we only say we have sent them protective wear, this may not be enough, because the disease may even go beyond the protective wear. I would like to thank you and to thank Government for the efforts they are putting in but facilitation and assistance to the families of the deceased health workers should also be emphasised. I thank you.

5.32
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I speak as somebody who lost two cousins to Ebola – they were medical workers in Lacor Hospital. I am worried - honourable minister you will forgive me - that the bodies are still leaving the places where they have died to be buried elsewhere! The best we did in the situation in the Northern region was that wherever the person died, they were buried right there, and very fast. Probably it is very painful to just bury a dear one in a foreign place but please, I want us to save the lives, which have not yet been affected by burying those dear ones where they have died.

Secondly, this morning we benefited from the professional advice of hon. Prof. Anokbonggo. As members of the HIV/AIDS Committee, we were supposed to carry out a function in Rakai District but he advised that such gatherings must stop as per now. But I still hear people talking of introductions, weddings and funeral rites. That is how many people died in Northern Uganda. 

I want to propose that as we still wait for other remedies to be taken. Let us immediately stop these gatherings, which are taking place in the villages. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Members, are we going to have another debate on this when we –(Interjections)- because yesterday we really dealt with this matter.

5.34
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the previous speaker. I just want some clarification, some guidance. Is there no way Government can come out very strongly and declare a state of emergence in some parts of this country? We are playing with lives. I mean, these are not bullets that you can take cover. No. It is a highly contagious disease, very dangerous disease, which can kill anybody even anyone of us or all of us here. Leader of Government Business, is it possible to declare some of these parts quarantine, to some extent? I do not know whether it is allowed. That is why I am seeking for some advice. If it is possible, let us do it.

Secondly, let us come out very clearly without any shame and order that these gatherings must as of necessity stop, immediately, across the country. Tomorrow I have been invited for a function; there is another huge gathering for finance and people are coming from Bundibugyo, Nakasongora, everywhere. We are shaking hands and hugging each other. This is exactly how we are transmitting this disease. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest honestly if it is possible that we come out very strongly as Government that these gatherings must stop immediately until these other measures we are talking about are put in place. That is all I wanted to find out, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- Even Parliament - if need be why not?

5.36
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a lot more to be done on the awareness, beginning from here in your House. Each one of us has got a role to play. I have been observing these senior politicians shaking hands and hugging with colleagues. This was yesterday and today. I have witnessed it. I denied shaking hands with Dr Kamanda Batalingaya, I refused to shake hands with hon. Urban Tibamanya, so many people. I looked at colleagues! I told them, “We are going to die”. Awareness is needed here. People are interacting with so many people from various places. You gather here in this august assembly and look at each other as people who are free, who are very safe but this is not acceptable. Each one of us has got a role to play in awareness, whether you go on bimeeza, or radio programmes, begin with Ebola awareness. Sir, this thing is very serious. 

I would like to pass on my condolences to the families of those who have perished in this scourge and may their souls rest in eternal peace.
 
5.37
PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Natural disasters are very difficult to prepare for. Ebola is not like any of these diseases against which you can vaccinate. Ebola is not a disease that you will know how you contracted it very easily apart from the person who is already a victim. So when it breaks out, what is important is a professional handling of the situation; and the Ministry of Health is doing its best. So it is not an issue of panicking because if you panic you make the situation even worse. A statement of emergence or a declaration of emergence at the moment could easily be misguided. 

You see, you have diseases, which come and last a short time depending on how they are handled, the way they deal with human beings or with animals. Isolation is always the best for those diseases and I am not talking as a professional but as somebody who has some knowledge from ordinary life. Ebola is frightening but it is not as frightening for example as earthquakes. An earthquake can kill 200,000 people in less than five minutes. The other day we were in a conference on earthquakes. In a matter of five minutes 200,000 are dead. However, Ebola can be avoided when it is already declared or already known. 

One of our problems of preparedness is for example to have equipment and the doctors who are here to detect that this is actually Ebola. We were told yesterday that this probably is a different streak, a different type from the ones that we already know, and probably this seemed to take a little longer to gestate, if I could use that word. And that is probably why there was this delay in understanding what it is, because we are dealing with the doctors, who are dealing with these patients, and those doctors and health workers who have died did not want to die. They thought they were dealing with normal cases or normal diseases.

So, preparedness in this case comes in almost expecto facto, after the event and that is why there has to be a declaration of limited meetings and I am sure the local governments are doing this. All these teams have been set up I am sure that the government in Bundibugyo, together with LC system, are already in high gear on this. 

However, allow me say that we still have traditional believes about death; this is what we must really tell our people rather than make them panic more. Let us help them understand how this situation can actually be controlled.

What the honourable member was telling us that we should bury the dead people very quickly, that is also tricky. There are many of us who will, if this were directed, say that, “That is an unfair directive, which interferes with the human rights of some of the citizens”. So, let us deliver a message that minimizes on the spread. Ebola, like all other diseases which come and kill people, if properly handled, the number of people who get it and die can reduce very quickly.

Lastly, let me say something on the equipment that we have to treat those who are already infected. I was talking to somebody very close to me and who is a doctor. According to him, it is the treatment, which is inadequate. For example, he asked me what effective transfusion we apply when the haemorrhage stage comes. We may be inadequately equipped for blood transfusions in all these health centres. Where can one go to give blood as constantly as possible? For example, when you are treating somebody from his or her house, you obviously do not have the facilities of doing a good job. 

The other issue relates to having the equipment for detection. I do not know whether Prof. Anakbonggo or hon. Dr Kamanda can give us an indication as to the cost of this equipment so that we can send for them from say, Atlanta, to help us detect the different types of Hepatitis? For example, there was a type of Malaria which was killing people in Kyamuhunga in my constituency; people were just passing out blood. Many of them thought it was a different disease but when blood samples were taken and sent to South Africa and Atlanta, it was discovered that it was a form of Malaria. So, we are not yet scientifically and technologically equipped to handle these things on the ground by taking blood samples and have the results come out very quickly in spite of us having Mulago Medical School or having had it in existence in the country for some time. So, there are inadequacies just as there are inadequacies in the vehicles we are going to enter as we leave this Chamber. 

For example, how many of our vehicles have fire extinguishers? You are driving a vehicle, which runs on fuel and it could just knock and develop fire, but how many of us are ready with fire extinguishers to effectively handle such a situation? These are some of the challenges, which we have even in our own preparedness. 

Additionally, how many of us are living in houses with fire escape routes? We have walls and burglar proofs around and if a fire caught us in there, we would die like we are in a cooking pan. There are things, which are not so easily prepared for but when death comes we get over excited. I believe that we can do better by being more cautious than spreading the panic.

THE SPEAKER: No, Prime Minister, please let us close this matter because it is basically what we discussed yesterday.

5.45
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, allow me say something about the issue of compensation, which was raised and which is important. I would like to inform the House that on Friday as I chair Cabinet, compensation is a matter, which we shall consider. The issue of compensation is very important because I know that the relatives of the late Dr Lukwiya were compensated. So, we have a precedent; this matter will be addressed. 

Let me also inform hon. Members of Parliament that Dr Otaala and other experts from the World Health Organisation (WHO) are assessing the situation. When they come back, they should be able to advise us because they are on the ground. Based on their assessment of the situation, we are hopeful that we shall be able to take a professional approach -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, the information I have is that Dr Otaala is in Kitgum. He left for that place this morning with hon. Anywar Beatrice. So, I do not see how at the same time he can be on the ground in Bundibugyo.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: My understanding is that at the time I talked to him he was trying to get a helicopter so that he could move to different places. Anyway, I have directed him to report to Cabinet when he comes back on Friday. You get the point? But he is not the only person who is taking charge; we also have the Director of Medical Services and others doing the same work. Anyway, the point I am making is that Government is taking charge and that when I chair Cabinet on Friday, a number of decisions will be made. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have her clarification and then we conclude.

MS AKIROR: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the Leader of Government Business relates to what they have done to see to it that the medical superintendent whom they say is being treated from his home is isolated from the members of his family to save their lives, in case he gives way or dies of Ebola. Otherwise, it is also very disheartening to hear that he is being treated from his home today yet as we all know, at home everybody will come and shake hands with this patient. That means we are not even trying to save his family. If the government is really in charge, can the hon. Minister of Health do this august House a favour by isolating that patient from his family and also have a look at his children? Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Dr Kamanda - and he is a medical doctor - has informed me that all those people who are infected have been isolated. I am gathering that information from him. Perhaps with your permission, he can add details, but he has informed me that all those people have been isolated. So, there is every effort by those in charge to take the necessary, professional steps to save lives. I thank you.

MR OWORI OTADA: Mr Speaker, you remember yesterday Dr Otaala made a statement here to the effect that they have advised the population to avoid infected places, but some of us thought that that was ambiguous because potentially, every district in this country can become a prone area for this infection. I am raising this matter in relation to our Vice-President’s ongoing tour of Hoima District as well the visit of the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda to the same region and all these other public gatherings. We would like to get clarification on how they intend to make certain pronouncements.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is what hon. Nankabirwa has said. She was advising that it is high time we sensitised people about this issue and how to handle it. The Government has heard, let them go and take appropriate action so that people are saved. We have said whatever we wanted to say on this matter. Let Government go and sit and decide on this.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, we want an authoritative direction to our people because – some of us do not even want to go out of this place, for example.

THE SPEAKER: What was your most effective proposal?

MR OTADA: I do not have any proposal because I do not have the capacity to give a proposal on the way forward about that. But I am proposing that the government should give a directive in as far as public gatherings are concerned - this is a serious matter - so that we can have an authoritative - or maybe there is the problem that the Prime Minister has always talked about of “presidentialism”. Maybe if that is the problem that they are waiting for the President to make that pronouncement, then that is different. But we want the government to come out and give a directive to help us help our people. This is what we want.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the contributions you have made on this matter and urge Government to go and seriously consider all measures that may help us to minimise the losses we are suffering. 

With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow when we shall consider another item, which has remained on the Order Paper - the Trial on Indictment Decree. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 06 December 2007, at 2.30 p.m.)




