Thursday, 2nd December, 1999

Parliament met at 2.20p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is information to Members of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs that His Excellency the President would like to meet you tomorrow at 11.00 a.m at State House, Nakasero.  This amends the circular that was sent to you yesterday.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, with humility I need your guidance on a point of procedure with reference to the Order Papers dated 25th and 30th November, 1999.  According to those two specific Order Papers, my motion on Nakivubo wetland was supposed to come immediately after the Political Organisations Bill which has been postponed for another two weeks.  Now, my seconders have spent the last three weeks preparing themselves, warming up for the motion.  On a point of procedure, I would like to be directed on how we are moving because if things are going to come and jump others, I get an awkward impression.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not have the Order Paper of 25th November but I have no reason to doubt your statement of fact  but at the same time, it should be appreciated that sometimes you may have to jump a business which was listed depending on the importance of the business. Further more, if it is an emergency law that has to be passed, definitely we have to jump. Secondly, you know very well that sometimes when there is Government business, it is given priority but I want to assure you that your business will definitely come, if not this week, maybe next week.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Dr. Kezimbira Muyingo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my Ministry has found it necessary to update Parliament and the Country at large about the state of the environment in the country.  Mr. Speaker, this has been decided in view of the fact that hon. Members are going into recess and since they are also stake-holders in the environment sector and matters, it is fitting that they should go when knowing exactly what the state of the environment is in the country today. Mr. Speaker, during the course of this, I will also offer some explanation on the increased rainfall in some parts of the country in view of the fact that our statement earlier on had indicated tapering of rains towards about now, up to about mid December.

Mr. Speaker, the damage that has been done to the environment in this country is tremendous and a lot of our natural resources have either been depleted or abused tremendously. The reasons that we have found and traced for this damage has mainly been because of relaxation in the enforcement of some of the laws and this has been due to the fact that environment was not given that much focus, especially in the past and this particularly refers to the sector of wetland.  

There has been a shortage of staff in some of the departments of the sector of the environment and in particular, the sector of wetland.  The shortage is so critical that we almost have only one person to cover five or six districts.  The inspectors who are within NEMA are also very few, and I will be giving measures that we have taken.

There have been varied policies over some of our resources, especially wetland, over time such that at one time Government did designate some of the wetland to be industrial areas and therefore, some were built in under that policy although the majority of people have illegally encroached on them.

We have also had problems dealing with corruption within the different departments whereby the law has not been enforced properly and therefore people have got illegally into, especially wetland, or involved themselves in cutting down forests. 

The shortage of land in some areas has been said to be one of the reasons although we cannot really justify this because Ugandans are free to settle anywhere in Uganda, but they do not have to settle on wetland or forest reserves.  

The dependence on wood fuel has heightened the depletion of our forests and alternative measures must be taken or alternative means of providing energy must be sought and I will elaborate a little further: Forests, hon. Speaker and hon. Members, are very important natural resources that must be protected.  In the past, there has been a lot of deforestation and the cover of forests has diminished.  There has been no replanting.  As you are aware, forests contribute to our rainfall. Forests also contribute to the income of the people; they are a source of energy; forests fix green house gases, especially, carbon-dioxide which is important in climate change; forests act as wind breakers and forests also contribute to the fertility of soil.  Of course forests also contribute to the building industry. We must, however, in recognising all this use, use the forests sustainably so that we do not reach a stage where utilisation leads to depletion.

Wetland:
Wetland are also an important natural resource which a country must protect.  Uses of wetland include the balancing of the water table by replenishing the underground water, the filtering of solids and pollutants from the run-off water, and this is done by the pastures - the papyrus that is found in the wetland.  Wetland are also a habitat for organisms which form part of our bio-diversity which is quite important for us in Uganda. Wetland connect the water bodies all over the country and therefore allow circulation of water.  Apart from the damage to these natural resources, we have also pollutants which are discharged into our water bodies, especially from industries and here, there has been some relaxation in the measures taken to try and see that standards are adhered to but again, as I will mention, more measures have now been put in place.  

There have been people who have said that government has not done adequately to protect the environment.  I just want to allude to what government has done to protect the environment.  The 1995 constitution has provision which safeguards wetland and  forests and this is in article 237 (2) (b).  Then article 245 also talks about the protection, the management and the creation of awareness of environment to Ugandans and these are being undertaken as part of government initiative.  Then there is the 1995 Environment Statue.  

Mr. Speaker, this one set out to create an authority, NEMA, to set standards and it is managing the whole issue of environment together with the lead agencies which are the Department of Wetland, the Department of Forestry, the Water Department and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.  Mr. Speaker, the environment Committees and secretaries of environment were included in the NEMA Statute.  Many districts have already recruited district environment officers and many Committees have been set up in many districts at district level.  Some have been operationalized, others are due to be operationalized.  

The lower Committees from LC I up to LC III are in formative stages and when these are all in place - and we have set a deadline of March 2000 - we will have them operational and then the environment will be monitored right from LC I upwards.  Government is prepared to put in place sub-county environment officers. Mr. Speaker, government agreed to deploy these environment officers who are going to be graduates at sub-county level to guide the sector of environment.  Unlike other sectors, the sector of environment in general has not had extension officers who could particularly focus on the environment but with this provision, I think we will have effective control, extension services and advice to all Ugandans, especially educating them about the environment.  

We hope that during the course of the coming financial year we will be provided for so that we can deploy these officers.  The district environment officers who are already in place are right now being employed by the district without a provision from the centre, and we are putting a request to the Ministry of Finance so that they are aware that these be provided for.  

Within the Ministry of Water, Land and Environment, the President appointed a Minister of State in charge of the Environment to particularly focus on the environment, and to make sure that all things go well.  I can assure you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, that I am taking on this duty very effectively.   

The environment has also been made a priority programme through the National Executive Committee of the Movement. It was decided that environment be placed in the priority programmes of government.  This was to give the sector the status it deserves. Mr. Speaker, we have completed the Environment Regulations which are going to give force to the different Acts which were made. These regulations have already gone through discussions and have been sent to the Attorney General for eventual gazetting. I will lay on the table a copy of these regulations when they are out and these will help us and  the entire country to know exactly what we should do and what we should not do, who to approach when they have a problem, and who is supposed to solve the problem.  

We intend, during the course of implementation of these regulations, to have division of labour and checks and balances so that the lead agencies will be the ones to promote the protection and management of the environment. These lead agencies are the Wetland Division, the Forestry Department and the Department of Meteorology while NEMA will be out to look for abuse and therefore make people comply to the good practices or to the standards. The local governments and the urban authorities will be helping us to enforce what NEMA will have pointed out.
Environment, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, was also included in the 15 Point Programme of the Movement, it is now Number 15.  

Recently, Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to begin fulfilling the implementation of many of the laws which are in the books, the National Forum For Local Leaders which came to Kampala and had more than 700 local leaders was addressed by the ministry and in the keynote address that I gave, I highlighted the responsibilities of the local leaders in implementing the laws that are related to environment, and for them to value the natural resources that they have and prevent their abuse.  We will have the local authority participating fully in whatever decisions that we want implemented at the grassroots.   

Mr. Speaker, as I have mentioned before, the extension staff  has been thin, of just a skeleton staff but with the deployment of environment officers, we will be firmly on the ground and our operations will be visible.  I want to point out that while many of the districts have deployed environment officers, we have a few districts which have not yet employed district environment officers and these are Kiboga, Hoima and Kibaale which I understand have advertised, Sembabule, Rakai and Kitgum.  I am sorry Kampala was forgotten but Kampala conspicuously also stands out as having failed to recruit an environment officer.  

Recently we held a meeting of all district environment officers and the Local Council IV  Secretaries for environment, and during this meeting, direction on reporting methods from all environment officers were spelt out that the environment officers have to  give a written report to the Commissioner for Environment and the Assistant Commissioner for Wetland, giving the status of wetland in their districts.  

Mr. Speaker, because of the importance His Excellency the President attaches to the environment, on the 23rd of September 1999, His Excellency the President invited the Ministry of Water, Land and Environment to a one day meeting to discuss the serious environmental issues facing the country.  This meeting was attended by the Ministers within the Ministry of Water, Land and Environment, the technical staff, a representative from Ministry of Finance, a representative from Ministry of Agriculture, Her Excellency the Vice-President and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  

At this meeting, the total status of the environment was reviewed with a special focus on wetland and on deforestation and the following were agreed as the way forward.  It was said that lamentation has gone on for too long and it was time now to practically begin averting some of the abuses that have come to the environment before the country runs into a catastrophe.  Stake‑holders were to be sensitized so that they can participate in the formulation of the way forward and these include the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Local Government.  This exercise, as I have explained earlier on, has already started with a forum where these were addressed.  Then we were to ensure the appointment of the environment officers and the Ministry of Finance is aware of this. Further discussions with the Ministry of Finance are going on to address the issue of staffing.

Plan of action:  
Meeting stakeholders to bring them aboard about the actions to be taken.  All the local government authorities were addressed and as I have said, district environment officers have all been directed on how to move, especially on encroachers and I might inform hon. Members that when I am moving in the district - last week I was in Mbarara and I travelled with the forest Officer and the environment officer and they were able to show me all the wetland which they have acted on and actually made agreements with the people who are encroaching on them, especially those just doing cultivation that this was their last season of interfering with the wetland.  

An inventory of the present status of wetland is on-going and we have given end of February as the last time to give us the status of all wetland. For Kampala, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, on spot assessment of the extent of wetland encroachment is going on right now and I am leading the teams and the teams include the Wetland division, NEMA inspectors, the Kampala City Council, environment officers and the politicians; the area grassroots civil and political leaders. So far, Makindye and Nakawa divisions have been visited.  The press is also with us for publicity and for Kampala I will be meeting the mayor and his executive and the civil servants to discuss the problem of Kampala wetland tomorrow.  

Mr. Speaker, because of the damage that has been done to the wetland, and I have mentioned their functions, we must look for ways of restoration of some of the damaged wetland before we have a catastrophe in this country.  In addition to what finances government may afford, I have discussed with international organisations for wetland, especially the Ramsar, to provide funds for restoration of some of the wetland which can be declared Ramsar sites.  We already have in the country two Ramsar sites that is the Lake George wetland and Lake Nabugabo wetland which are fully sponsored by Ramsar.  

Recently, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we ratified the convention for the migratory birds and African Euro-Asia migratory birds. These, Mr. Speaker, are conventions which bind us or allow us to cooperate with other nations in order to protect birds that migrate from one country to another.  It is said that Uganda has over 90 species of birds that come from Europe during the winter and after discussing with the executive director of this convention, they are willing to support us to restore those wetland because this is the habitat of most of these birds when they come here. Official request is to be submitted for assistance.  

We want to thank the Netherlands Government which has been supporting the Wetland division by paying for some of the few staff members that are there.  We are discussing with them to see what further assistance can be extended to us.  We also expect support from countries and international organisations under the present International Climate Change negotiations that I have recently attended in Washington, Ottawa and Bonn.  

Before I come to my conclusion, I would like to state that the issue of abuse of our natural resources, especially the wetland must be tackled and must be tackled firmly.  Kampala which is the focus right now because it is the face of Uganda is in very serious problem and unless we can be able right away to maintain and secure all those portions of wetland that are still open, we will be in big problems with the increasing climate change which is likely to lead to many floods and so on.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I am sure you see the elaborate work that my Ministry has been undertaking and I want to assure Parliament that the issue of effective and sustainable management of our environment will be pursued with all the vigour and determination to avert catastrophes that could befall this country.  In Kampala, immediate action is being taken to secure all the wetland portions not yet encroached on while we work out details of tackling developments that are blocking the wetland.  
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, all over the world today the phenomenon of climate change is worrying.  Due to the excess green house gases gathered in the atmosphere, especially carbon dioxide, climate has become adverse.  There will be more droughts, there will be more famines, there will be more vector and pest transmitted diseases and more severe floods. You have been hearing what is occurring in India, what is occurring in the United States.  

All this is likely to come here too and unless we have measures that can be able, for example, to let the water run off fast, we are going to end in a catastrophe.  Houses built in wetland stand to be washed down by storm waters and the owners must stay warned.  What, however, is even more worrying is the fact that blockage of the natural course of the water will sometimes make the water take alternative routes and therefore cause damage elsewhere. It may cause damage to buildings of Ugandans who have not participated in the blockage of these natural channels which are supposed to provide the drainage space.  This of course will also lead to spread of diseases like cholera and we have had it here and  we know exactly what it has done.  This is not to mention the pollution that it causes to our lakes and therefore the resentment of our fish by some of the buyers of our fish.  

I will need Parliament's support in all issues of the environment, they are not easy.  I request hon. Members to allow me time to implement what my Ministry has planned. I will appreciate advice and will discuss with individual hon. Members who may have environment at heart like hon. Lukyamuzi. I recognise hon. Lukyamuzi's commitment.  Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to appreciate the support of the Committee on Natural Resources in all the measures they are taking.  I am sure all hon. Members will join us in this important national task.  

I would like now to turn a little to the statement of the current weather so as to explain the voiced change in  the amount of rain that is coming today.  The experts within the meteorology department are telling us that the weather has not changed greatly.  What we see today was expected.  The only thing which has happened is that there has been a change of the winds that are blowing. 

There are winds blowing off Algeria bringing down to the South cold air which is laden with moisture. This is coming down into East Africa where it meets currents which are coming from the Indian Ocean, also containing moisture, and these all meet over the western parts of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo. This has led to increase in the amount of rain that has been seen, particularly in the western part of Uganda.  This  picture is likely to continue for about two weeks or so, but the pattern of the season is generally going to remain as we had forecast.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the message to take home is that whatever is harvested because of the increased rain that we have should be well stored and families should keep food because of the uncertainty that is now coming every season. Predictability has become difficult and, therefore, our people must have reserve food so that they do not land into shortages.  

I would like to end by thanking hon. Members for listening to me and I also thank those Members who have played a part in the protection and management of our environment.  The President is the leading player. Let us all continue this exercise so that we can avert any catastrophe because of the damage of the environment.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO(Kakuuto County, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to raise these questions directly to the hon. Minister who has just made the statement but knowing that government is one entity, these responsibilities may overlap.  Mr. Speaker, first of all there was a recent article indicating that the Nakivubo water channel has been blocked in several areas, and one would think that the kind of money that we are getting from the World Bank would be addressing the unblocking of the Nakivubo channel.  Could the Minister comment on efforts in this direction?  

Secondly, there are works going on in the improvement of drainage at the Kibuye round-about, further down and all the way to Natete.  I find it kind of strange that instead of directing the water to go to the drains, they have raised the so-called drains almost a metre high and the road has remained down!  When it rains there is a virtual lake!  I mean, if you go to Natete you will find that you have attracted water into the roads instead of out of the roads and into the drains. I think some of these plans  may even be World Bank funded for which my grand children will have to pay, and they appear very erroneous.  Could the Minister comment on that?  

Thirdly, recently also, there was an article that some Members of a planters association based in Namanve were taking government to court because the association had been responsible for planting those trees which was a means of their livelihood and  was also serving as a drainage and filter.  Now that that has been declared an industrial area, they think they should be compensated.  Could the Minister also comment on this, Mr. Speaker. 

DR. KINYATA(Kinkizi East, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the Minister for his comprehensive explanation about the state of the environment in Uganda.  Now, my question, Mr. Speaker, is; in so many parts of Uganda some wetland have been converted into farms or farmlands, industrial areas and also residential areas.  Now, how does the ministry intend to restore those welands and where do they think they are going to take the people?

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday or the day before, I was happy to read in the media that the hon. Minister was out in the field inspecting the state of our environment himself, a story which he has confirmed to this House.  Mr. Speaker, since Nakawa Division was covered, I believe the Minister and his team might have seen what is happening to Ntinda valley.  

Until recently this stream had water and during the El-Nino, it actually had a lot of water but if you go there now, you will find very beautiful buildings standing at the bottom of the stream. Mr. Speaker, in fact more foundations have come up and quite a number of buildings are still at foundation level.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from the hon. Minister what is being done about this because, given another El-Nino, Mr. Speaker, these buildings will be completely submerged and we are likely to lose lives.  Now, who will pay for these losses?  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to know whether these are illegal structures or the people who are building have actually been given planning permits to put structures in the valley.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, some time last year when His Excellency the President visited Kisoro, I think it was on the occasion of the opening of their airstrip, he made a statement that the Government was going to compensate the people who are occupying the wetland so that they can settle elsewhere.  After this statement, Mr. Speaker, there was a rush to wetland in order to get this compensation.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know what the Ministry responsible for environment is doing about all this.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKUMU (Bulisa County, Masindi):   I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from the hon. Minister what plans he has in place regarding the threat of the environmental degradation by polythene bags especially in the urban areas.  It has actually spread beyond urban areas. Right now even in the villages polythene bags are being used which in the past was never known.  They have now become bottles, they have become cups. Even at the parties in the villages these days, drinks are served in polythene bags.  Earlier on, Government had made a move that would prohibit the production of polythene bags in this country but perhaps the hon. Minister would let us know  why this matter ended in just statements. 

It is very well known that the effect of the use of polythene bags on the environment is very disastrous; not only in urban areas but also in the rural areas where soil is certainly highly degraded by these polythene bags.  So, I would like to know from the hon. Minister the plans he has in place to arrest this situation. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister as to what steps he has taken to ensure that environment impact assessment becomes meaningful because as of now, environmental impact assessment is mainly being carried out by investors and the role of NEMA in regard to environmental impact assessment is minimal.  I would like to be assured that the reports we get on environmental impact assessment are reliable.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. NKUUHE (Isingiro South,Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.  I thank the Minister for the statement and I seek a few clarifications.  First of all, the statement is on environment: it says "The state of the environment" but the paper concentrates on wetland.  Are there other aspects of environment apart from wetland?  For instance, the hills: We have a lot of bare hills in the south-west and I would like to hear something on that.  

The other point is, on page (5) it is said the President told them to stop lamentations and I think it is the right thing but in that list of actions, I see that you are going to go the Ministry of Finance to ask for more money to protect the environment.  My impression is that the environment programmes are some of the best funded programmes in this country and world wide.  I would like to know from the Minister how much, for instance, the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project is worth and what impact ii has had. 

There is also another project which covers the districts of Rakai, Mbarara and Karagwe in Tanzania. What is it doing and how can an MP get involved?  Does your Ministry have any project on the Kagera River because it is now like soup, it is permanently brown and it is full of soil?  On page (6) you said that you are seeking finances but what I see is that we want money to study birds. Hon. Minister, I think that might be very interesting to the people in Europe and all that but really, we have very, very, serious problems. So, are you seeking more money to study more serious problems, for instance afforestation and so on? 

Finally, what are you going to do about the livestock in Kampala?  The city is like a farm and as we know, livestock have got unique diseases which can be transmitted to humans. So what are you going to do about livestock farming in Kampala?  Thank you.

MR. NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have only basically one clarification I am seeking from the Minister.  Recently this house did approve a large sum of money which the country will borrow for the Nakivubo channel. Everywhere I go in town, the question I am being asked is, there is a soap factory sitting  on the top of that channel, could the Minister clarify to this House and the nation at large as to how they intend to reinstate the original Nakivubo channel because, in secondary school I was told that water finds its own level.

Secondly, maybe on a much smaller scale, Mr. Speaker, is whereas the Minister has confirmed the press reports of his tour, in one of those reports they said that the Minister was refused entry into a certain premises.  Does the Minister not think it wise that he should come to this House for empowerment so that he can go and insist on our environmental protection with our full protection? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. BABIHUGA (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to recap on the question that the hon. Member raised regarding polythene bags, if the hon. Minister could listen a little while.  Mr. Speaker, there are constant radio announcements on our local radios warning people not to use polythene bags, not to cook with them that they are poisonous and that they should not inhale the flames of the burning polythene paper. I wonder whether the Minister has listened to those announcements. If indeed it is true that the polythene materials have toxins in them, why has the Minister waited for so long to ban the usage of polythene packing in this country?  These announcement are there but I do not see any move by the Ministry to save our lives. Why has he kept quiet? 

Secondly, there is the issue regarding wetland. Is the Minister aware of persons like the people of the former Kigezi who have, for survival reasons, chosen to live in the hills and preserved the valleys for  cultivation for subsistence purposes?  Is he aware that he will be dismantling their livelihood for ever, and there is no amount of compensation that will put back their lifestyle?  What is he doing about this concern which is shaking the Kigezi area?  And, why is the Minister choosing to make Uganda the home for birds and animals while the waste is continuing to produce toxins that are depleting the ozone layer?  How are you responding to that?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA(Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like the Minister to clarify to me, when in this paper he says he will be getting his environment officers to report to him, is that really the correct procedure?  I thought he should receive reports from all technical experts from the districts to all Ministers so that you compare the different problems.  Really, saying only one department is going to report, may not awaken you adequately.  Are you sure you will be able to receive enough information if you do not receive information from, say the aggro-vet and other people?  

Two, are you planning to patent our genetic plant material some of which is getting extinct and others are being stolen and taken to be patented by other countries?  Three, what is the rate of destruction and extinction of some of our precious species of plants?  Have you gazetted some of the plants not to be destroyed?  

Finally, there are a lot of garages in the whole country.  Are you aware that people who are drinking water which has been polluted by oil which has been thrown away from engines and gear boxes is going to cause cancer eventually?  Are you aware there are some religions which have ordered their followers to destroy certain types of trees, even in Kampala, quickly because they are a curse in homes, that when the root arrives in somebody's home, the head of the house dies?  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI(Lubaga South,Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I ask the following questions, I would like to acknowledge the compliments given to me by the hon. Minister in charge of the Environment.  The compliments go  beyond such that in two conference scenarios -(Interruption)

MS. BABIHUGA:  Before the hon.Lukyamuzi pays himself compliments, is he in order to go against the rules of this House which do not permit us to make lengthy contributions apart from related questions which are related to the statement that the Minister has given? Is he in order to glorify himself before this House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I think it came from the statement of  the Minister and I have got it on record here. He is referring to that statement.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what I was saying is that the compliments are associated to two scenarios where my name was floated for the position of Vice President of Global International, both in Bonn and Cape Town. I have received no challenger for the Vice Presidency candidate.  So, with your prayers as hon. Members and Colleagues, I am sure I will win and I will swear to protect the Constitution, the environment. And, Mr. Speaker, maybe with your permission, I was requested to float this idea that if Uganda is ready to host the next conference, the Global International is willing to come here in Kampala.  

Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister for Environment to answer the following questions: One, I am concerned that the Kampala City Council has not appointed an environment officer, how will he ensure as a stakeholder that an environment officer is appointed in Kampala? Two, the issue brought by hon. Pinto is very crucial.  There is greater information beyond what hon. Pinto said.  I am on record as having asked government to reserve or to protect Namanve because there is a lot of open land in places like Tororo where coca cola industries can be established or built. The information I want to give which is subject to challenge by the Minister is that all the properties of the Uganda Investment Authority are going to be sold off because they have no money to compensate the people who won the case against the destruction of their land in Namanve.  Where is that money going to come from?  

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to give information to the hon. Member that, although there has been a judgement, the whole proceedings are still sub judice, they are still before court and I do not think it will be proper for us to discuss them and inquire into them.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister asked us a question:  He said "what has government done to protect the environment?"  When he was answering himself, he quoted Article 245 of the Constitution of Uganda, and Article 237, part (2) sub-section (b) and the Environment Statute of 1995.  I think, Mr. Speaker, what he quoted are the provisions which were made by the Constituent Assembly and Parliament.  We want to ask the Minister, what has the government done to protect the Uganda environment because today the environment is an issue which is politically contestable in most circles?  What has the Movement Government done to specifically protect the environment as a matter of contest?  

The other question, Mr. Speaker, is related to the climatic changes.  According to what I have in terms of research, Mr. Speaker, the forecasts stated by the Minister, most of them received from Entebbe, are faulty.  They do not stick to the realities of the conditions expected and yet Uganda has committed itself, according to the Kyoto Conference in Japan, to give Ugandan tax payers the realities of the climatic scenario.  Aware of that, I would like the Minister to explain to us why these days it can rain in Kawempe and will not rain in Nakulabye - (Laughter)  - it can rain in Najjanankumbi but it will not rain in the industrial area? The people I represent need an explanation.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, noting that the industrial sector as a result of privatisation is expanding at a very fast speed, and noting that at one time we had pari-urban forests in Ntinda, Bugolobi, Namanve and even in front of the Sheraton Hotel, with all the expanding industrial sectors in this city, what has government put in place to ensure a free flow of carbon dioxide and related dangerous gasses through natural absorption?  I thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you were recently photographed and publicised touring wetland in Kampala, I want to thank you for the practical steps you took.  However, the same press reported that you were stopped by the guards of one of the big investors in this country, by the name of Sudir Ruparelia or something like that, from entering an area which he had fenced but it is reported to have been a wetland. Possibly the Minister was concerned and was threatening to remove the licence.  So, I am asking, in view of this, Mr. Minister, can you confirm to this House whether really you as a Minister, legally in charge of environmental matters, were stopped from entering this land which was suspected to be part of the wetland and you wanted to verify what is there?  

Secondly, is it true that this investment is illegal because it is done on a wetland, without proper authority and so on?  
Thank you.

DR. MIYINGO KEZIMBIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will start by thanking the hon. Members for the reactions that they have put in. As every Member realises, we are facing a very complex issue and that is why I have decided to come to you to update you so that you can support me in the subsequent measures.  

Hon. Speaker, hon. Pinto put some questions to me but which are of an engineering nature that I am not that competent to answer them. My Colleague, the Minister of Works has volunteered to answer those concerned with drainage and I would like, Mr. Speaker, to request you to allow the hon. Minister of State for Works to answer those questions of engineering and then I will take on from there.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr. Andruale Awuzu):  Thank you Mr. Speaker and I also thank my Colleague for allowing me to help him.  As he said, actually the first question was from hon. Pinto and the first part was about the flooding, blockage and so on of the Nakivubo Channel.  Members are aware that a few weeks back, you approved a loan of just over US $20 million for the rehabilitation of the Nakivubo Channel which means that this work is now actually in procurement stage. The Ministry of Works is responsible for overseeing this project. Although there are consultants there, we are there to make sure that this work is properly done and under the proposal, the Channel is going to be widened and deepened all the way from Makerere up to its outlet into the Lake in Luzira.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, now that the Minister has taken on an engineering tone, talking of the technicalities of unblocking  the Nakivubo Channel, the drains have already been made poorly together with the roads. Since we had to borrow this money, one would think with a view to modernising our city. Is there, in this plan, any aspect of introducing fly-overs, improving on the size of the roads, opening up of more drains and giving access for free flow of traffic to avert congestion and also to allow water to flow out? Since we are modernising, are we still at the stage of deliberately visioning the future, or are we - from what I see - narrowing the roads and basically unblocking existing drains only?  Could he give us his overview, Mr. Speaker?

MR. ANDRUALE AWUZU:  Thank you for the supplementary question hon. Pinto.  In fact, according to these plans, according to the proposed works, we are not narrowing down any road at all.  I will come to this detail when I answer your second question about the levels in the roads. When we are doing this channel, what we are doing is where, for example, sewerage pipes which you must have seen on Access road down here are passing very near the Channel, we are going to change positions of these, put bridges and so on.  Basically, there is of course a master transport plan for the whole of Kampala which is still under review and it will cover all those queries you put in your supplementary, but the question about Nakivuubo Channel, as I said, it is going to be widened and deepened and our immediate requirement is to get rid of the floods in Kampala as you see them.  

Associated with this is the question which hon. Dick Nyai asked about Mukwano, saying that this factory is built right on the channel.  I do not know how accurate that is because what I see as I pass by is that this is not true. But I must say that the factory which Mukwano has built is not an illegal structure, it is a legal structure. In other words, he got approved plans from City Council and you can ask him to remove that factory but then, you have to compensate him.  You cannot just ask him to go - (interruption) -

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, the Minister of State for Environment read to us a very detailed account of how Ugandans intend to protect the environment.  Mr. Speaker, in the point I raised, I do not believe that at any time I did say that the soap works was an illegal structure but that I believe our hon. Minister of State for Environment is saying that the wetland should be left free so as to protect our future.  If we are arguing as a Government that because somebody licensed a soap works on Nakivubo Channel and therefore it is legal and that it should continue to stand, then I suppose, Mr. Speaker, the only reasonable thing is to ask the original Minister of State to withdraw his statement.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is the Minister aware that the City Council of Kampala has acquired a land title for the area where Mukwano is?  If he is, could the City Council not use that land property right to remove a badly positioned industry?

MR. ANDRUALE AWUZU:  Thank you for the two supplementaries but you do not correct a wrong by adding another wrong to it. In other words, it was wrong. We are not saying that it was right that Mukwano should have built in that area but you cannot remove him by force; that is a wrong.  So, you do not correct it by doing that, you have to do it legally  - (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will allow you but my understanding is that the hon. Member holding the Floor is answering the technical aspect of the questions only. He is not dealing with the environment as such.  So, I think you should spare him the questions that should be directed against the Minister in charge of Environment.

MRS. AKECH OKULLO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to supplement what the Minister of State for Works has said and what the hon. Lukyamuzi has also said.  It is true that City Council has acquired land but in the case of Mukwano, the land so acquired is from the Railways side, such that the Channel can be widened towards the Railways side.  This is the information I want to give.  Thank you. 

MR. ANDRUALE AWUZU:  Thank you very much, my Colleague for that information.  Actually, I am aware of that information and it is exactly what I was about to give to Ken Lukyamuzi because he was talking about Railways acquiring a title over the Mukwano factory.  That is incorrect, that is not correct.  My sister's information is correct that the land which has been acquired has been acquired from Railways. I know about this because Railways is under the Ministry of Works.  In lieu of the land which the factory has occupied, KCC has acquired land from Railways which is on the Western side of the channel to enlarge the channel. So, this is the correct information. 

Now, concerning the levels of drainage of the new roads and so on stated by hon. Pinto, the works are just starting.  Currently, the levels of the drainage looks to be above the level of the roads but that is the finished level of the drainage. The finished level of the roads will be above the level of the drainage as you see them now.  So, we are not going to leave the road below and the drainage to be above.  And as far as the Nakivubo channel is concerned, in fact after the five roundabouts have been done, the Japanese are willing to raise the level of the area around clock tower by another one metre and increase the traffic lanes between the two roundabouts to six so that the problem of flooding is solved and also the problem of traffic jams is solved.  So, we are actually looking ahead and we hope these will all be things of the past.  As I said, thank you my Colleague for allowing me to answer for you.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Ministers who have given important and relevant information.  Mr. Speaker, I will just only add one thing on top of the information that has been given that whereas the drainage can all be opened up and all the water within Kampala is removed from the streets, we have to have a place where this water will go because, as I said in my statement, the wetland are there to filter the water. The water will run very fast through the channels but the water is supposed to be trapped by the wetland and be slowed down, stagnated to a certain extent so that it leaves the wetland slowly while different sediments are being taken out.  If the storm water is collected all at ago and it  does not find enough space in the wetland, then definitely the water is going to forcefully hit the structures which have been constructed in the wetland. The end result will be that they are either thrown down or damaged extensively to a level that their maintenance will not be possible.  I just wanted that also to be put into the perspective.  

I think the issue of Namanve has been solved by the Attorney General, so I will not touch it.  

Then the issue raised by hon. Kinyata that some of the wetland were drained and turned into farms, and he wants to know what  government will do about the people there.  Right now, I can say that the intention of Government, and I think this is what you would also like to see, can be illustrated as follows:  For example, when you take Kabale, you know that Kabale used to be a very cold place.  In fact you could hardly walk out without a jacket and I am sure hon. Rugunda will confirm this but today however - and I was in Kabale recently, I did not even have to bother to put on my jacket because it is no longer cold. The reason is because the environment is changing, the wetland were contributing to this, the wetland are all dried up, and the climate has changed.  Malaria transmitting mosquitoes were not in Kabale.  Today malaria is in Kabale but the situation is getting worse.  

Really, it is up to us Ugandans to decide if we want to mitigate against the changes that are coming, that are going to affect us and affect our grand, grand children.  If we do not move now, future will blame us.  So it is really entirely up to us to take a decision that is firm. In same of the cases, we may not have to vacate all the wetland but we need to have a certain portion or certain representative amount of space of the wetland in order for it to be able to provide the micro-climatic environment that is required for these areas.  

This will be explained by fully by the technical people but this is what is happening world over.  All over the world, wetland are being reclaimed and that is why I mentioned this organisation called RAMSAR.  In fact at meetings of RAMZAR, each country comes up to announce how many wetland it has reclaimed.  I was last in that meeting in June and countries were coming up proudly to announce the number of wetland they had reclaimed back. Mr. Speaker, I will be discussing with Cabinet and then come to Parliament and a decision has to be made in national interest.  

What hon. Okello Okello is stating is indeed very correct that the Ntinda valley has all been encroached on and people are building very fast in that valley.  Actually, when there is another torrential shower, I do not know what is going to happen to these houses.  There is, by the petrol station as you go down to what used to be the Drive in cinema, someone heaping murrum to totally cover that portion of wetland and I was there yesterday and we directed that the filling be stopped. They have been directed before but the problem is enforcement.  The lead agency has detected these people and has written to them to  stop but at night they ferry murrum and fill up.  

Yesterday we went there, I think the gentleman was remaining with maybe about a few days of filling before he can completely alter the channel or the wetland. This wetland is what collects all the water from all those industries up there in Ntinda area and that water has to find space.  

Just as hon. Dick Nyai said, water finds its own level so the water will have to find somewhere to pass. Whether you like it or not, some buildings will go with the water  because the water will have to find its way out.  It is really up to us to determine what to do and this is going to require also engineering work so that we determine what optimum intervention we can make in order to make life safe within Kampala.  

As to whether these structures have permits, is one of the issues that I am going to discuss with the mayor. The mayor and his officials together with my Ministry staff are sitting down to begin an exercise of examining structures that are within town, to see those which were permitted or which are said to be legal and those which are said to be illegal.  But as I have stated, we have to find space for this water to go in.  Whether these buildings are legal or illegal, we must find space where this water has to go through.

Now, His Excellency the President made a statement for compensation of people in the wetland, and it was said that in Kisoro people rushed in.  I had an opportunity to interact with the Environment officer from Kisoro and also the chairman from Kisoro, and they did not confirm this.  I think there must have been some desire to go into these wetland, but I think people were warned because we would know who has gone there now, and who has not gone there now.  So, I think that is not true. Now, on the issue of whether compensation will be made or not, compensation will be made. This is an issue which, I think, will have to be discussed by Government and a decision made. 

Hon. Lukumu, yes, the issue of polythene bags is a very important issue that even my Ministry is concerned with.  Actually, we have a paper in Cabinet which we are presenting about the measures that we are going to take about these polyethylene bags and until we come out of Cabinet, I may not be able to give a full picture but I can say that the focus is that we should eventually get rid of the polyethylene bags. I think we have to go back to paper bags and whatever measures we are going to take and the steps that we are going to take will come back to Parliament. 

Hon. Nkuuhe, the paper is about the environment but I concentrated on wetland. The only thing that I have not quite emphasised is the issue of the bare hills which are covered within our environmental regulations.  The environmental regulations  that we have put forward is going to take care of this. We have recently held a meeting with the President in which he demanded that we find out the species of trees which can grow on these bare hills that can be taken up easily by the people who are near these bare hills. I commissioned Makerere University Faculty of Forestry together with FORI and the department of Forestry to identify these species. Right now as I talk, three teams are out in the field to establish that, and we will be able to give these species of trees that will have been identified. 

The second question about the Lake Victoria Environment Project, I have identified that we can have some money here within the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project to help us on planting trees on these bare trees.  This is in addition to a project that is still before the Committee on Natural Resources which is targeting some six districts which are faced with environmental degradation to try and replant trees.

I am sure hon. Members are aware of what happened last season in the Western part of Uganda.  The drought that we had, well, you can blame it on any other reason but I think forests and trees are one of the contributing factors to the shortage of rainfall leading to the drought that we have encountered. Knowing the issue of climate change, whenever I go to these international meetings, I have urged that Uganda be assisted in ensuring that we re-afforest this country so that the functions or the uses which I have mentioned about forests can play a role in this country.

The other project which was mentioned by Dr. Nkuuhe, the Bio-Diversity Project which is under NEMA is under study. Last Tuesday, I was with the entire group of the Lake Victoria Environment Project for a whole day. We were at the Ranch on the Lake discussing this project and that is why I am telling you that I have now found money that I can use there.  Next I am going to tackle this Bio-diversity project to ensure that money here is also put to proper use and Members of Parliament from those  areas are made to know what is going on so that they can and participate in the project -(Interruption).

MR.PINTO: The Minister is talking about money, that he is going to get money, he going to do what! Now, are these grants, are they loans? If they are loans, will we be privileged, according to the Constitution, to approve this because I have heard many times; "I am going to ask these people for money"! Although we want the money but hearing this coming out a little lightly, could I get confirmation whether this money is a grant or loans, and how are they going to be secured?

DR. BITAHWA:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister has just mentioned a very important issue of worldwide environmental degradation and he has also pointed out that this issue is always pointed out in international conferences.  Since we know that it is largely the developed countries which emit dangerous gasses in the atmosphere which is responsible for the present changes, are the developed countries showing any interest of compensation to us who do not emit such gasses, but suffer the consequences of bad weather?  Thank you.       

DR. KEZIMBIRA MUYINGO:  Mr. Speaker, let me first answer those points of clarification, the ones of hon. Pinto. These two projects that I am talking about are world bank projects which were approved a long time ago. The Lake Victoria Environment Management Project and the Bio-diversity project are on-going projects.  Now, the ones I am talking about, for example, the RAMZAR Convention and the one of Migratory Birds, these are not loans, these are grants, if they are obtained. These associations are just interested in seeing that the birds, for example, that come from Europe, when they come here they can live well and return to Europe After winter.  That is all and that money will be given to us just to allow the birds to be here and return when winter is over. There is nothing attached to it.  We can study the birds when they are here but the money is to thank us for providing a home for the birds-(Interruption).   

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, will it be wrong for the Minister to put a case to these guys who have got a high per capita pollution rate to pay to us who have  still got facilities to plant to clean the air because it should be a bargain really, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I thought that was the answer he would have given you?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to give some information to the Minister in for a positive direction.  Uganda has the biggest number of birds in East Africa and one of the most attractive aspects of tourism is related to bird watching.  When the tourists come here, they would like to see as many birds as possible and that is a big treasure to us.

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue raised by the two hon. Members about the developed countries polluting the world or the atmosphere is correct. Negotiations on the Kyoto protocol are going on and the Africa Group of Nations is led by Uganda as chairman. The last time we met in Bonn to discuss the way forward. The line that we are towing is that the developed countries are indeed the ones that have caused this pollution because Africa in general contributes only about 3.1 percent of the greenhouse gasses and the rest is contributed by the developed countries. We are saying that these countries should contribute to the African countries in terms of capacity building so that we can set up structures and institutions that will help us, first of all, monitor our position so that we do not also go into excessive production of the greenhouse gases. We need capacity to change from dependency on wood energy which is destroying the forests so that we turn to alternative sources of energy like solar, biogas and electricity. 

We are also demanding that the developed countries themselves should begin to reduce their own production of gases at home by a certain percentage. These Governments have started to commit themselves and we think this is going to be a reality. They have seen the danger themselves.  It is difficult to visualize when you have not gone into details but a lecture by one of the American scientists showed us the danger we are facing.  Global warming is taking place now, temperatures are rising every year and these droughts and floods are going to be more and more frequent.  At the shores, the water in the seas are rising and many parts of the countries are going to be submerged, including many parts of the United States like Florida and so on are going to be submerged because of the rising levels of the seas. So, they have really taken this seriously.  

At the meeting in Bonn, I happen to have been the chairman of one of the general Sessions of all ministers and the technical people from the 200 countries that participated and I received the commitment of these countries so I know this will be implemented. Both Africa and the developing countries will gain out of this.  We are seriously negotiating.  I can assure you, Uganda will gain out of this.  

Mr. Speaker, the issue of animals in the city.  As I said, we are going to meet the City Council tomorrow.  These are some of the issues I will bring up with them - the concern of honourable Members.  

I think the issue that hon. Nyai brought up about Nakivubo Channel has been answered technically, and I have also tried to polish it up by telling you that water will have to find a way out.  

Now, the allegation that the Minister was refused entry by Karim and Sudhir which was brought up by hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Nyai, actually, is not true. I was not refused entry into any premises.  When I set out for this on-spot inspection of the wetland, my focus was to go and approach the wetland from the extreme ends of whatever development was being made to see how much damage has been done by development.  So, for example, I approached Karim's premises from Kibuye and we went through Nanganda and came down to Kansanga, and from below the valley where I even addressed people. I was in full focus of the extent of Karim's development into the wetland.  

It was useless to go into the buildings of Karim or Sudhir because the walls are standing 30 - 40 metres high, and the doors would be locked.  So how would you see the wetland?  You would just see the filled up inside.  So, I never entered and I do not intend right now to enter any premises but only to find out the extent of damage, and also to identify how much of the wetland is left because we want to immediately secure whatever is left while we go into the arrangements of what can be done to the illegal developments that have been set up.  

This is the same answer for Sudhir's place in Munyonyo.  In fact, myself, the Secretary for Environment from City Council, another gentleman, Mr. Mugiso, also from City Council, my Commissioner for Wetland, approached Sudhir's wetland in Munyonyo from behind the building through the bush until we got where the wetland has been filled and I even told my officers that when they go back they should measure the distance from the building to the extent of the filling so that no further filling can be done.  This was the inspection I was doing. I never intended to enter the premises.  So, I was never refused entry to any premises.

Hon. Babihuga, the announcements that are made by NEMA about the dangers of polythene bags, I have listened to them and as I said, we have a Paper before Cabinet that is going to take measures against this.

The people of Kigezi - I think I have answered that.  It is up to us to decide whether we now want to protect these people who are going to face a catastrophe, and also whether we want our grand children or our children to enjoy a better environment.  

Hon. Gagawala, the reporting of the environmental officers is not directly to me. It is stated that they Report to the Assistant Commissioner for Wetland who will give a copy of their Report to me.  It is not only Wetland that are reporting on, the Forest Department is already reporting and I am sure you know the measures that we have taken in the Forest Department to reduce the deforestation that had been going on and how now our Forest Officers are really adhering to the Forest Act and performing according to what the regulations say.

On the issue of the disposal of oil, this is an issue that NEMA is handling to see that all these garages and so on get a way of disposing of the oil.  It is difficult  because of the so many small garages here and there.  I think they are going to insist that they have disposal tanks where they can deposit oil.  But then, we need to involve the Oil Companies, I think the are the ones to be pressed. I understand an arrangement had been reached that they should be the ones to incinerate this used oil.  So, this is going to be taken up among the measures that we are going to follow up.

I am not very conversant with these trees that cause death that hon. Gagawala was referring to.  Rumours of this nature, I may not be able to substantiate.

Hon. Lukyamuzi, K.C.C. has not appointed an Environmental Officer.  Actually, I have taken them to task during the course of the forum for the local leaders.  They should have been the example.  They have someone who is in the position but they have not substantially appointed one and tomorrow, it will be one of the subjects to be discussed.

On climatic change and forecasts of weather,  I can assure you, hon. Lukyamuzi, that our forecasts of weather are fairly accurate but we always say that our forecasts are up to 70 per cent accurate because as you know, weather forecasts guide you as to what can happen. As to the issue of rain in Natete and no rain in Kamwokya, that is really nature; and the micro-climates of an area also play a role. For example, an area which has wetland may have a micro-climate that may promote rain in that area instead of another place. The trapping of winds by trees and so on may be the cause of that precipitation; and also mountains or hills -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I am sorry, Mr. Speaker-(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, but we really - would you please finish up your answer.

DR. KEZIMBIRA:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, you also know that in geography we have the leeward side and the windward side of mountains and rain will be on one side and not on the other. 

I have answered hon. Atubo that indeed I was not stopped and, Mr. Speaker, as I wind up I just wanted to also say that one of the measures that we are going to take, especially in Kampala here, will be to throw out the people who are growing yams, sugar cane and so on in the wetland because they are really growing them in all sorts of heavy metals and all sorts of pollutants that could be taken up by these yams. The sugar canes are even worse because they are really growing in sewerage and from there they are just cut and taken to the market and the people who are eating them at the market do not even bother to wash them because they do not know where they originate; and this is really dangerous to our people. We will have to move on this.  

Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Members very much for the contribution they have made, it has shown the importance they attach to the environment, and I request for support from you so that we can improve the environment of this country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE AMNESTY BILL, 1999

LT COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I must take this opportunity also to thank the Members who have supported this motion.  This indicated that all Members, regardless of where they are coming from, are committed to see that peace is restored in the whole of Uganda.  We should take Uganda as our body such that even if it is one toe which has got some pain,the whole body is affected.  So, I really thank you very much for that contribution which shows that we are united to see that peace is restored in Uganda.  And if this Bill is passed into an Act, I am sure it will be us to preach peace and reconciliation to all the people in Uganda but, Mr. Speaker, I must comment on a few of the observations of Members of Parliament.  

Hon. Toskin asked that if the Statute of 1997 failed, how will this one succeed? Here, I would say that the difference between the statute of 1987 and this one is that, this Amnesty Bill has been supported and requested  by the population.  You are aware, Mr. Speaker, that ministers went around the country and asked whether affected areas are willing to forgive the rebels and they answered in the affirmative that they are willing to forgive the rebels.  So, I believe that with this background that this originated from the people, it will succeed.  

Secondly, the 1987 Amnesty Law was not a blanket amnesty.  It went as far as saying that the ring-leaders of these organisations will not benefit from the amnesty yet here we are saying that every body - be it ring-leaders or even Kony himself can benefit from this amnesty; and I think that will make a difference between this one and the Statute of 1997.

Mr. Speaker, there was a comment by hon. Lukyamuzi that this bill is not an opinion of the public but as I have already indicated,  even in our Committee we had recommended that rebels should come back and be charged for other crimes they committed during the insurgency.   For instance, we suggest that rebels should answer for robbery and things like that which might not be in this Bill.  Even the President was really, very, very much against this blanket amnesty but because of the wish of the people, he has come out and supported this line.  So really, to say that this was not the opinion of the public, I think is not true.  This wish, especially, of the blanket amnesty came from the people who were interviewed.

There was a suggestion that once these rebels settle, they should be treated differently.  I would hesitate to support such a line because we shall be saying that unless somebody goes to the bush, he or she will not be assisted and that when he or she comes out of the bush will be rewarded.  So, if you treat these people differently by giving them packages, by giving them incentives leaving other people who have been living here peacefully without these facilities, I think we shall be creating a very terrible precedence.  So, I would suggest that by the fact that the government has forgiven, and is willing to forgive and forget what atrocities rebels have committed, I think that is good enough for these rebels to come back like any other citizens and contribute to the development of this country.  

There was a question of soldiers.  Some Members have indicated that some of the UPDF soldiers should benefit from this amnesty.  We discussed this point at length in the Committee but we were hesitant to include these UPDF soldiers in the Amnesty Bill.  The purpose of the Amnesty Bill is to forgive forces  that are fighting the legal government.  UPDF soldiers are part and parcel of the state so, we think and believe that the UPDF soldiers have got their own regulations which government can use either to forgive them or to take disciplinary action when they commit some crimes or make mistakes in the field.  

Members,  I think we shall be sending a bad signal to the nation if we included the UPDF.   Somebody could come and say, okay fine, even some people who are working in the civil service in these affected areas should also be exempted because, definitely in the course of their duties, they have also committed some crimes or atrocities.  So really, I would think that we should let the law take its course regarding the UPDF soldiers.  

There was a question about including the UN agencies in our law.  Might be at this point I will ask the Attorney General to guide us whether really as government of Uganda we can make a law which involves the UN agencies.  For instance, here we are saying that people who are living outside Uganda can report to any UN agency.  I do not know whether it is possible to include such bodies in our laws.  So, we might have to think about this and probably change it when we come to that clause but I want Members to think about it; whether it is really possible for us to be in this Parliament and make laws including these international bodies.  

Hon. Kweronda said that the money to run this commission might not be available quickly but I believe and the Committee believes that if we can reduce expenditures on military equipments, on maintenance of soldiers in the bush, that little expenditure we have saved can really serve this purpose.  So, I urge and request that the government and the Minister of Finance put this as a priority that money is found in the budget for the commission.

DR. EPAK: I thank the hon. chairman.  If I heard him correctly, he said money saved from buying military equipment for operations in the field could be used to support the commission.  I do not know under what circumstance that can be done.  First of all, how is the money saved?  Secondly, how do you divert it from a Ministry, from a budget line which was meant for something else to another commission?  How feasible is that?  Unless that is to come in the subsequent financial year, I thank you.

LT COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much for that clarification.  Here, I am not saying that immediately this Bill is passed we shall realise the saving. I am saying that this will be in the long run because we have already passed the budget.  But if at all this Bill is implemented, I am sure  perhaps next year the Ministry of Defence will ask for less money because we hope the expenses will reduce because there will be no more wars or there will be no more operations in the country.  That is what I am trying to say. I am not asking for the money right now but maybe next year.  If these rebels come out, I am sure the budget of the Ministry of Defence will become less and that money can be diverted for other purposes.  

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I do very much welcome the idea of the Amnesty Bill, and I have been listening very attentively to the chairman giving some comments.  I was all along waiting to hear his comment about what is itching me.  Mr. Speaker, the Amnesty Bill is the view of government on what the government wants to put in place in order to create a round table for our colleagues to come back. I would like something to come from the Committee, to tell us; how are you going to convince the other side?  Do you have enough information to know why the other side went into the bush?  Is this the only condition that they demand that once you say, 'I have excused you, come and we work together', that they will come out wholesale? Have you taken the trouble to know why they went to the bush so that while you are addressing the issue of how you are going to operate and while you are soliciting for the money,  you also consider why they went there or, you think that just by saying the government has said we have pardoned you, now you come back, you expect them to  come back wholesale? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Member, I think we have had this debate for the last two days and 25 Members contributed and one of the issues that was raised was this one and you also recall that this Bill is coming as a result of a report which was made by the Committee some two years ago, and it is the Committee that really recommended that this kind of law should be passed.  So,  unless he is going to repeat what was said two years ago, this matter was substantially dealt with yesterday.

MR. DICK NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The clarification I am seeking and which perhaps my Committee chairman can help me in is this: In answer to hon. Kweronda's query as to where money will be found, once government has committed itself to a Bill like this one becoming law, it is part of the commitment of government to look for that money.  Unless it is so, then we are doing an academic exercise. I am quite sure that we have appreciated in the House that having peace has among its dividends a saving on unnecessary expenditure which can then go into development.  I think that is where this money will come from. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that government is committed to seeking reconciliation and peace in our country, and that government will find the necessary money.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RUHEMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I think the context in which I was making my contribution has been forgotten. I said, if this law is passed tomorrow and it is assented to the following day, we have six months in which to put it into effect or to implement it and I said, the law is saying that the money to execute this very law is coming from the Consolidated Fund. Then, if you recall, I said we have passed a budget framework and I said that the ceilings are fixed.  Therefore, if this money is coming from the Consolidated Fund, we can only fidget with these ceilings in order to get money to implement the law. I also  said that those of you who are talking about huge packages for the returners, that that is not possible because of this budget framework but otherwise, the government is committed to this law once it is passed and it will look for money to implement it modestly.  Thank you.

LT COL. MUDOOLA:  I thank you very much for that information. As I was ending, I asked government to find ways and means of getting money to support this cause. Mr. Speaker, there are some questions like; how shall we prevent revenge among the people?  We have heard Members here saying that a lot of people who lost their property or children who lost their parents can never forget what happened and that as soon as these rebels come out of the bush, it is likely that there will be revenge.  Anyway, a Member has come up with some suggestions and at a later stage, I will table them to find out whether by putting some hindrance on that we shall prevent revenge.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Kirenga asked: at what point can amnesty be granted, is it when he comes out of the bush, when he hands in his or her gun, when he is registered?  The Committee is of the view that as soon as the reporter comes out of the bush and reports to any reporting point, he will enjoy benefits from this amnesty because, if we say that he will benefit after going to the Chief Administrators Office, in the course of moving there he could be arrested and be charged!  So, we say that as soon as  he reports to any of these given points, he benefits from the Amnesty Law.

Mr. Speaker, there was a Member who suggested that Army deserters, illegal holders of guns and people already convicted of treason should benefit from this amnesty.  The Committee is very, very hesitant to accept that because, if somebody is already convicted and he is already serving or waiting for a sentence, I do not think it will be proper for him to benefit from this amnesty.  There are other ways and regulations under which such people can benefit like through presidential pronouncements or presidential pardon.  

As for a deserter, unless he joined the rebels and started fighting against the government, then he will also benefit from this as a rebel but if a deserter left and settled somewhere, only disciplinary action can be taken against him as a deserter but not as a rebel. For the unlawful holders of guns, there are also laws governing people who are in possession of unlawful arms.  So, really, I do not think that this law should also cater for people of that nature -(Interruption).

MR. PATAKI AMASI: Mr. Speaker, I am feeling uncomfortable with some of these wordings of this Bill. The chairman explained that a detainee who responds to the law is not questioned about past crimes he committed while he was waging war against the government.  At the same time, the Bill says that he is pardoned and also reconciled. Now, if somebody reports and he is referring to this law, how do you pardon him without him confessing? He should admit his past mistakes - he should be asked to admit his past mistakes and then you pardon him!  You cannot pardon him without him saying anything, without him being questioned!  How do you reconcile - you reconcile somebody with another party, you reconcile two parties, you cannot reconcile him without, actually -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I think you clearly put your point yesterday and actually, you are just repeating what you said yesterday you know - how do you pardon somebody who has not asked for pardon? It is just a question of emphasising what you said yesterday, I do not think there is anything really new that requires a clarification.  I think your stand on the matter was clearly appreciated. 

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  To put more light on hon. Pataki's worry,  when you wage war or when you go to the bush to fight the government, you are committing a crime and you are supposed to be charged.  But government is coming up and saying, for that crime of fighting a legitimate government, I am forgiving you, whether you have asked for forgiveness or not.  I think it is coming as a father who can forgive his son even if he has not asked for forgiveness for his mistakes.  

I was going to the next point, Mr. Speaker. It was suggested that people suspected of treason who are being tried but have not yet been convicted should benefit from this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, I talked to the Attorney General and he said that this could be very difficult for administration in the courts because somebody charged for murder might come out and say, "look here, I did this in the course of insurgency, I am abandoning the insurgency, I am not going to be a rebel any more."  With this law, it would mean that he would be forgiven or would be released!  So really, this becomes very, very difficult for the judges.  

He only suggested that Members could consider saying that the DPP should qualify these cases and find out who exactly committed these atrocities because of insurgency or during the course of war. Otherwise, if we just left it open for anybody to declare and say: "you know, I am no longer a rebel", even other people who have committed other crimes will come out for the sake of coming out of prison or for the sake of not continuing with their  judgement. So, the suggestion is for us to go through the DPP, but what I do not know is whether Parliament can make a law asking the DPP to withdraw cases from court. That again calls for a legal interpretation to assist us.  

I conclude by thanking all the Members for their contribution, but also remind government that during the probe in the North, there were quite a number of recommendations made and I am requesting that the government studies those recommendations and tries to implement them so as to achieve lasting peace in our country.  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I request that if this Bill is passed, rebels take advantage of this amnesty and come out to join other Ugandans to develop our country. I am challenging all Members of Parliament and all leaders with this task that let us preach peace and reconciliation among our people. I think this will assist and build great confidence for the rebels to come out.  

At the same time, I will ask the government to be committed and be serious that whichever rebel comes out, he or she should not be victimised.  If at all you make a mistake of victimising one person or two people and word goes around, they will pack up and again go back to the bush because they will think their lives are in danger.  Mr. Speaker, many people say that forgive but do not forget  but I would ask that let us forgive and forget and start afresh on a new plate.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members.

THE  MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Rugumayo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of this august House.   Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate the Committee for a commendable work which has taken them many hours of patient discussion, debate and consultation and I feel very happy that we have reached this stage, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to add, Mr. Speaker, that we have consulted very closely with the Committee and all the amendments they proposed will have full support from my Ministry. 

I am reminded of the words from, I think, the preamble of one of the UN documents which runs like this: "All wars begin in the hearts of men and it is in the hearts of men that they end."  This Bill's objective when implemented is to bring to an end the brutal insurgency currently wreaking havoc and causing untold misery to innocent people in the affected areas of Northern and Western Uganda, and in Uganda in general. 

This suffering, Mr. Speaker, is felt in every home and corner of this country; it has no boundaries, it has impacted negatively on the lives of all our people.  People have died, property has been destroyed, the survivors have seen their once beautiful bodies maimed, children have their innocence shattered by witnessing death at close quarters or by actually participating in the macabre actions of  killing the innocent, they have been raped and physically abused so, it has been a brutal situation.  

In representing and articulating the expressed wishes and desires of a large cross-section of our society, Parliament is acting as a midwife that will bring forth harmony and love amongst our people. Parliament, by passing this Bill, will be identifying itself with the yearnings and aspirations of our people. Their call is: "Give peace a chance; turn our spear into plough shares and our guns into hoes, ox-ploughs and tractors. Give peace a chance."  

I thank the Committee for the dedication and commitment to their work. As I have said, they have consulted widely with major interested groups and individual stake holders. Groups like Kachoke Madit, Ugandans in various parts of the Diaspora and ordinary citizens here in all walks of life have all contributed in no small measure to the Bill which this august House has just debated and will soon pass. In fact, many of the amendments which will be presented embellish and enrich the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, although this Bill is brief, it has its meat close to its bones; it is easy to understand, simple to operationalise and has few, if any, ambiguities.  Ordinary rebels will be able to understand the contents of the Bill without much effort.  Herein lies its strength. Like most great things, it is simple yet deep, brief yet it is far reaching; it is focused, punchy, short and sweet.  What remains to be done, Mr. Speaker, is a distribution of tasks among the hon. Members of this House.  

Many hon. Members have emphasized the merit of sensitizing the public to the historic importance of the Amnesty Bill, and how it offers a rare chance in a decade to break the barrier from war to peace.  Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to enjoin hon. Members to show as much support, if not more, in sensitizing their constituents to the role they have to play in the realisation of lasting peace for which we all yearn in our beloved land. We want to speak with one voice and act in unity.  
The process of implementing the Bill will necessitate setting up a Commission as the Bill demands. Persons of the highest calibre, integrity, empathy and deep understanding and concern for the cause of peace will be needed. Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, discrete but not binding input from hon. Members will be most welcome. I end by stating the Government's sincere commitment to peace, to genuine reconciliation, to a future that is free of weapons of destruction.  

We urge the same commitment on the part of rebels and their supporters, we say to them: lay down your arms, embrace your neighbours, begin to love yourselves then you will not harm your neighbour. Uganda is for all us. "There is enough for everyone's needs and not everyone's greed" to quote Mahatma Ghandi. Where there is a will there is a way.  Let us pull together, build the nation, prepare ourselves for the new millennium compliant or else we might crash. 

Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, I have a vision, I see peace on the horizon, I see laughing and jumping children doing their UPE in peace and tranquillity.  I see adults visiting each other from one end of this country to another. I dream of people camping and hiking in the Rwenzori mountains or exploring the beauty and mysteries of the Muzizi forest, diving and boating on lakes Albert, Edward and George and river Semuliki. I see a new Uganda on the horizon, let this dream become a reality in our lifetime, not tomorrow or the day after but today, now.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members and the Committee for your historical support of the Amnesty Bill which will allow peace to flow like a river. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill be Read for the Second Time.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker -­(Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion that the Amnesty Bill, 1999 be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
              COMMITTEE STAGE              

THE AMNESTY BILL,1999.

Clause 1.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Chairman, the Title, but it is Clause 1.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This is the short Title, okay.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment to make to the short title and the original amendment was that it should read "Amnesty, Peace and Reconciliation, Bill, 1999" but Mr. Chairman, on consultation with the Chairman of the Committee and the hon. Minister, I have forgone the word "peace" and I have been advised that if it remains "The Amnesty, Reconciliation Bill,1999", it would be okay.  So, I beg to move that amendment, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No objection?

PROF. RUGUMAYO:  Mr. Chairman, I agree with the hon. Member that we consulted but on further consultations, I find that I have problems with the addition of "reconciliation".  Problems arise out of the fact that amnesty is one of the events, and you can legislate for it but it is difficult to legislate for reconciliation.  Reconciliation is an emotional, spiritual experience for which we do not legislate.  However, it is well covered in memorandum because this Bill provides a framework within which government can implement its policy of reconciliation.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I urge my Colleague, the hon. Member to be persuaded to withdraw this amendment.  I thank you.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Chairman, I am persuaded to withdraw - (Applause)

(Question on Clause (1) put and agreed to).

Clause 2.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In Clause (2), I would like to define amnesty and it will read as follows:  "Amnesty means pardon, forgiveness, exemption of discharge from criminal prosecution or any other form of punishment by the government or state."  I beg to move.  

Mr. Chairman, it is because it is necessary to provide a definition in the scope as it is because when we met, a lot of questions were asked as to what real amnesty is and what the purpose of the amnesty is and we thought with this definition, we shall come out with a clear scope within which the Bill will be applied.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So you have heard. The purpose of inserting the words is to define amnesty in the interpretation Clause.  Any contribution?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Thank you Sir.  I think I will probably agree with him if only he could help me to distinguish between  pardon and forgiveness.  

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I also seek some clarification on this new definition of amnesty in the sense that if somebody committed, say, a serious crime against an individual and he was witnessed, after this Amnesty Bill has been passed as an Act,  can that individual prosecute that person in any court of law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Oh, you mean a civil claim?  Your question is, if the Bill is passed, can the amnesty by government, by the President or by this Act, take away the rights of an individual accrued because of the act which you did to him?  I think that is the question.  Who is going to answer this?  Is it the Minister of Justice? It is a technical question.  Yes, hon. Okumu Ringa.  Let us list down these clarifications, then may be somebody will answer.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I support the spirit in which the amendment is being presented that we need to define the word amnesty so that it can be well interpreted by any person who will read the Act or who will implement the Act but there is confusion in the various words which have been used if the Chairman can explain pardon, forgiveness, exemption or discharge from criminal prosecution or any other form of punishment by the government or state.  

My concern here is with regard to what has already been stated before and I also stated it in my presentation.  There are some crimes which are too individual and yet the state will be involved to say we are pardoning such a person!  To what extent can this definition of amnesty cover that aspect so that individuals are also involved, not just the state?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I do not know, but this is - hon. Steven Kavuma, the Minister of  State for Defence.

MR. KAVUMA:  Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I was trying to catch your eye on another point Sir. I would request  that I catch your eye on another point of clarification on the same provision, Sir.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, a question has been put whether passing this law would deprive a private citizen of his or her right to sue and my answer, Sir, would be that it will not because these crimes covered here are really  against the state like treason and things like that, but not private wrongs committed against individuals.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, that is answered.

MR.  LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I think the amendment as advanced by the Committee chairman is very important.  It is the crux of the matter if we are seriously addressing the amnesty in its totality. The clarification I am seeking is; how do you categorise Ugandans who are commissioned as mercenaries to fight for countries which are not friendly with Uganda?  Supposing you put in place this amnesty law, how do they return to Uganda?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think this law as it is  very clear.  It is dealing with those fighting against Uganda in Uganda.  If other people go to a country X and fight there, that particular country must have laws dealing with those people fighting it.  So, really, it has nothing to do with people fighting against a government of another country because we cannot legislate for another country.  So, we are only concerned with bringing peace here by bringing back those who have been fighting. So, once we pass this law, they come here and they will be punished and they settle so that we do not continue fighting each other.  I think this is really clear.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Let me be a little bit clearer.  These are Ugandans, they are fighting outside Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  They cannot return here because they are known to be fighting in connivance with countries with which we have bad relations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, let us take an example here.  If somebody goes to the United States and commits theft or robbery and we decide in this country that for this occasion, let us pardon everybody who has been committing robbery here.  You think this exercise here will exonerate a person who has committed robbery in Chicago?   So, it is very definite and very clear.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think the question raised by hon. Bakkabulindi is very important with regard to civil cases against those who have committed atrocities.  I believe it is in the spirit of reconciliation that - although we have not yet reached Clause 9, section 9 in concerned with the functions of the Commission.  Subsection (c) of clause 9 was actually put in later as a result of recommendations that this area is actually covered by the Commission.  I think it should be made very clear that the people will be persuaded by the Commission to reconcile and forgive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well, I think that could be so, but here, the question is; by this Act, can you deprive - can I deprive you by this Act the rights that accrue to you as an individual?   This is a Government matter, the Government is not going to prosecute you, it is not going to do anything but certainly a person who was injured by you may, if he wishes, take action against you. He may be persuaded not to take it, that is a different matter but for us, by this rule, to take away the rights of another person is the issue. Maybe the Attorney General can assist us here.  The question, the learned Attorney General, is that; suppose we pass this law, will it deprive the person, an individual who has a claim against a person who has been covered by this law to take civil action against him?

MR. KATUREEBE:  The answer is no, Mr. Speaker.  The civil actions were not amnestied.  What is being amnestied are crimes that have been committed by the individuals.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, I think the crime is cleared.  

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On that definition, I do not know whether the word "Government" there is useful really.  It is should be only the State to punish someone and not the Government.  Why should we leave the word Government there?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairman, they are asking you why do you not just leave "State"?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I think here the idea of the Members was that "State" could be other organs other than the actual Government.  For instance, you could have bodies like the CID and things like that, but we thought that we could put the State and Government so that other bodies which are part of the Government can also rescue this person. 

MR. OKELLO OKELLO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to suggest that the word "Government" be withdrawn because Government is not a legal entity really.  It cannot punish anybody, it cannot be sued, it cannot sue.  So, it is the State.  I think everything is being done in the name of the State.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Does it make a difference when you leave "State"?

MR. RUGUMAYO:  Mr. Speaker, I accept the amendment.

MR. KAVUMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the hon. Chairman.  I find the definition as read a little hanging.  Do you see any harm in directly relating the definition of persons whose cases are being handled under this Act, because there are other people who may be tried in other circumstances, but when you leave it as it is now, I think there is a little bit we could add for purposes of being clear as to what persons we mean can benefit from the amnesty as defined.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you help him because - the idea is okay but could you help him?

MR. KAVUMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will propose a very rough one which can be refined.  Maybe you could add at the end where the definition now stops something like: "...to a person whose case or a person dealt with under the provisions of this Act", something to that effect.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, he is saying it should be related to a person covered under this Bill.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Okay, I am not objecting but maybe we could say, "for the purpose of this Act" at the end. I mean, instead of saying "persons", I would say "for the purpose of this Act".

MR. KAVUMA:  Well, but still, I think when you define, you want to be precise and clear to every user of the legislation.  I think it does no harm if you could accept, because we are really dealing with persons in this Act and you would want to come out clearly.  We are defining Amnesty as it relates to persons whose cases are being handled under this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So can we say that the idea has been appreciated, then the technical people will definitely decide on this.  I now put the question to this particular amendment.  

LT.COL. MUDOOLA:  Again on the definition  of a reporter, we would have loved to change  the definition of a reporter a little bit to read as follows: "A reporter means a person seeking to benefit from amnesty granted under this Act." The justification is that, when this Bill is enacted into Law, amnesty will not be granted.  So it is up to the individuals concerned to decide whether or not to benefit from it.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But what is the difference with what is in the Bill on page 4?  What is the difference?  I thought in the Bill it says "a reporter means a person seeking to be granted amnesty under this Act."  Is it not the same thing?

LT.COL.MUDOOLA:  If we say "seeking", it will look as if it is you who really wants to have it, that it is not yet granted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see, the Act gives amnesty but some people may not want to take benefit of it.  So a reporter is a person who has decided that there is that law which pardons me, so let me go.  And that is what this says.

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, in the Committee, the word "benefit" was deliberately put in to substitute "granting" or "granted"  because the matter for debate was, do you report and then somebody grants you amnesty or is this amnesty granted by Parliament and the reporter merely benefits from it?  That is why we thought we should not take the granting to the reporting level.  Parliament will grant this amnesty, then when you report, you are only seeking benefit, not seeking a grant of the amnesty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to this amendment.

( Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended agreed to.

Clause 3.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, I have something to say about that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I thought it was on this issue of -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  - the reporter. I have some point to make on that reporter for the benefit of the people I represent, many of whom will be benefiting from the amnesty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You mean in the definition or on some other -

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  On the definition, Mr. Chairman.
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What is it?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to be guided because the word "reporter" is very important in as far as this Bill is concerned.  I have got in mind that once we pass this law, the likes of people who have been serving sentences in Luzira and those who are out on bail will all of a sudden be applying to become reporters.  And you can guide me whether what I am seeking in terms of clarification will come later or at this stage?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think it will come later if they decide to include such persons.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  From the explanation  given by hon. Owiny Dollo, we thought that instead of saying "declaration of amnesty", we should say "granting of amnesty."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  You see the policy behind.  I now put the question to the amendment.

(question put and agreed to)

LT.COL.MUDOOLA:  Clause 3: We would like to replace Clause 3(1) to read as follows: "Amnesty is hereby granted to any Ugandan who has ever engaged or is engaging in armed rebellion against the Government of the Republic of Uganda, either by actual participation in combat or collaboration with the perpetrators of the war or armed rebellion, committing any other crime in the furtherance of the war or armed rebellion, assisting or aiding the conduct or prosecution of war or armed rebellion."  

Mr. Chairman, I think that also applies to (2). I could also read it because the justification includes (2).   (2) says: "A person referred to under sub clause (1) shall not be prosecuted or subjected to any form of punishment for the participation in the war or for any crime committed in the course of the war or the armed rebellion."  

Mr. Chairman, amnesty should be extended to those who have been engaged in armed rebellion even though they have ceased to fight.  This is because they are liable to prosecution and it is imperative that they also get pardon from this Bill like their counterparts still carrying on armed rebellion.  

Mr. Chairman, here there was fear that if we do not include those who had fought before, they could be taken to court.  This law is just forgiving those who are engaging in the war now.  So we thought that those people who have given up rebellion should also be included in this Bill.  Also, Mr. Chairman, reporters may be exempted from persecution but be subjected to some form of punishment like torture or intimidation.  The intention of Clause 3(2) above therefore, is to avoid such occurrence.  I beg to move Mr. Chairman.

MISS KADAGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am in some difficult about that amendment.  When you say anyone who has ever engaged in rebellious activities, you are stretching the line back, and people who have already been convicted will be tempted to request for amnesty based on that definition.  So, I have some difficult with it, Mr. Chairman.  I would appeal to the chairperson to abandon that amendment.  Thank you Sir.

MR. RUHEMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I also have some difficulty with this amendment.  In the original Clause read, it said that an amnesty is declared for all Ugandans waging war against the Government. "Declared!" In this amendment, the proposal is that an amnesty is "granted", whether you come forth to take it or not.  I find some problem with that.  When it is declared, it becomes effective when this reporter comes and takes advantage of it.  When it is granted, whether he comes to report or not, you do not pursue him. That is the way I understand it.  I need to be clarified, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I am finding a lot of difficulty in appreciating the amendment proposed by the chairperson.  The amendment opens up many, many wounds.  Here you will find thieves  who have committed crimes on some individuals will hide under this provision.  It is so open, Mr. Chairman, that I would rather, for the sake of creating reconciliation, we maintain the existing draft because the existing draft will refer specifically to those individuals who have waged wars against the State.  

Over the last many years, maybe, ten to thirteen years, there are individuals who have committed crimes and they have hidden behind fighting the government.  I do not know how you are going to distinguish these! So really, the proposed amendment by the chairperson is too wide and it will open a lot of wounds. I oppose it.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, after defining amnesty as pardon, forgiveness, exemption or discharge from criminal prosecution, can I assume that all those convicted, all those on bail, and suspects should be beneficiaries of this law?  I need a clarification from the Attorney General, why those convicted on the same level will not benefit.

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, people who have been convicted have had their cases already processed by the due process of the law. They are not out there in rebellion.  The purpose of this law is to bring people who are still in rebellion here and reconcile them, not to cater for people whose cases have already been dealt with by the due process of the law. 

My difficult with the whole amendment proposed by the chairman,  is that it is not even consistent with the amendment we just passed in the definition of "reporter" because there we define the reporter as someone seeking to benefit from the amnesty.  Now, if he is seeking to benefit from the amnesty, then the language should be consistent with what is here that you declare the amnesty,  it is available, then someone does certain things to benefit from it.  If you say hereby he is granted, then that will be inconsistent with the idea of seeking to benefit. I suggest to the chairman - subject to what the Minister will say of course, but I would suggest that we retain the language that is contained in this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And you see, the problem here, when you talk about government in the way you are talking about it, there has never been any time when we did not have a government here.  So are you stretching this Bill to maybe sometime ten years back or to  somebody who might have been fighting the government 15 years back? Is it the intention to resurrect even those people you say are still being hunted and, therefore, should be covered?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, I think you are referring to this word 'ever': "ever engaged in a struggle."  Here, Mr. Chairman, I think the Committee envisaged that there are people who actually have not yet reported to government.  They have given up fighting but in the past they were fighting this government.  So really, they should also benefit and report though they are now not actually fighting.  This was the actual idea behind this. That maybe there are people who are seated somewhere in the village, they have given up fighting but they are not yet recognized as people who are no longer fighting the government.  So that is really the idea behind this 'ever engaged in'  because, really we are making this law for this government, you cannot excuse somebody who was fighting, let us say the NRA, when they were in the bush. You cannot say now this law will apply to them!

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Mr. Chairman, I am seeking this clarification from the hon. Attorney General.  Now, if we are to use the word 'declare' Mr. Chairman, I would like to know at what stage amnesty will be granted and by whom, if this Parliament does not grant it? Who will grant it and at what stage?       

MR. KATUREEBE: Mr. Chairman, what I said was; first, we have already passed a definition of reporter and defined him as someone seeking to benefit.  Now when you seek to benefit, you seek from something that has been declared.  If it had been granted and took effect from the day the law came into force, then there is no need to come and seek.  So, if we want to be consistent with what we have passed, then we maintain that parliament is making something available.  Then someone does certain things to benefit from it. In other words, that is how the idea of a reporter comes in.  You will report to places that have been declared in the law and you take benefit, you gain benefit of the declared amnesty.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I am not a lawyer but I know that in law, no one is assumed to be guilty until one has been proved to have committed an offence.  I would like the Attorney General to be specific on this challenge I have made namely that people who are on bail, you have not proved that they are guilty in a court of law and people who are suspects, they are merely suspects, they could be declared innocent in a court of law.  I would like you to categorise those in regard to reporters. Should they be seen as bona-fide reporters or people who can be granted amnesty?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, the first position, of course, was people who have been convicted.  There is an amendment which I have seen being proposed by an hon. Member, I believe, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, when we get to that bridge, then we will cross it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So this has become a tricky type of amendment?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, what we had in mind when we agreed on this amendment was that there are a number of people who, because of the crimes they committed, cannot stay in the bush and are actually hiding quietly and they feel they cannot enjoy their full rights as citizens. So this is why we put in the phrase:  "those who have ever engaged" but when I come to think of it now, the "ever" can be deleted and we leave: "engaged or engaging in armed rebellion against the Government of Uganda",  meaning of course, the Movement Government. That way, we do not twist back to eternity and secondly, we do not include those who already have cases in court or have been convicted.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Chairman, regarding declaration and granting, I think now I am confused by the legal nicety. When you grant, it means way is given. Declaration; once you declare, someone has to make a process to do something to be granted the benefits of a declaration -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it is like this. For instance, if somebody has been admitted in an institution, the admission is completed by the person admitted reporting to the institution.  Now, the idea here is that, amnesty is granted, but for it to be effective, you must come out and report so that they know you have accepted the amnesty.  

PROF. RUGUMAYO: - otherwise, somebody may say, I grant you amnesty and you say, why?  Why do you grant me amnesty?  For me I do not accept it.  So, that is why it is necessary for you, to benefit from the amnesty granted here, to report.  Otherwise, we would say, this day we pass the law, everybody who is in the bush has been granted amnesty even if they continue to fight!  So, it is necessary, I think, to report.  It is completed by reporting.
  
MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Chairman, I seek further clarification on that matter.  Mr. Chairman, there could be some rebels living, for example, in Khartoum where at the moment because of our relationship with the Sudan, they cannot be arrested but if they could go, say to London where because of our friendliness they could be arrested.  Now, if after this someone decides that he or she does not want to come and report here in Uganda, he would like to go and live in America, in Japan, what will be the position?  Will he have to come and report here first and then go?  Or are we going to include our missions abroad among the reporting centres?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think we shall come to that. Where does a person report is another detail but at the moment, we are still with the idea of what do you do?  Whether you report in the London High Commission or wherever, that will come.  At the moment I think we have to satisfy ourselves with  who are covered because the policy in the amendment is different from the policy in the Bill itself.  I think we are just trying to find out which is which.

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to request the Chairperson of the Committee and my Colleague that having shared the experience of hon. Omeda yesterday that you want reintegration in a community where the community must actually be asked pardon so that you are free, how do we take that knowledge and wisdom from him in the law?   The reporters whom we grant amnesty, can they not organise to meet the population?

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think I would like to ask the Minister and the Chairman to be convinced that there is a difference between declaration and granting, and what we are talking about and what is consistent is for us to declare and somebody comes and takes advantage of this declaration.  

Yesterday, you heard from hon. Omeda that his amnesty was completed after he had gone around to say, "I am sorry, I did this thing to the people.  I committed atrocities against you, so please, forgive me". And dwelling on my past experiences during the first amnesty, we went to the reporting centres in Gulu and in all those reporting centres, there were groups of elders who comforted the returners and who later on -(Interruption)

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman, I am getting a little bit confused.  Are we on Part II, on the heading, or are we on the amendment on Clause (3)?  Members are debating what we have already passed, while I am on Clause (3).  So, I do not know where we are  exactly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I agree but you see, what we really passed by putting in "granting" is just a heading; the most important thing is the body.  So, you can say we amended it by removing declaration and replacing it with granting, but at the end of it, if the body remains, actually what we are doing is declaring.  So, I think we are now dealing with the substance rather than the head.  But my feeling is that Members need more time to think about these amendments.  

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Chairman, I beg that the House do resume and the Committee reports thereto.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Rugumayo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to report that the Committee has considered Clauses (1) and (2) of the Bill and passed the two clauses with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Rugumayo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee be adopted by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think now is a convenient time to adjourn. Members may also consider the amendments they want to put in this Bill and all those which have been tabled.  So, I adjourn the House until Tuesday, at 2.30 p.m.

(The House  rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7th December, 1999, at 2.30 p.m.)
