Thursday, 4 December 2003

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in the Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker –(Interruption) (Hon. Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why are you standing? What is the problem? I do not have to make a communication everyday.

MR SABIITI: There is something of great importance I want to communicate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the rules are very clear, if you have a matter of urgency you notify me in advance of the sitting. I said that even yesterday. Proceed, Minister of Defence.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: With great happiness I beg to move that the bill titled, “The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Bill, 2003”, be read for the First Time. I beg to move. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. I now commit it to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Let me also say that I am finally happy to see it here. Thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: I seek clarification on the point of the First Reading of the UPDF Bill. Madam Speaker, I am a little bit worried in a situation where over 28 senior officers of the UPDF have been summarily fired –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, a statement was made yesterday on that matter. It was fully explained. What more do you want to say? You were not here in time. A statement was made here yesterday on that matter, and we said there would be not debate on it because it involves matters that would go to other tribunals, which we cannot comment on.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am worried about the time frame for this Bill. The time it has taken Government to bring it out could be equated to the time we will wait for the same.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the House and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi that we have been requesting for this bill. Last week when we debated the statement on defence, the Minister promised to table this bill this week and I would like to congratulate him for living up to his promises. (Applause).

MR JACK SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I also congratulate the hon. Minister of Defence for having, at last, brought this bill before Parliament. However, I thought that procedurally when a bill of this nature is being tabled, its financial implications should also be tabled so that both are discussed by the committee. May I be guided by you?  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the procedure of submitting the certificate of financial implications is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submits this directly to Parliament. I happen to have a copy here with me, which I can lay on the Table, but I know that it had been submitted to Parliament. That is why I did not mention it. 

MR SIMON MAYENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to confirm to the House that actually the certificate of financial implications has already been submitted to Parliament and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has a copy confirming that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also confirming that I have in my possession the said certificate and it is now the property of Parliament.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable Minister for living by his word this time. He said in the House yesterday that the bill was in print. 

However, the issue I stand to seek clarification about is basically communication. How does Parliament communicate with the Executive, and when the Executive communicates with Parliament who should receive the communication first?

I am surprised that the Minister is saying communication came to Parliament and it seems the Speaker’s Office is not aware of it, although the chairperson of the committee is saying he received his copy. How is the communication done and to whom is it done? We do not want to run matters of this country and legislation in a haphazard manner. That is the clarification I want to seek.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are talking about general communication, the Office of the Speaker receives them. However, as far as these bills are concerned, when the Minister reads the bill for the first time, he is supposed also to say that it is accompanied by a certificate of compliance. (Applause). That is what he is supposed to do. That is how we do it.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 26 OF 2003 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

2.57
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I am holding brief from my colleague the Member of Parliament for Buikwe South, hon. Anthony Mukasa.

“Could the Minister explain why the Immigration Department has failed to control the entry of aliens to the extent that many of them have settled in the country illegally?”

2.58
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, honourable members, as we have heard, hon. Mukasa Anthony, Member of Parliament of Buikwe South, has stated in his question that the Immigration Department has failed to control the entry of aliens to the extent that many of them have settled in the country illegally. The honourable member wants an explanation. 

It is not true that the Immigration Department has failed to control the entry of aliens. On the contrary, the department has always done a good job to the extent that it has sometimes been accused of frustrating investors. 

Uganda plays host to many categories of aliens. The first category, Madam Speaker, is that of investors. It is government policy to attract foreign direct investment to help us attain the rapid industrialization we desperately need to create jobs for our increasing population. 

In response to the investment drive, aliens come to the country in search of investment opportunities. Those who eventually invest in the country sometimes also live here. Others bring in foreign technical personnel in areas where we do not have suitable qualified Ugandans. 

Uganda Investment Authority always recommends the investors and foreign technical personnel. They are issued with entry and work permits for a fixed duration. It is, therefore, possible that some of the aliens hon. Mukasa sees around are investors and specialized technical personnel who are here in response to our investment drive. 

Madam Speaker, the second category of aliens that we have here is that of registered Ugandans. Chapter 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for citizenship by birth, by registration, by naturalization, and for foundlings and adopted children. It is possible that some of the people thought to be aliens are actually citizens of Uganda, falling under these categories.  

The third category is that of the tourists. Madam Speaker, Uganda is endowed with many tourist attractions and historical sites; they are many. These attract many tourists from all over the world. 

I would not be surprised if honourable members have seen some of these tourists and sometimes taken them to be the unrequired aliens. We need them to come here and boost our economy. The amount of foreign currency we received from tourism-related activities last year was announced by our colleague the Minister of Finance during his Budget Speech. 

We do not want to lose this revenue by keeping foreigners away from our country. On the contrary, we would like to see a significant increase among the number of tourists visiting our country.

The fourth category is that of the refugees. Uganda has been fairly peaceful but countries that have been in conflict surround us. We have played and continue to play host to refugees from Sudan, Congo, Rwanda, Somalia et cetera. It would be a crime against mankind if we turned away these people when their lives are in danger. 

Working with the Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Refugee Eligibility Committee, refugees are hosted in refugee camps. They are not allowed to illegally settle in the country. 

The final category is that of the foreign students. Despite the troubles we have gone through, Ugandan’s education system continues to be of high quality. We, therefore, receive many aliens who come here for education. They bring in some foreign exchange as they come for education at all levels. This is a development that we encourage. It will also boost our regional integration efforts.  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to stress the fact that the Immigration Department has not failed to control the entry of aliens. 

All those who come to Uganda legally are processed, documented and issued with appropriate identification documents such as entry and work permits, visitors’ passes, refugee identification papers, tourist visas, students passes et cetera. No alien is allowed to settle in the country illegally.

Given the nature of our boundaries, the warm hospitality of our people and the “it does not concern me” attitude of some people, it is possible that a few manage to cross into our country undetected through non-gazetted crossing points; that is possible. Whenever these are detected they are arrested, prosecuted, made to serve their sentences if convicted, and then deported thereafter. 

I, therefore, wish to call upon all of us to always report those suspected to be illegally staying in the country. Such reports will be thoroughly investigated. Those found to be violating the laws of this country will be dealt with according to the law. Given the current security situation all over the world, there is no room for complacence. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I have a few supplementary questions. One, is the Minister aware that his Department of Immigration is actually grossly under-staffed and that could be contributing to possible inadequacies in enforcement of the law?  

Two, would the Minister say that an alien of Caucasian origin found selling Bukedde newspaper in a rural area would qualify as an investor?

Three, is it true that this country is short of bulldozer drivers to the extent that some investors are allowed to import drivers of heavy machinery from neighbouring countries?

Four, would the Minister allay the fears about possible unauthorized persons working for Tri-Star, especially in the face of the fact that some of the people managing Tri-Star have a record of human trafficking?

Five, Madam Speaker, if refugees are supposed to be in gazetted refugee settlements, could the Minister explain why refugees had actually flooded hon. Lukyamuzi’s constituency? 

Also, some refugees harassed the female Member of Parliament representing workers. She was actually attacked by refugees who were armed. I thank you.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also have a few clarifications. 

In the Minister’s statement he has categorized the aliens into five groups. This is of great concern to all Ugandans, given the fact that there is no good policy for investors. I say there is no good and genuine policy for investors because we have seen several people who come in the name of investment, but when they reach here they are just hawkers but not investors. 

Someone could come here pretending to be an investor and then he ends up in our big markets, Nakasero, Owino to mention but a few. 

If you take a look and closely monitor Johnson, Nabugabo and William Streets, those are the three busy streets dealing in shoes. At one time I happened to find out that most of these shops are owned by either Chinese or Koreans, selling shoes! You enter a shop and there is no indigenous Ugandan. Even getting someone to interpret prices for you is a hurdle.    

We know that we are facing a problem of unemployment in our country. But how can our government allow in those people who are pretending to be investors? When they come here, why do they come with all the manpower to an extent that some of our local people who would have been employed by these investors are not? The benefits, which would have come along with them, are taken away by the same investors. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that if there is a genuine policy and that if someone is coming here to invest, at least there must be some negotiations that could allow Ugandans to also be employed by these so-called investors, those who are genuine. But finding a shop with seven Chinese, seven Koreans on Johnson Street and Nabugabo Road, dealing in shoes and you do not find any Ugandan, is a shame. We cannot call those investors.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to commend the one who asked the question, and I thank the honourable Minister for his answer. This question poses many challenges to us. 

First of all, I would like to agree with the Minister that the policies and laws in place are quite adequate to address the problem.  

However, and maybe I need to hasten to add, the proposed merger of URA, the Export Promotions Board and the Tourist Board is delaying the bringing to Parliament of new measures, some of which are to address this problem. I think the earlier that matter is addressed the better. 

There are issues, which crop up. Take an example of the issue of security bonds, which are paid. Every investor coming to this country is supposed to pay an equivalent of a return ticket to ensure that in the event of any summary deportation, there is ready money for that person to go back where he or she came from. 

The question of security bonds is quite sensitive. It has been argued that, should real investors deposit money equivalent of a return ticket? Should it be only for the employees of that investor? That may need to be looked at a bit more critically.

Another thing is, yes, as much as we agree, the current laws are inadequate. An investor comes, goes to the Uganda Investment Authority and says, “I want to be an investor”. The law requires that that person to demonstrate that he or she has capacity to invest in the country at least US $100,000. 

What happens normally is that the money is actually deposited. The next day, that money is withdrawn from the account and finds itself on another person’s account, who also becomes eligible for an entry permit, and the money rotates.

I know that in the reviewed measures there is need to insist on demonstrating ability not only in terms of cash coming in but also what one can actually bring in terms of tangible materials. 

Then you also have a problem of the nature of business. I am not, certainly, condoning the issue of Asians selling newspapers on the streets, but you also have peculiar jobs. 

Take an example of the lady who invested in Fang Fang Restaurant. She is supposed to cook oriental food, Chinese food. So, are you going to say that we are going to employ a Muganda or Munyankore to cook Chinese food? This is a challenge. And when you go there you may not actually enjoy the food. 

So, the investment challenge is, should you insist that the person coming to invest in a restaurant to sell Chinese food uses Ugandan personnel to cook that food? Those are challenges.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ruhindi, you know that supplementaries are really supposed to be brief and precise. But now members are using the opportunity to contribute. Please ask supplementaries.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I was supplementing the Minister’s submission. (Laughter). Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to compliment hon. Wagonda Muguli for having expressed sympathy over what is happening in my constituency in regard to the Sudanese phenomenon. 

The first question I am putting before the Minister is, would the Minister explain to us why a good number of Sudanese refugees are concentrated in Lubaga South constituency? Is that not an indication that there could be a hidden agenda to unseat me in the year 2006?  

Madam Speaker, is the Minister also aware that a good number of Sudanese refugees who come here are not refugees? Many of them in Lubaga South –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this country has laws. One of the laws that we have in this country is the electoral law. I do not know whether this law permits refugees to exercise their rights of voting. If it does not, I do not know how hon. Lukyamuzi gets worried that the refugees would get to unseat him from his constituency. Can he clarify what he exactly means?

MR LUKYAMUZI: First of all, they have got money and they can sponsor candidates. They may not be differentiated from ordinary Ugandans and they can vote.  

Madam Speaker, this is a touching question. Is the Minister aware that a good number of Sudanese who come here are not refugees? Many of them are concentrated in Lubaga. They move at large with vehicles bearing number plates, “New Sudan”.  

As I speak now, to qualify what I am talking, five Sudanese are in the High Court before Justice Katusi. They are accused of crimes like rape, murder, violence and so many such catastrophic crimes. If the Minister is aware, what arrangements is he making to ensure that Lubaga South is freed from that quagmire?  

Lastly on the Sudanese factor, is the Minister aware that as we speak now, the Members of Parliament in Kampala city are unhappy? There is a report that was made on the Sudanese refugees in Kampala. We asked the former Minister of Internal Affairs for permission to discuss it publicly, up to now the ministry has refused us access to discuss such a report. What are the indicators of arrangements of that kind?

Finally, in accordance with the Third Schedule of the Constitution of Uganda, the Banyarwanda are No.20. How is the Immigration Department able to identify the Banyarwanda concentrated here from the Banyarwanda coming from outside but seeking refuge in Uganda? I need an explanation in very serious terms Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry to keep interrupting, but when you ask six supplementary questions other members of the House will not have the opportunity to ask.  Can you ask one supplementary question so that other people can have a chance?

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mine I think is guidance, since I come from a constituency that borders Tanzania. 

I know for sure that Uganda has been very hospitable to a number of people. Whoever comes in, we accept and later we start finding out who they are. For us we have found it extremely difficult to cross to Tanzania without a passport, but the Tanzanians cross easily to Uganda and do all sorts of business, even stay here for good. 

This is East Africa; we are not talking of people from outside the region. How should we handle the situation where it is really a must to have a passport in order to cross over to Tanzania and then for them they come in freely? 

Several times our cows have been taken because our people have strayed to the other place. I would want to get guidance so that we see how to handle the situation on the border. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My questions are going to be very brief.  Does the Minister know how many aliens are actually employed in Uganda? I am asking that question deliberately because he may not know.

Secondly, is the Minister aware that the AGOA company, Tri-Star, has 58 expatriates and the majority of them cannot even speak English? If they cannot speak English, how can they work with the Ugandans?

Is the Minister also aware that it is becoming fashionable for companies in Uganda to employ Kenyans and South Africans in middle management positions, which can easily be occupied by Ugandans? Considering that there is unemployment among graduates, is it right that the Minister should allow this to continue?  

Is the Minister aware that it is difficult even to get a job in Kenya? It is very difficult because they have systems of ensuring that foreigners have got to be really screened before they can be given employment.

Lastly, what are the procedures for aliens to access Ugandan passports? I think this is one area where there is a lot of abuse. Is the Minister aware that the Asian owned companies are bringing in Asians here with no qualifications to do jobs, which are manual jobs, which could be done by Ugandans? Thank you.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like as a preamble to thank the honourable Minister for responding to this very important question. The fact that he also in the last few days went upcountry –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hold on a bit. Honourable members I am sorry, the children are leaving but I have just been informed that they are from Sagazi Primary School in Lugazi. I do not know in whose constituency. You are welcome.

MR WADRI: I would like to thank the honourable Minister once again especially for the trips he made upcountry to assess for himself the state of affairs that affects his ministry as per these questions. 

I have the following questions to ask him. Mr Minister, when you went upcountry, especially to West Nile region, were you aware that troops of a sovereign state cross the border into Uganda with their military hardware, dressed in army uniforms and carrying AK-47s and other equipment? When these people are here and they commit crimes, how can Ugandans trace them to their own country?  

Mr Minister, I ask this question because I am one of those who have given shelter to a number of SPLA and Sudanese refugees in this country. Are you aware that refugees have continued to come into this country in contravention of the Geneva Convention, and they come with their arms and terrorize our innocent people? 

How best do we handle such kind of matters especially when they also have somebody behind them whom we treat with kids gloves? Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for his answer.  However, I want to find out whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs has a mechanism of tracking aliens who come into the country. So that at any one time if an alien came in for two months and over stays, he can be apprehended and deported. Do they have that mechanism?  

I am asking this because at one time, a high profile Interahamwe was arrested in Kiangwali in Hoima District. He came in and disguised himself, and there could be many others. When he was arrested, I am told he was put on a plane chartered to Arusha. And here we are in Bunyoro sleeping with this type of character and Ministry Internal Affairs is here!  

Can the Minister tell me whether that mechanism is there and what plans they have to set it up?

MRS RUTH KAVUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister included students amongst those who actually bring in foreign exchange. I do not know whether the Minister has made some investigations to find out whether this is true. 

Most of these foreign students who come in actually use up our money. They use up our space, especially public universities. There is no way you can tell whether they are Ugandans or not, so they just qualify for government sponsorship in our universities and other tertiary institutions. 

Most of them do not bring in a single coin. I have seen this, because we have caught a few who have applied for the female scholarship initiative sponsorship. They have all the documents saying they are Ugandans but somehow we managed to find out that they were not, and they did not qualify for that programme.  

So, you can imagine how many get in and take over the place. Actually, these students start off with UPE and they get access to very good secondary schools, leaving out our students. I do not know whether the honourable Minister knows how we can deal with this situation.  

At least I know I dealt with many and I tried to make them pay different amounts of money, but I do not know how many people can do that. Thank you honourable Minister.

MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for his answer.  I have three issues to raise. 

One, I want the Minister to explain this word “aliens”. I come from a border district, Kasese District. My people live on the other side of the border and I live on this side of the border.  

Madam Speaker, we have got farms and gardens across in Congo. And of course some polygamous families have got homes across and other homes on this side of the border. Does this word “alien” apply to members of the same family living on both sides of the border? I want the Minister to explain.  

Madam Speaker, this question borders on the question asked by hon. Lukyamuzi. These people called the Bakonzo are in the Constitution of Uganda and on the other side they are Bakonjo. So, are they aliens, Sir?

Another issue is that, this investment policy has stretched too far. One of the reasons the Cancun World Trade Organization (WTO) Meeting collapsed was because the so-called tiger economies are protecting their economies too much. So, we in the third world countries cannot even penetrate. 

These same people who caused the Cancun WTO meeting to collapse, however, just find themselves here doing all sorts of jobs. We get problems when the Minister comes here and says these are investors yet for us we cannot access their so-called tiger economies. 

Honourable Minister, we could maybe help you to describe an investor. An investor must bring capital, expertise, market, and of course we expect the Government to give some protection so that our people can access employment. But these investors of yours are bringing sweepers and toilet cleaners.  For God’s sake – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are contributing.

MR MBALIBULHA: I am going to ask a question. There was a Member of Parliament who was arrested by the SPLA in Aringa County in Yumbe. Really, if you cannot protect MPs from these aliens, or refugees, I do not know what they are. I want the Minister to clarify on those issues.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a complaint that some people had actually got visas to come to Uganda but their family members happened to be arrested here. These are my neighbours and they are from Ethiopia. 

As you remember, some time back there were two bomb blasts in Kabalagala. One of the bombs was at Telex Bar and the other at Family Restaurant, which happens to be owned by Ethiopians who are my neighbours. When the bomb went off, the security men came and arrested the people who were there, including the son of my neighbour who was a student.  

He entered the country legally and had his passport and everything. He was arrested by CID people and interrogated. Before investigations were concluded, this young man was deported.  

His family complained to Government, Government apologised for that incident but now this young man cannot travel anywhere else in the world because he was deported from here. The family requested the Government to at least cancel that deportation, which has never been done.  

They came to me because I happen to be a legislator here and they think I can assist. I asked the former Minister of Internal Affairs – they used their lawyers to write – but the Minister responded by saying that they cannot cancel that deportation order.  

I am now wondering how we can continue with the African Union when we have such. Eventually the people who were planting bombs were arrested, evidence was found and some were killed. That is why Government even apologised to these people. But their son is still suffering because of that deportation order.

MRS JULIET KAFIRE RAINER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the honourable Minister regarding the identification cards for Ugandans. Since Kenya and Tanzania have their national identity cards, why has Uganda failed to give identity cards to Ugandans? (Applause)  

Secondly, I am made to understand that we are keeping off that exercise because we want the aliens to be free around.

Thirdly, we get involved in the elections and they also share our national cake equally. So, my plea to the Internal Affairs Minister is, make sure, probably in your budget for the next year, that you provide money for the identity cards.

Lastly, we got machines for photographing every citizen in this country, what has happened to those machines? I understand even the exercise collapsed.  Can you give an explanation to the House as to why those machines are not functioning? Thank you very much.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you Madam Speaker for according me a chance to ask the Minister an issue of immigration. 

I would like the Minister to clarify to this House whether the foreigners are treating Ugandans in a reciprocal manner. Ugandans applying to immigrate say to a Commonwealth country like Britain, are the problems they go through equal to the problems Europeans get to enter Uganda? 

I would like him to clarify whether we are being treated equitably, or whether we pay the same to go out as the other people are paying to come in? (Interruption) 

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you my brother for giving way. Madam Speaker, I was wondering how I would bring this out. My colleague has touched a very important point about our brothers who try to get visas and mainly visas for Great Britain.  

Madam Speaker, this is a public outcry right now.  The visas for Great Britain have been privatised.  One company called Visa Handling has been floated to handle all visa applications in Uganda, and Ugandans are asked to pay Shs 30,000 each for these visas on top of the Shs 130,000. 

If this company is working on behalf of the British High Commission, why can’t this High Commission pay this very company to handle visa services? Why should a Ugandan be exploited to pay an extra Shs 30,000?  

Madam Speaker, another thing is, for British Embassy when you do not get a visa, they take all the money. This is unlike the German Embassy, which refunds at least 50 percent.  

Madam Speaker, the Director of this new company, Visa Handling Service, is called Mr Declan. He has been working with British Airways for three years.  After studying the market of exploitation in Uganda, he went and bought shares in Uganda Travel Bureau (UTB) of Prof. Bunyenyezi. 

What does this mean? It means when you lodge your visa application to this new company, he urges you to get tickets from his company, UTB. And this means that Ugandans who are in this business of travel agencies are going to lose jobs. 

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. I do not think we should be incongruent to these people’s problems. We should act very fast if these embassies accredited to Uganda are throwing our friends in the mud. We should act and see what we can do because the position is going out of hand.  

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I was completing the question, Madam Speaker. Ugandan citizens are being discriminated –  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You did not finish?

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI:  No, I gave him the Floor to complete. I think he appealed, honestly, but this debate has to be lively. Surely, it should not be dull. 

The issue that I am completing, Madam Speaker, I apologise, is that there is discrimination. It appears the Ugandans are being discriminated as far as immigration is concerned. We are stopped from going out while others are having favourable terms to enter. I think that is the end of the question.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable Minister outlined four categories of aliens, but there is one prominent category he conveniently left out, and that is ex-political leaders. In other words, former Presidents who have been either kicked out, voted out, or run away from home.  

Madam Speaker, since we enacted a new Constitution in 1995, I would like to know whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs has kept track of former political leaders who have taken refugee here, used our travel documents, enjoyed our hospitality and have since gone back home. I am aware of one and I do not have to bother you with the answer, but that is Col Bagaza. 

My question is - did Col Bagaza go back to Burundi last year with our travel documents? I once travelled with him from Entebbe and both of us had the same type of passport. I would like to know –(Interruption)- that is the Ugandan passport not Burundi passport.  

I would like to know in the last three years how many former Presidents have taken refugee in this country, the kind of hospitality they have enjoyed here, whether it was under UN refugee status like Obote is in Zambia, or whether they have come here as special guests of the President?  

Lastly, I would like to know whether the former Congolese political and military leaders who have been enjoying the hospitality and a territory of Uganda should go back home by force. For instance, there was Col Bemba of DRC and Wamba dia Wamba. 

I just want to know how many of these categories have been enjoying our hospitality, travel documents, security and probably cash. And of those who have left, did they surrender our travel documents before they went back home?  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I just wanted to highlight the problem I have with the question that the Immigration Department has failed to control the entry of aliens. When you think of people running away from hot lava like was the case in the Congo, really can you control such people? 

It then goes back to what kind of regulations we have in the country and how they are implemented in line with this. I would really like to urge the Minister to bring the refugee law, because we had proposed that it should be revised, as well as the Immigration Act. 

The Committee on Foreign Affairs and that of Defence and Internal Affairs would be in position to look at this. Of course, we also have some legal minds, which could also add some spice to this. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming the children of Naguru UMEA Primary School in Wakiso District and staff members of Kanyogoga Primary School in Mukono District. You are welcome.  

Minister of Internal Affairs, there is something burning from the chairman of your committee.

MR SIMON MAYENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a very short one and it has not been raised. Is the Minister aware that the Immigration Department is under-staffed? What steps is he taking to make sure that people who should be employed in those positions are recruited and actually do the job?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will just make short responses to the many points that have been raised by the colleagues. Some were suggestions, which we do appreciate, and others were specific queries.  

Hon. Wagonda Muguli asked whether under-staffing in the Immigration Department could be responsible for some of the problems We are grappling with challenges. There is no doubt that the Immigration Department is under-staffed, but I must say that Government has now taken measures to transform that situation. 

Cabinet is due to consider a Paper that will upgrade the status and staffing in the Immigration Department, to be able to meet even greater challenges that face us as we go along. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue was about people doing menial jobs - bulldozer drivers and other people selling all sorts of things. Really, we would like colleagues to let us know when there is any suspicious situation where you think somebody for reason X or Y is illegally in the country. Then we will follow up the matter.  

Madam Speaker, the responsibility of every citizen is to make sure that this country is secure and that laws are not just violated by anybody. So if you see somebody breaking the law by staying illegally in the country, you will be a very responsible citizen, which honourable members are, if you assist the state to handle such a matter. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I expected the Minister of Internal Affairs to be more serious than he is proving to be. Not very long ago in this Parliament I officially told the honourable members about the catastrophe regarding the refugees of Sudanese origin concentrated in Lubaga South. Why doesn’t the Minister remember what happened in the past? 

No step has been taken since I reported officially. The Sudanese are moving at large. They stay in private houses and some are armed. They move in official vehicles some bearing UPDF numbers. I do not know; what is he talking about?

MR MWANDHA: Assuming that the Minister is not trying to dodge the question, has he tried to get his Police to investigate some of these foreigners who have been quoted as selling newspapers, Kabalagala and are all over the place? Has he taken the trouble to use the machinery, which is available to him, the Uganda Police, to actually do exactly what the honourable member asked?  

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must say that Police is diligently performing its work. But definitely, the Police also rely on information from members of the public. So we should encourage members of the public to play their role in supporting investigative agencies to do their work. 

It is true that we do not publicise every case we deal with. Actually, we deal with very many cases of illegal immigration and some of the people that we find illegally in the country are deported. When we deport them, we do not necessarily put it out in the media. But a lot of work is being done in that direction.  

Hon. Sebaggala raised issues about the investment policy. Yes, there is a clear policy on investment -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I raised other issues, which the Minister has not responded to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him finish. I do not know how he has clustered his answers. Let him first finish, if you find he has not answered then you stand up.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: No, he is mentioning names and as the questioner I had first priority, the others are just supplementing what I asked. So, I do not see how others can take precedence over the principle questioner.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister, can you answer.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, a number of colleagues did raise questions that were related to each other. My intention is to congregate them and answer them together. So, colleagues should be patient, the answers will be coming. It is true that the mentioning of questions is un-tactical. Therefore, I will shift from that position in order to make quick progress.  

Madam Speaker, there was a question raised about whether there is a genuine policy regarding investment or not. There is the Investment Code, which was passed by this august House some years back. There are also other laws that promote investment. So, there is adequate law and every method is being used to implement this law. 

With regard to the Chinese and Koreans dealing in menial jobs, again, if there are such suspicious circumstances the Police would be interested to get information on this matter. They will follow it up.  

Issues were raised about combining Export Promotions Council, Uganda Investment Policy and Uganda Travel Bureau. In my view, those issues will be dealt with by the minister responsible at an appropriate time. He will also be able to answer more detailed questions on investments.  

Suffice it to say that our duty as a country is to promote investments. It is true that in the course of promoting investments there may be some bad elements that may sneak in. We should collectively pursue those bad elements and weed them out. In this respect we need co-operation of all Ugandans.

Questions were raised about people working in Tri-Star, whether they had permits, whether they were literate or not. The question of Tri-Star and people employed there would require more specific investigation. Government would be more than ready to avail this information at an appropriate time.

Then there is the issue of the Sudanese who are resident in Lubaga South, which was brought up by a number of colleagues. I must say that Uganda has been very hospitable to refugees and, incidentally, it has not been a one-way traffic. 

Ugandans have been refugees in Congo, Sudan, Kenya, Europe and America. Even when Ugandans were refugees, they were treated reasonably well. Many of them were employed in Kenya. By the way even now some of them are still employed in Kenya. So I think so long as people meet the legal requirements, we should be able to understand that situation.  

As to the specific details, which Ndugu Ken Lukyamuzi has been complaining about, I do not think that his reports were just ignored. I do not have a report of the results of the investigations. 

However, I am aware that his reports were investigated and I believe that appropriate action was taken.  It may not necessarily be in conformity with what hon. Lukyamuzi may have wanted - (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) Can I proceed? There are many questions and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the problem with this matter of yours is that you raise it at the spur of the moment. You never actually reduce it into writing to enable us get a good answer. You are always raising it just from the Floor, so I think it becomes difficult to get a good answer.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for that guidance. A point was raised about how we differentiate between Banyarwanda who are Ugandans and Banyarwanda who are Rwandese, or the Bakonzo who are Ugandans and the Bakonzo who are from Congo, or even the Basamia who are Ugandans and those who are not. They are many; the whole border is full of Ugandans and their counterparts –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, without prejudice, I am standing on a point of order. About a year ago there was a protest about the big number of refugees staying in Lubaga South. An alarm was made officially in this Parliament and the Minister of Internal Affairs then, hon. Kategaya, constituted a team of officers from his ministry, including Police, to carry out investigations. 

A report was compiled and the Members of Parliament representing Kampala were summoned to the office of the Minister. We unanimously agreed that there was need for us to discuss the contents of the report so that we express our respective concerns. 

Is the hon. Minister in order to skip that important report, which would have been discussed officially by the representatives of the people? And should I be expected to do anything beyond discussing a report of national concern of that magnitude? Is he in order to bulldoze a matter of public concern like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, unfortunately, neither the Speaker nor me are Members of Parliament of Kampala. So we did not attend that meeting and nobody has briefed us about what transpired. Therefore, I cannot really rule on that matter because I do not know. But maybe the Minister can explain, because I have no idea about this report or the meeting Kampala Members of Parliament had with you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Well, Madam Speaker, I do not have that information. But as our brother hon. Lukyamuzi said, this matter was apparently handled by my predecessor, hon. Eriya Kategaya. I would be more than pleased to interact with hon. Ken Lukyamuzi both on that report and its follow-up implementation. So, Madam Speaker, I am inviting hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to link up with me so that we can follow up that report.

Madam Speaker, on the question of Ugandans who have got their relatives across the borders, this is normal. This is a result of bulkanisation of Africa. The deepening of the African Union may eventually be able to heal this wound. 

However, for the moment we have to accept Ugandans as Ugandans, Kenyans as Kenyans. Whether they are close to the border, whether they have relatives in Uganda, it does not matter. I think it involves all of us. It is a demand on all of us to deepen closer African integration.

The other issue raised concerns Tanzania; that Ugandans are required to produce passports when they are going to Tanzania whereas it is easy for Tanzanians to cross into Uganda. 

Uganda Immigration Department liases with the neighbouring countries to make it as practical as possible for the wananchi, especially those near the border areas, to be able to exchange visits and also to engage in trade. So if there is a problem with regard to the Tanzanian border, this is a matter that my ministry will be able to follow up.

There was the question of Kenyans, South Africans and other foreigners now being employed in middle level jobs. Really, all those who are employed are required to have work permits. The Immigration Control Board examines cases of these applications and it is only those foreigners found to be very deserving that are given a limited period to work in our country.

There was a question on troops from neighbouring countries crossing into Uganda with arms and also refugees crossing into Uganda when they armed. The position is very clear; all refugees on entering Uganda are required to be disarmed, and indeed troops of other countries as well. 

If this is not being implemented it is a mistake, and again Government will see to it that refugees in our country are not armed. 

You may know about a case in Masindi where there was a big problem, where some of the refugees molested some administrators including an RDC of Masindi. Government did not take that lightly. Government decided to impose discipline and to transfer the refugees from where they were to another camp. Subsequently, Government dealt with the elements that were causing indiscipline in that camp. 

On the question of foreign students not contributing foreign exchange in our schools, really, I believe that Uganda is benefiting a lot from these students. They come in and pay school fees, buy our food, buy whatever they consume here, and I think we should encourage that. 

There may be a few cases where some smuggle themselves as Ugandans, but we need to be more vigilant and discover those that may be crookedly passing as Ugandans when in fact they are not.  

The question of aliens has partly been answered, and I must commend Ndugu Kibanzanga, in his absence. He helped us to revise the question of who an investor is. Many of the points he made about the investor are indeed consistent with the way Government looks at an investor. 

The question of –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is a very important aspect of our economy and I feel I should give more information so that all of us can be alert and vigilant.  

Uganda Investment Authority does issue investment licenses and they have an elaborate criterion.  Members have raised concern about people who come and do petty trade and claim to be investors. I must say that, this is illegal because an investment license is not given to a foreigner if he is going to engage in trade. 

Therefore, whoever is trading here and he purports to be an investor is most likely committing an offence. This is because trading is not one of the grounds upon which one can get an investment license. 

To get an investment license if you are a foreigner, the Uganda Investment Authority must be satisfied that the area in which you are going to invest has some value addition to our local products, which is not available here. They must be satisfied that if it is not value addition, it is for technological transfer –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister; I do not know whether the Ministry in conjunction with Investment Authority has ever carried out a situation analysis. When you go to Kikuubo, Chinese are just as many as anything.

MR MWANDHA: I think the information the hon. Minister is giving does not tally with what is on the ground. What does Uchumi do, or any of these other people with supermarkets? Are they adding any value? So, the information being given does not tally with what is happening in the country as far as investment is concerned.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I was still elaborating the grounds upon which Uganda Investment Authority gives investment licenses. 

I stated that they do not give investment licenses to people engaged solely in trade except if that trade has some value addition or if it is for technological transfer of some kind. They also give licenses if there is some skilled manpower being brought in this country, which we do not have, or if it is intended to utilise our local raw materials, or if it is intended to employ our people. 

If somebody is dealing in massive trade and Uganda Investment Authority is satisfied that in that business there is a likelihood of so many people being employed in this country, an investment license may be granted as an exception. It would just take into consideration the fact that the foreigner is going to offer employment.  

So, when you mention companies like Uchumi, they are doing trading but definitely they employ so many people –(Interjection)- Well, I do not know about that. That is why I started my remarks by saying that all of us must be vigilant. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that a whole Minister in Finance does not know what is going on at Garden City, which at one time I was contesting. In Uchumi, Garden City, 90 percent of the workers are Kenyans. These are the specifics I am giving and I have checked my sources.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the hon. Minister of Finance to inform us whether there is a register of the serious investors, and whether he could avail us with that list as members of this august House. 

Sometimes we find those people selling sweets in Fort Portal and various towns. We would like to know who those serious investors are in this country.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue. When we were complaining about people who resemble Asians doing petty business here, we were told that actually some of those people are Ugandans. But now to hear that Kikuubo is occupied by Chinese, I do not think in Uganda we have Ugandans of Chinese origin. 

I would like to make an appeal to the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs. Yamato, this textile industry, their chain shops are all managed by Japanese, and Nytil’s agents are all Asians. Now what shall we do? I think we should be serious. 

Do not expect a trader in Kikuubo to go and arrest a Chinese. In Owino, a certain Asian who does not even know any single native language is running a milk cooler. He trades in raw milk there, and he has actually disorganised all the traders in milk business.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know of about five Ugandans who are in China currently and are married to Chinese girls, and they are sent here to do business on their behalf. They are here. But that apart –(Interjection) - one of them is the son of the former Deputy Prime Minister called Patrick Adriko. 

Apart from that, what we want is to have a mechanism to track these people. It is not a question of saying you are in charge when you do not have a system of tracking them.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister that because of laxity in our system, our local business traders have lost agencies through the investors who prefer to give their fellow Asians agencies. I want anybody to challenge me; where there is an Asian investment here, most outlets are manned by Asians.  

So, really, it is not a simple matter. When we talk about a mechanism, we are encouraging investors but we are also not providing employment for our people.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I said in the beginning, I think it is important to take each case on its own merits. 

It is true that we have so many Ugandans of Asian origin and they are as entitled as we are here. Unless you point out an individual and say, “this particular Asian is not a Ugandan and he is doing trade”, it becomes a big problem to us.  Secondly –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. 

The information I would like to give you is that we have Ugandans of Asian origin, yes, but it is the same Ugandans of Asian origin who are bringing their cousins from India. Please, they are there and they are very big business people. 

For the small ones whom I told the Minister of Internal Affairs stand on the door as investors but count boxes of soap, he promised to investigate. I hope he will soon come up with a report. They are very many, and these are cousins from India. We are not talking about the bourgeoisie. We are talking about that middle class and low class. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I will repeat that each case ought to be treated on its own merit.  

Somebody said that he could not imagine that there are Ugandans of Chinese origin. They are there! Even this morning in my office I had a group of Chinese, all Ugandans, and we were discussing business. Yes, they were registered here, they have their documents, they had their Ugandan passports of long ago and they look 100 percent Chinese. 

So, if you meet him carrying on trade, if you do not know that, you condemn Government for not taking action. But indeed, once such a person qualifies as a Ugandan, he is as entitled as you are.  

A member raised a question about whether we have a list of investors. Yes, every person issued with an investment license is registered because those investment licenses have serial numbers. The list is there and we can produce it given appropriate time. 

Madam Speaker, as I said, Uganda is not an exception. The question of immigration is a question that has eluded so many countries, even developed ones. One can tell us how many Ugandans are, for example, in the United Kingdom and –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. A common concern has been predominantly expressed by the Members of Parliament to the effect that under the guise of investment, many foreigners have found their way to Uganda in an illegal manner. 

With regard to what hon. Basaliza has suggested, I was proposing that the Minister seriously unveils to us a comprehensive programme or a report on how these people have come in this country. He should tell us what they are doing, what the criteria of their recruitment is, so that we do not find ourselves in a Uganda, which is as largely occupied by foreigners as that one of Idi Amin. 

If it becomes necessary I could move a motion without notice. If the Minister does not come out openly to let us know what is happening, I could move an impromptu motion using Rule 40(1)(2).

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will only say that Government has a list of the registered investors and releasing that list is no problem at all. In fact, the Minister of Finance has told me that he is ready to release that information to colleagues in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Minister, I think that members are not worried about genuine investors. They are worried about those who come in through the back door. This matter has come up on the Floor of this House, and probably this is the fourth time. 

Maybe, honourable Minister, we would like to hear from you that you are going to have a crackdown and inform the House about your findings. This is the fourth time this matter is coming to this House.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I did indicate as I was beginning to make responses that actually there is a Paper now due to be discussed by Cabinet to upgrade the Immigration Department and to computerise it. 

The whole purpose is that, with an upgraded computerised directorate, it will enhance the capacity of the department to be able to follow some of these foreigners who are illegally engaged in activities in Uganda. 

In addition to that, we are interacting with the neighbouring countries to ensure that we coordinate in tracking some of these fellows who are in our country and in the region illegally. So, the matter is at hand and we believe that it is a question of time. 

We also intend, by the way, to recruit more personnel. It is true that the department is greatly undermanned, but now that the restructuring process is being completed, recruitment is going to be the next stage. (Interruption)

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Minister for giving way. I am a victim of the Asians because I worked for the Asians for a long time. I was a top manager in Mukwano Industries in 1991. 

Mukwano can be regarded as a Ugandan because he has got a Ugandan passport. Mukwano brought in managers, a few of them, and those managers brought their cousins, brothers, concubines, name it. They were guarding even the doors! They brought in somebody whom they put above me, who had just finished Primary 7.

The information I want to give you is that, this happens not because our Immigration Department is not manned, not because you lack people there, it is because of corruption. 

I remember very well taking 40 passports of those kinds of people I am talking about and the Immigration Department refused to give them work permits. The following day money followed and they were there. Some were upgraded, especially that one who was above me, and he became a chief engineer with forged papers.  

So, when you say that you are trying to recruit more manpower, I think you are trying to recruit more thieves. The issue of corruption in immigration must be tackled first. If you do not tackle that one, then we are not heading anywhere.  

There are these Kakoozas - I am sorry, not Kakooza James - selling cakes. They change their names from Pratesh to Kakooza. They are everywhere on the streets of Kampala selling cakes. They came in the same way. Let us not put all the blame on Uganda Investment Authority, it is also on Immigration Department. They also give the investment license.

I work with Asians now, I am the general manager, but I have to tell you the truth that I do not have any single Asian working there. But the moment you put one executive Asian manager, he will bring his brother, his sister, and what have you. 

Uganda Investment Authority is not a problem. The problem is your Immigration Department. Who cannot exploit such a weakness in the country? That is the information I want to give you; look seriously into your personnel. The computers you are bringing will be a waste of money. They will still do the same thing.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is another issue, which the Minister and his colleagues should take seriously, in addition to the problem of corruption in the Immigration Department. There have also been repeated cases of political interference in the work of the immigration officers. 

There are so many immigration officers who have been victimised for doing a good job. They are rounding up these people from the streets of Uganda, but they have been called people who undermine investors. Every time they try to do this, a political directive comes in and the institutions of Government fail to operate. 

So, political interference, in addition to corruption, will not enable the department of immigration to do an effective job. I thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really want to say that the concern being expressed by colleagues and the information given is very well taken. I am sure that it is going to help us in our crusade to streamline and cleanse the Immigration Department. 

With regard to the issue of somebody who was deported, this is a new issue as far as I am concerned. I will again appreciate if you and I meet and sort out this matter.

There was an issue about national identity cards. The point made is very well taken. Government is anxious to see that Ugandans get their identity cards. We are looking at the most cost-effective and quick way of doing so. Many government departments have been involved and we are also trying to see what equipment is available in the country, which could be put to use even in this exercise.

There was a question about visa handling fees by the British High Commission. I must say that Government has been in contact with the High Commission. We are trying to see a rational way that we can advise British friends to deploy. 

But I must say we had a big problem of congestion, where we had queues lining up throughout the night. Some of these measures have been taken by the Missions in order to reduce some of that queuing that we are talking about.  

There was a question on whether Ugandans are being treated in a reciprocal manner to Britons and the Americans. Unfortunately, the answer is no, and that is why Government continues to interact with these two embassies to improve the circumstances that are faced by Ugandans when they are looking for visas.

There was a question of political leaders who have lived in Uganda as refugees, and the case of Col Bagaza was quoted. It would be possible to get a list, but we have been looking at them either as refugees or as guests. And I must say Uganda has played this role well, to see that some of them have been received and some of them have been able to go back to their countries. 

On the issue of the refugee law, which was raised, Cabinet has already passed this bill and it will be presented to Parliament in due course.

Finally, on the positions in the Immigration Department, as soon as restructuring process is approved, which will be soon, recruitment will be made. I appeal to all of you to work with our ministry and Government to make sure that the Immigration Department is a better department to serve the interest of our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, with reference to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 40(1)(b), I beg to move a motion without notice on the strength of the concern that has predominantly been expressed by the members here present, on this subject. 

I beg to move that at an appropriate moment the Minister of Internal Affairs should release the names of foreigners issued with working permits, the work they are doing plus their places of work. I beg to move.

4.28
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons With Disability): Madam Speaker, I want to second it but I want also to amend it, with his permission. 

The Minister has not answered the majority of questions members put to him. I asked five questions but the only question he alluded to was the AGOA one. 

I asked him questions with regard to the number of aliens, as the colleague is saying. I asked him questions with regard to how a foreigner gets a passport here. I asked him other questions but he dodged them. He never answered them. 

I would like to propose, Madam Speaker, by way of amending my colleague’s motion, that the matter of the management of immigration be investigated by our committee. 

We can then know exactly what the weaknesses are, what the system is, and look at the various complaints raised by members on corruption, lack of facilitation, political interference, which are undermining a proper and effective immigration system. I hope my colleague agrees. 

Therefore, I move that this matter be put to the appropriate committee so that they investigate it and bring a report to this House within two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a part which our committee cannot handle, namely, the production of the names of the investors and where they work. I do not think our committee can do that.

MR MWANDHA: They will require the Minister to produce that information and it will be put in the report. They have constitutional powers to demand any information, any document from anybody in this republic. So, that can be done. There is no fear about that one. 

I think the proper thing is to look at the corruption, the inefficiency, and the problems of political interference going on in immigration, which are undermining its performance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you sure that it can be done in two weeks?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, there is a constitutional provision protecting our concerns along those lines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want somebody to talk about the time frame. Are you sure that this work can really be done in two weeks?

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the time frame is too short. Two weeks is not enough to get to each and everything. Members have raised a lot of issues and we need to give the committee ample time to do its work effectively. I think let it be first on our agenda when we come back after our recess.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that we are going for recess on 18th December and we normally have it up to February. So, that is why I was asking, are we in position to do this work in two weeks? I think that is not possible.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I know that in the past we have gone on recess but some committees have either remained or they have been recalled from recess to conduct the business of the House. 

Secondly, even if we went on recess, if we gave the committee adequate time to report when the House opens, the committee can report in March. If the committee is given up to March next year, that time is ample enough, taking into consideration the recess, the different schedules that we have and also the nature of investigation that must be conducted.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The relevant committee that is being suggested is the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. They have an important bill, which has been referred to them. There is also the chopper issue and now this work. Is it not possible to have a select committee for this? Otherwise, the bill seems to be sufficient enough to keep them busy.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the mover of the motion because the motion he has put forward has got a lot of implications. This is a motion where the committee will be going out maybe to find out whether the information given to them is right or not. This is an issue where the Members of Parliament are likely even to interface with investors. 

I have got experience, having been in the private sector for long; I have never been in Government. I know how sensitive the investors are especially when you involve Members of Parliament. I do not want a scenario whereby we go to investigate and we scare away our genuine investors. 

I am not talking of quack investors -(Interjection)– yes, I have to tell you that. Even the genuine investors, the moment they see Members of Parliament entering into their affairs – I know what has happened and I have got experience on that - you will see how they will react. Therefore, I am seeking – (Mr Mwandha rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The clarification I wanted from hon. Lukyamuzi is whether in his motion he has got the intention that the Minister provides the committee with a list of investors and workers but they will not go to interfere with our private investors. He issues the work permits and he has a list. I wanted to know the intention of the motion, whether he is going to put in that demarcation.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know what the honourable member on the Floor is suggesting. I would strongly support a select committee because it draws from many committees, instead of picking on one committee to concentrate on one issue. 

Is he suggesting that specific terms of reference should be worked out by the Speaker, with the input of this House? So that when this select committee goes down to do the work it does a job, which we are all satisfied with, without having to be prejudiced with the considerations he is putting across.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A while ago the honourable member holding the Floor made passionate revelations about what was happening in the Immigration Department and what had actually happened to him in his former place of work. (Laughter). 

The reason he gave this very useful information was to assist this House to get a way forward on how best this issue could be redressed. Now the honourable member is coming up to say that Parliament should not interfere!

First of all, what does he mean by Parliament interfering? Madam Speaker, have we ever interfered, anyway, in the nature of conduct of our business, in the private arrangements of private investors? Should that prevent Parliament from doing a legitimate job? I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have understood what he means. I think his worry is that we might unleash Parliament on all investors. That is his point and that is what he is worried about.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I meant. And I want to commend hon. Katirima; you captured my point correctly. We need terms of reference. My concern was only on genuine investors, I did mean quack investors or all the investors. That is why I said that we need terms of reference.  

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to give some information. 

A few weeks ago, I think it was two weeks ago, this House passed a motion to set up two select committees. One is supposed to be on Tri-Star. Some of the issues that were raised about Tri-Star are the issues that are being raised today, that some employees are working there when according to our immigration laws and regulations they should not have been given work permits. 

The other committee is supposed to investigate the labour laws and conditions of workers. Those two committees are not yet constituted. I see an overlap on the one hand.

Secondly, if we constitute a third select committee, I see this affecting other committees that should be working. While I agree with members that we need to investigate these issues, I strongly suggest that we let the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, which is already well versed with these issues, investigate the matter while we constitute the other two committees to investigate those issues.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this House that a while ago, Dr Kasirivu raised a very important issue that the Committee of Defence has got the Army bill, and this law has been outstanding since the Sixth Parliament. We shall require the Committee on Defence to expeditiously handle this issue so that the process of modernizing the Army can be kept on track.

Secondly, there is the chopper report and other reports that must be investigated by that committee. And we have a Business Committee of the House, which can sit and reschedule or schedule the business of the House in accordance with the priorities that we have. 

I, therefore, see no problem at all in this House constituting another select committee, provided the terms of reference for each committee are clear. In circumstances where they overlap, the two chairpersons could meet and compare notes for purpose of expeditious disposal of business before us. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am proposing that we first deal with the motion, get it out of the way and then we shall consult on the process of whether we give it to the committees already existing or set up a select committee.  Let us deal with the motion for now. I put the question that the motion as proposed and amended be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall hasten to conclude the consultations over those two committees and I will get back to you in the next session on how to proceed.

REPORT OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE ON THE CAUSES OF THE STUDENTS STRIKE AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AND MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL

4.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this is the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the students’ strike at Makerere University and Makerere University Business School.  

Introduction

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 26 November 2003, the Parliament of Uganda resolved to inquire into the students’ strike and other related matters at Makerere University and Makerere University Business School. 

Parliament adopted a motion that the statement presented to the House by the Minister of Education and Sports, Dr Khiddu Makubuya, on the students’ strikes be referred to the Committee of Social Services for further scrutiny and that they report back on Tuesday, 2 December 2003. 

Honourable members, although today is Thursday 4th December, we have been waiting for this opportunity on the Order Paper. I am happy we are ready to present the report.  

The committee’s terms of reference were to make an inquiry into:

1. The causes of the students’ strikes at both Makerere University and Makerere University Business School.  

2. To investigate the contradictory reports about the releases made to Makerere University Business School.

3. To examine the controversies surrounding the legal status at Makerere University Business School.  

Methodology

The committee met and discussed with officials from the following:

    • Ministry of the Education and Sports
    • Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    • Makerere University
    • Makerere University Business School
    • Makerere University Council
    • Makerere University Business School Governing Council

Secondly, the committee also analysed the ministerial statement on the cause of the strike by the students, by the Minister of Education and Sports made on 26 November 2003. 

The committee also referred to the related legislation: the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001; the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003; the Budget Act, 2002; the Statutory Instruments establishing Makerere University Business School and other related documents; and correspondences on the subject, which were submitted to the committee.

Findings by the Committee.

The Causes of the Strike.

We begin with Makerere University. First, Madam Speaker and honourable members, originally non-resident government-sponsored students used to get their living-out allowance in two instalments. The first instalment used to be paid in the second week of the semester and the second payment was in the 12th week. 

Allowances were sent to halls of residence to which the students are attached where the majority were paid by cash. However, security problems came in as well as audit queries for lack of or delayed accountability. 

A decision was, therefore, made to pay students through their banks. Students were asked to open bank accounts against which payments would be made directly by the University central administration using lists submitted by the hall wardens. This inevitably caused delays in the payment system.  

The University officials confirmed to the committee that the funds had been remitted to the University in good time by the Ministry of Finance. According to the University, the committee further learnt that at the time of the demonstration, the majority of the cheques were ready and some of them had already been deposited to their respective accounts. Documents confirming this, that is the delivery notes, were tabled. 

The committee was informed that the only outstanding payments were for Nkrumah Hall, which submitted the list on the day of the strike. The majority of the striking students were from Nkrumah Hall. 

Nevertheless, all students at Makerere University, Kampala, who were entitled to living-out allowances have been fully paid their money for the whole semester. 

The committee was informed that each student is given a total of Shs 350,000 per semester except the first year students who get Shs 368,000 each for the first semester. 

The committee learnt that on the day the Chancellor of Makerere University was to be installed, the students who had not been paid from Nkrumah Hall gathered at the Freedom Square. The Dean of Students met the students, assured them of their payment, explained the situation and requested them not to demonstrate since their payments were in the pipeline. The students seemed to appreciate the explanation by the Dean. 

Shortly after, students started throwing stones and the seemingly peaceful demonstration turned violent. The invited guests to the installation of the Chancellor - who is also the Prime Minister of Uganda - including the Vice-President, were under threat. This prompted the bodyguards of the Vice-President to shoot in the air in an attempt to protect him. 

The Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University informed the committee that sometimes strikes and demonstrations are instigated by outsiders. 

Madam Speaker, the committee regrets the incident of shooting of one of the students, although this was left out in the typing of the report. 

Secondly, we wish to condemn the violence at Makerere University.

Basing on information availed to the committee, it is concluded that the strike was caused by the delay to pay the students’ living-out allowances.  

We now turn to Makerere University Business School and the cause of the strikes there. Madam Speaker, according to the Principal of Makerere University Business School, the students’ strike was also caused by failure to pay the students’ living-out allowances. 

The committee was informed that the affected students were the cumulative additional government students since year 2001. These were admitted to Makerere University Business School as a result of the President’s pledge to increase the number of the government-sponsored students. 

The committee also learnt from the Principal that for the previous two academic years, 2001/2002 and 2002/2003, due to inadequate releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Makerere University Business School had diverted funds to the tune of Shs 344 million from the internally generated revenue to pay living-out allowances to the additional government-sponsored students. 

For this academic year, 2003/2004, the School Governing Council directed the Principal not to make any other payments out of internally generated funds to the government-sponsored students. 

For this financial year, Parliament appropriated Shs 2.9 billion for Makerere University Business School. The Principal admitted to the committee that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was releasing these funds religiously and on time, as you can see in Appendix D. 

I wish to draw your attention to Appendix D, which is attached at the back of the report. Those are quarterly releases and Makerere University Business School has received all their quarterly releases up to November. The last release was of Shs 242,253,000. 

It is, therefore important to note that priorities of the Business School are set by the Governing Council, which budgets for the institution. The committee was surprised to learn that the Governing Council did not consider the students’ living-out allowances as top priority.

Under-funding:

The Governing Council told the committee that although the institution gets the releases promptly, especially this financial year, the funds are not adequate for the services and general requirements of MUBS. This makes it impossible for the institution to be run effectively. 

MUBS informed the committee that in spite of timely releases, they are always given much less than what they budget for. On page 6 you can see those tables, two of them. 

The first table is indicating the School’s financing from Financial Year 2001/2002 up to this financial year, by the Government. The first column shows the year; second column shows the projected budget by the School; third column shows what Parliament approved; and the last column shows the actual releases by the Ministry of Finance to the School. You can read those tables and compare the actual releases. 

It is also important to compare it with the second table of internally generated revenue. The first column shows the year, second column shows what the school budgeted for, and the actual collection. You can study this and see. If you look at Financial Year 2001/2002, MUBS budgeted for Shs 6.4 billion. But given the ceiling the Ministry of Finance had given, we appropriated Shs 2.4 million average. All of it was released. 

However, that financial year MUBS, from internal generation, had budgeted for Shs 7.5 billion and the actual collection was of Shs 5.5 billion. When you total the two, you can see how much funds they had for the institution that financial year.

Claim of Arrears:
Madam Speaker, MUBS claim that they have arrears of funds to the tune of Shs 1.8 billion, being funds for the additional students as a result of the Presidential pledge. 

They informed the committee that the funds for the additional students for 2001/2002, in which they had 281 additional students, and for 2002/2003, when they had 176 additional students, have never been released to them. This is a total of 457 additional students. If you computed at a unit cost of Shs 2.44 million, this would certainly translate to arrears of Shs 1.8 billion, which MUBS say they are claiming. 

However, it is important to note that on the allegation of MUBS’ funds mistakenly sent to Makerere University, it was established by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that these funds were not sent to Makerere University at all. 

On page 7 the committee, therefore, recommends that the Auditor General should carry out a special audit to establish the claim by MUBS that funds for 457 students have never been released to the school at all.  

On the subject of the strike, the committee concluded the following:

1. The strike at MUBS was sparked off because of paying students living-out allowances at Makerere University shortly after their strike. The students at MUBS thought that the solution to this problem was also a strike. 

I wish to make a rider here, honourable members. The composition of the Governing Council also has student representatives. We had the Guild President and the deputy, and we interfaced with them. They said that they thought that the immediate solution to their problem is a strike because after Makerere University had carried out a strike and they were paid immediately.

2. The Governing Council of MUBS failed to set living-out allowances among the top priorities. Even if they had little, what were the most urgent priorities in the budget?

3. The delay to sort out the legal status of MUBS has continued to create uncertainty at the School.

4. Variation in the unit costs per student between MUBS and Makerere University accounts for the confusion at MUBS.

On page 7, among other assignments was the investigation of the contradictory reports on MUBS as far as the releases were concerned. 

The committee was informed that all public institutions under the Ministry of Education and Sports are given - these are public tertiary institutions - subvention by Government. This is a contribution from Government to be used in budgeting by the institution. 

This contribution is supposed to be supplemented by internally generated funds by the institution. The institutions are then required to set their own budget priorities and where necessary, may re-allocate to meet the priorities.

As a rider, honourable members, we found all sorts of contradictory reports, as indicated on page 8, about internally generated funds and subvention. Makerere University Business School claims that Government should be giving them enough money to run the School. 

The Ministry of Finance, and certainly the Ministry of Education and Sports, claim they give them a subvention but they expect this government subvention to be supplemented by internally generated funds. They feel that with internal generation, they should not be re-allocating funds from this hand to the other.

The second contradictory message, as you will read, is how much a private student should be paying versus a government-sponsored student. The Ministry of Education and Sports alleges that MUBS makes privately sponsored students pay less than the government-sponsored students whereas the assumption of the Ministry is that private students should also pay for the sunken costs. 

In view of this, the Ministry has always advised MUBS to find money to pay living-out allowances and to reimburse when subvention is released. The Ministry believed that MUBS, like other institutions under it, budgeted for all its costs as the Ministry appeared before the committee with all its sectors. It was, therefore, a surprise for them to hear that MUBS had no funds to pay for the additional students.

Madam Speaker, the committee also learnt from the Ministry of Finance that appropriation of Shs 2.9 billion to MUBS for this current financial year represents a budgetary provision for all government-sponsored students at MUBS and was enough to cater for the 1,090 government-sponsored students at the School as presented by the Principal. 

Without narrating all the stories, the essence of the above paragraph was an argument where MUBS says that for the three years the additional students had not been budgeted for, and the Ministry of Finance insisting that the additional students are already among the 1,090. 

Whereas MUBS could have been given money at a unit cost of Shs 2.44 million per student, the Ministry of Finance had actually given them at Shs 2.6 million, which amounted to Shs 2.9 million. It was over and above Shs 2.44 million per student and, therefore, there was no explanation or justification for MUBS to claim that the additional students had not been catered for. This is the contradiction, which we discovered here.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development maintains that they do not owe MUBS any money but rather the School is experiencing a cash-flow problem due to poor management. We found it contradictory because MUBS was insisting that their problem is under-funding yet Finance was insisting that the problem of MUBS is the cash-flow problem. 

The committee was also surprised to learn from the Joint Admissions Board of the Public Universities, chaired by the Deputy Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University, that MUBS is supposed to have a total of 1040 government-sponsored students as per the records, and not 1090 students as submitted by the Principal.  

The committee verified this in form of admission lists, which were laid before the committee by the Principal. However, this was contrary to the report by the Chairman of Joint Admissions Board. The chairperson of MUBS Governing Council also gave a different figure as you can see. 

Whereas the Principal appeared on Thursday together with the Minister, the Governing Council appeared before us on Monday. As the manager, the Chairman told us that the students who are sponsored by the Government should be totalling to 1136.  

The Joint Admissions Board, if I can highlight this, is chaired by the Deputy Vice Chancellor of Makerere University. Every university brings to the dean a list of students for selection, and prior to selection every school or university sends their requirement lists to the board. 

So, the Joint Admissions Board is the one that selects students for all these public universities and public tertiary institutions. No wonder the Deputy Vice Chancellor of Makerere was insisting that, according to his lists during admissions, the number is 1040, not more or less. If it is more, it should be two or four students who may be persons with disability. 

As a committee we found all this very contradicting, and it could be creating this confusion.

Another important finding by the committee was that whereas Makerere University pays Shs 350,000 per students for living-out allowance, MUBS pay Shs 368,000 per student. Certainly, you can see that difference, which is likely to cause financial complications.

The other issue that may contribute to the constraints at Makerere University Business School is the unit cost per student. This is management’s working figure to help allocate funds to the departments and faculties. 

For Makerere University, the unit cost ranges from Shs 2.4 million to Shs 3.2 million per student.  Shs 2.4 million is for the faculties, which are usually referred to as “chalk and talk” and Shs 3.2 million is for practical-intensive courses like medicine, engineering and agriculture.  

The average for Makerere then is Shs 3.2 million while that for MUBS is Shs 2.4 million, although it had used Shs 3.2 million as a working figure in many of their communications. This could have also contributed to some arrears that they claim.  However, by the end of the meeting, MUBS accepted that they would use Shs 2.44 million as advised by the Ministry. 

To us these were contradictions and, therefore, could be part of the cause of confusion. 

Release by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Ease the Situation at Makerere University Business School. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you may recall that the Minister of Finance was ordered to make a special release to enable Makerere University Business School pay the students. However, as you recall, the Minister reported last Thursday that he had not released the funds because he had not received the requisition letter from the Principal by then.  

I am happy to report, honourable members, that the Minister has released the funds, as you can see in Appendix E. Appendix E is a photocopy of a cash release of Shs 233,800,000 for living-out allowance.  

Going back to page 10, honourable members, it is important to note that Minister of Finance assured the committee that the release of Shs 233 million to the Principal of MUBS, to pay students allowances, would be regarded as an advance payment from MUBS appropriation of Financial Year 2003/2004. It would be recovered over the remaining part of the financial year pending special audit he was considering to institute in Makerere University Business School.

The Legal Status of Makerere University Business School. 
Honourable members, in 2001 the Sixth Parliament of Uganda passed the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. The same Act was amended by Seventh Parliament in April 2003. 

Makerere University Business School was established by the Ministry of Education and Sports under Section 5 of the Makerere University Act (Act 32 of 1970) by Statutory Instrument 77 of 1997. 

The Statutory Instrument was amended in financial year 2000 (Statutory Instrument No. 51) under which a separate council was established, but at the same time the School was specifically represented on the University Council unlike other affiliated colleges.

The amended instrument still left MUBS as a constituent college to Makerere University. This was confirmed by the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. This was in name but its operations were more or less those of an affiliate institution. 

When the Act deemed MUBS to have been affiliated to Makerere University and assumed the status of an affiliated public tertiary institution, MUBS should have become independent of Makerere University.  

Under Section 71(2) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001, an affiliated college remains an independent tertiary institution from the university and retains its status, administration and organizational structure. It only depends on the university to the extent agreed upon and in conformity with the Act and regulations made there under. The institution also has to abide with the status and guidelines issued by the university.

Apparently, honourable members, Makerere University Business School sometimes operates as a constituent college and sometimes as an affiliate college, as the committee was informed. 

For example, the committee was informed by Makerere University that all the schools and colleges are affiliated to the University through the relevant faculties for the course or courses conducted jointly. For that matter, Makerere University Business School had continued to use Makerere University logo on its communications and certificates and diplomas issued by it. 

It should be noted that Makerere University Business School has courses, which it conducts independently, that is, courses which are not Makerere University courses. But Makerere University Business School has continued to issue certificates and diplomas for those courses bearing Makerere University logo even after its affiliated status.

Honourable members, under Section 132(6), the National Council for Higher Education is supposed to ensure that MUBS is established fully as a tertiary institution under the Act. This would deal with the issue of the name, the logo, and other related issues. However, this has not been done, hence continued conflicts and an unclear situation.

Honourable members, the committee also learnt from the Minister of Education and Sports that the legal status of Makerere University Business School is more complex than meets the eye. He has to find out what is involved - whether the problem is financial, legal, administrative, social, political or personal. 

The Minister said he also has to find out the social implications to the students and those who aspire to be students, as well as to the policy makers. The Minister, therefore, asked for another three months to deal with the issue. 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, as you may recall, the Minister asked for two months in April; three months would then be an extension of the period.

Honourable members, before I conclude, as you can see this has some legal complications. It also has financial complications, where MUBS claims that its money could have ended up in Makerere or otherwise. It also has political implications. You have heard people expressing their interest - Where is the university for the East? It could also be personal.  

Madam Speaker, after the Minister had expressed all these complications, we thought that he required an extension. And as you will see later, what MUBS is saying may not be uniform. There are some social complications; students want this and the leaders want the other.  

Honourable members, the committee tried to find out what the cause of the delay in operationalising the law is. To the surprise of the committee, the stakeholders, MUBS, had conflicting wishes on the status of the institution. 

The students want to remain part of Makerere University, Kampala. The Principal, who all along wanted the institution to be independent of Makerere, also said in this meeting that he wanted to remain part of Makerere. But the Governing Council wants the institute to be independent and eventually become a public university. So, these are the complications, which the Minister is facing.

The committee learnt from the students that they are admitted to Makerere University and then sent to Nakawa Campus, and for that reason they are part of Makerere University. So, according to them, this should be a big campus of Makerere University and their certificates should read Makerere University. They consider themselves as students of Makerere University but sent to Nakawa Campus, while the managers say they want independence. So, these are the complications.  

Recommendations:

Madam Speaker, the committee came up with the following recommendations: 

1. The Minister of Education and Sports should ensure that the management of institutions improve on the method of payment of students’ allowances, to avoid delays. They should improve their internal systems of processing funds.

2. The committee recommends that the system of communication between the central administration of institutions and the students should be improved.

3. According to Makerere University officials, increased strikes and insecurity at the University are sometimes instigated by sections of outsiders.  

Honourable members, we had a long list of examples of outsiders. A strike can take off, some bayaye join in, possibly even some politicians. The Vice Chancellor mentioned that at times among the students you see big bald-headed people. There were all sorts of outsiders mentioned.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that outsiders should stop this kind of habit.

4. The committee recommends that education institutions that generate internal revenue should set a priority list and should not wait for Government to release funds to pay the students.  They should be encouraged to use locally generated revenue to settle urgent needs as they wait for government releases.

5. The committee also recommends that the use of live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations must stop.  

6. On the matter of unit cost at public institutions, this is a policy matter in which the Ministry of Education should come up with unit costs for courses per student, per faculty in all public universities and tertiary institutions.  

At the same time, the institutions should also do their study on the matter to enable them have better planning and budget estimates. 

Madam Speaker, if I may be allowed to highlight this, we now have many public universities, unlike in the past. In the past we had only Makerere University. So, when you have a faculty of medicine in Gulu University, in Mbarara and in Makerere, you should have a uniform unit cost. 

If you have a faculty of education in Makerere, a faculty of education in Kyambogo University and a faculty of education in Mbarara University, you should have a uniform unit cost for that. This also goes for the public tertiary institutions. We want to encourage Ministry of Education to move very fast on this matter. 

There is this issue of the private students paying more whereas the Government, particularly Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education and Sports, believe that government-sponsored students are paying more. If we get the unit cost per course and per faculty, it will enable us get a better picture. This would solve the conflict of, “Why should I get Shs 2.4 million per student and the other one is getting Shs 3.2 million?” 

Of course, we expect variations. You do not expect a student who is doing Bachelor of Arts to be given the same amount as a student doing Medicine. Certainly, it cannot happen. But those uniform faculties should be given a uniform unit cost.

7. The committee also recommends to Parliament that the Ministry of Education and Sports be given three months, from December 2003 to February 2004, to sort out the matter on the legal status of Makerere Business School and report back to Parliament.

8. The committee recommends that a special audit by the Auditor General’s Office be carried out at Makerere University Business School and they report back to Parliament in one month to verify the following:

We found contradicting figures of additional students. One version was that there were no additional students, another said they were 1,090 and another 1040. 

We therefore recommend a special audit on the number of students on private and government sponsorship at Makerere University Business School from the year 2001 to this financial year, so that we get a clear picture of how many students we have. Did we have additionals or not?

We recommend for a special audit, Madam Speaker, to establish the exact releases to Makerere University Business School and their expenditure and priorities.

We also recommend a special audit to establish the internally generated revenue to MUBS and its expenditure since 2001.  

We also recommend a special audit to verify the arrears claimed by Makerere University Business School. We feel that if it is established that these arrears exist, then the Auditor General’s office should verify and authorize for these funds to be paid to MUBS.  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I wish to say that the Committee on Social Services condemns the delay to pay students’ living-out allowances. 

We must bear in mind that living-out allowances are for government-sponsored students who did not find space in halls of residence. They depend on these allowances to pay their rent and also buy food. Therefore, they should be paid timely so that we arrest the situation. We have students from far, like Arua, who may not have relatives here.  

Also, Madam Speaker, as a Committee on Social Services we condemn the violence in institutions because it can cause damage to property, loss of lives and time wastage. Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me thank the chairperson and the Committee on Social Services for this very quick but very comprehensive report that they have submitted to this House. I think it has enabled us to appreciate better the situation in the institutions.

I would also like to ask you to join me in welcoming a 70-person delegation of elders, farmers and team leaders from Kigulu North in Iganga District. (Applause). The delegation is on an agricultural study tour of Central and Western Uganda. They have been facilitated by the hon. Francis Mukama, the Member of Parliament for Kigulu North. You are very welcome. 

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA: There is one recommendation, which did not come out here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of this committee and there is a recommendation, which we wanted to come on the Floor of the House but I think inadvertently it has not come out. 

The committee realized that MUBS is under-funded and we had recommended that MUBS should enter a process of asking for supplementary expenditure. It has not come out in this report. I would request the chairperson of the committee to include it in our report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to the report, at least the way I understood it, there is an issue of how many students they have, how much is given to them and what they are entitled to. So, the question of being over or under-funded has to come from the special audit.  In my view it is premature to make that recommendation; it will come after the special audit. Why don’t we debate?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do not intend to make a substantive contribution but just to seek clarification so that I can sit down and have my peace. There are three items from the report, the matter of the legal status of MUBS vis-à-vis –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the honourable member should not take advantage of clarification because I can see he wants to contribute. Let us adhere to the rules of the game, either you give him a chance to contribute or others continue, instead of bypassing the normal procedure. Is he in order, therefore, to start contributing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is out of order for any member to smuggle in contributions. No clarifications but contributions.

5.29
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Social Services and all the committee members for a job well done.  

At the same time, Madam Speaker, I must take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God for having saved our Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business and the Chancellor of Makerere University, from the stones that rocked Makerere University on that very unfortunate date.  

Madam Speaker, the situation at hand is comparable to the African practice of polygamy. If you choose to be a polygamist and you have three to four wives, you should be seen to divide and share your love equally among those spouses that you have chosen to stay with. 

The moment you decide to become sectarian and only show your love to the beloved wife, or husband if it was a polyandrous society, then you run into the risk of what has just happened in this country. I am referring to the numerous strikes that we are seeing in and around Kampala, especially in the two big institutions.  

Madam Speaker, students in Makerere University and MUBS, especially those who are on self-sponsorship and all those who are non-residents, live in a very deplorable situation. 

The days when Makerere was the University of East Africa, as it were, in terms of standards and living conditions, if you were a non-resident as soon as the term started, you would be facilitated to rent a house for yourself. You would also be able to buy especially your evening meals, as was the practice then. 

You cannot expect a student who has come from Kisoro, Kotido or Terego who might not have a relative here, and who might be coming to Kampala for the first time, to stay in the university for one month without a penny in his pocket. And then you expect to pay them at the end or close to the end of the semester! 

Students are what we call transfer payment earners; they do not work. How do you expect these students to stay for all that long without having any money in their pockets? How do you expect them to pay all –(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that for a student to perform very well in his academics, he is supposed to sleep well, eat well and do other activities well. But if he is denied these, then how do you expect him to excel in academic performance?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving that professional input. Indeed, you have summed it all. When a student is not sure of his next meal, when a student is not sure of where to lay his or her head, then you can be rest assured that that student’s performance will be grossly and negatively affected, even if he or she participates and goes to lecture theatres.

Madam Speaker, what we have actually gone through is a clear indication of group dynamics. Why did it happen that the students of Makerere University finally received their out-of-pocket allowances only when the Chancellor had to be sworn in? Was it a coincidence? 

Here is a situation where you are saying students must first open bank accounts. Where do you expect these poor students, who do not earn any salary, who depend on transfer payments, to get Shs 10,000 or 50,000? This is the amount that may be required by the various banking institutions as per their respective regulations. Where would you expect these people to get such kind of monies for opening an account? 

At the same time you also need to appreciate that the amount of money that is being given for a semester, even though it is Shs 368,000, cannot suffice for house rent and for the upkeep of the student for the entire semester.  

So, when these students saw that their colleagues who violently confronted the Chancellor of Makerere University were able to get payments, they saw that as the only avenue. 

At the same time, I am sorry the committee stopped short of telling us when Makerere University received its release. They have appended the release order from the Ministry of Finance indicating that the release was made to MUBS on the 28th of November. This was long after the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, who is also the Chancellor, had been installed. It shows that the problem is both managerial and administrative. (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the report specifies that both the Principal of Makerere University Business School and the Vice Chancellor of Makerere were satisfied with the timeliness of the releases from Ministry of Finance. 

In the presence of this very clear report, is it procedurally correct for a member to divert from the committee report, which we are debating, and create an impression that there is likelihood that there were late releases?

MRS HYUHA: The committee did not fall short of information. Look at Appendix D; it shows quarterly releases of the two institutions, Vote 136 of Makerere University and Vote 138 of Makerere University Business School. 

If you follow this, the last two quarterly releases I have given are of MUBS but the above column is for Makerere, which had received Shs 2,000,190,750. So, both of them had received the releases.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that matter has been settled by this report. They had been paid timely, and they admitted that they had received the money timely.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have been very careful with my statements and they are already in the Hansard. I believe that the errors or the problems that have been faced are both administrative and managerial. I did say that. And I was very calculative in my words when I said that the committee has stopped short of giving the succinct date. 

Madam Speaker, before I came to Parliament I was well versed with what it means to requisition funds from the Treasury. What is reflected in Appendix D only specifies the month and the amount. It falls short of succinctly stating the date, as it is in Appendix E. That is why I said I wish they had indicated that to us, we would then be able to know as to when this happened. 

I am very sure of what I am saying because I am using information, which they have attached to the report. Nevertheless, that should not derail this debate or what I feel I should be able to contribute in order to improve the management of resources and resource-flow into these important institutions.

Madam Speaker, one thing, which has increasingly continued, is that over a number of years many privately sponsored students have been seen to be the ones propelling operations of these institutions. I think Government needs to be a little proactive to avert some of these unfortunate occurrences. 

If the budget has already been submitted and we are sure the money is there, why should we have these administrative bottlenecks? They kill the patience of these students to the extent of becoming violent. Before we can even say whether something has happened, we go into this. 

When we go to the legal position of MUBS, I am a person who believes in being proactive. While talking about MUBS, and since we have the Minister responsible here, we also need to look at Uganda Management Institute. 

Before it became Uganda Management Institute it was Institute for Public Administration. Even after it had been changed into Uganda Management Institute (UMI), it used to award postgraduate diplomas and certificates in collaboration with Makerere University. But as I talk, UMI awards postgraduate degrees. Masters degrees are being awarded in UMI; I wonder under what legal framework that continues to exist? 

The Universities and Tertiary Institutions Act, which came in place in 2001 and was amended thereafter, had already deprived it of that responsibility. How come today UMI is able to award postgraduate degrees on its own when its legal status is questionable? 

I think this is the time when we should also be able to get a clarification from the Minister. Today we are talking about MUBS but tomorrow we shall talk about UMI if we do not at this point in time address that issue.

Madam Speaker, while it is demonstrated clearly that the ball was not in the courtyard of the Ministry of Education, let them be a little more vigilant. Let them take some trouble in the execution of their noble duties, to liase very effectively with their colleagues in the Ministry of Finance. 

I appreciate how difficult it is for MUBS and Makerere University solely to go to the Ministry of Finance. I would prefer that the Ministry of Education take a lead role even when these institutions have done all the documentation. Let them go and lobby their colleagues in the Ministry of Finance so that financial management bottlenecks that exist in these institutions are expeditiously addressed, to avert such unfortunate occurrences that we have experienced. Thank you.

5.42
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for their detailed report despite the fact that they had very little time. They did a good job; we have facts from which we can now debate.

Madam Speaker, I note with serious concern that the students went on strike when some of them had their cheques already remitted on their accounts in their banks. I think the problem here is communication. There is a problem of communication in Makerere, there is a problem of bureaucracy and there is a problem in the manner in which things are handled. 

I do not know who is going to change this great institution of learning. It still takes somebody three months to process a transcript. How long then does it take for a student to know that money has been remitted in their respective accounts? 

I hope the Chancellor, since we are honoured to have him with us here, will do something expeditiously to ensure that there is a change in the way business is done at Makerere University. Otherwise, this is a very big problem.  

Madam Speaker, I also note, interestingly, that from the figures produced by the Ministry of Finance and the estimates that are made, the government students appear to be paying more than the private students. 

The money for a government-sponsored student at Makerere is between Shs 2.4 to Shs 3.2 million. The most expensive private programme at Makerere for undergraduates is about Shs 900,000 a semester. This is minus living costs, which are estimated at about Shs 350,000 a semester, as indicated by what is given to the non-resident students. This means the undergraduate students that are privately sponsored are paying less than the government-sponsored students. 

I think the public should know this, because the impression you get all the time is that the private students are sustaining the universities. The truth is that they are supplementing –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I am a citizen of this country, I am a parent and I sponsor children at public universities in this country. The truth of the matter is that there are other costs involved. There are costs of stationery, textbooks; even if it means photocopying any document, the private student actually pays personally. 

There are also courses, which include fieldwork, and parents meet the costs for fieldwork. So, it is not true that because the tuition fees appear to be small, the private students are paying less. I would like my colleague to note that.

MR KIZIGE: I thank hon. Wagonda Muguli for his information. But the truth of the matter is if students are going to photocopy some materials, irrespective of whether you are government sponsored or private, you will dig into your pockets to do the photocopying. 

If it is research, the government students are facilitated within the Shs 3.2 million. Within that amount, they pay the lecturers’ salaries, they pay the living costs for the students and they charge the tuition. So, basically, the government-sponsored student is spending more at Makerere University than the private-sponsored student. That is in my own opinion. Madam Speaker, the public also needs to know this.

This leads me to my next point. Is it not time for a total paradigm shift? Is it not time for a change in the way we look at things? In many well-developed countries, universal education is paid for. The difference is that those students can really access credit to pay for their tuition. 

For a student to go on a strike and smash people’s windscreens because living allowances have been delayed and yet there is another student from the same village, from probably a poorer parent, who is paying for his education fully and he is not going on strike, I do not think that is fair.

Madam Speaker, on MUBS, maybe I could declare my interest here. I am a proud product of the Department of Commerce in the Faculty of Social Sciences. As a student leader, as a treasurer of the Makerere University Commerce Association, I helped to turn that faculty into the Faculty of Commerce, which is now the Makerere University Business School. 

Madam Speaker, I would love to continue to be associated with Makerere University because that is what produced me. Many people have gone through the Department of Commerce and Faculty of Commerce now.  When the Minister is going to do his investigation - and he is a very good lawyer, so he will come up with a legal position - that is the stand. 

We benefit a lot from outside there when we continue to be seen as products of Makerere University other than products of Nakawa University, or whatever will be born. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.49
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, my commendations go to the Committee on Social Services for expeditiously coming up with this detailed report. 

I would like to continue from where my honourable colleague started. My observation is that the communication gaps, not only at institutions but also in families, can lead to chaos. 

I strongly condemn the acts of indiscipline, the acts of strikes, in any institution of learning. But I would like to observe that the gross mistake that these students were faced with, the problem that they got, was lack of information on time.  

Whilst the problem is blamed on Makerere University students, I would like to observe that it was even more lugubrious for Nkrumah Hall as per the report. The warden of Nkrumah Hall submitted the list of students to be paid on a day of the strike! 

I would urge the administration to take action on some of the leaders who were lax in discharging their duties. I read from the papers that the Minister of Education was demanding disciplinary action on the students. I did not hear anything to do with action on a warden who is not acute in handling his duties.  

Madam Speaker, I also support the committee’s recommendation demanding for a detailed audit on the Makerere University Business School. I noted with great concern, on page 6, that the School budgeted this financial year for Shs 13.2 billion and only Shs 2.9 billion was approved. 

However, from the report we are told that actually the Shs 2.9 billion is well above the needs of the School. I now query, why the big discrepancy in the subvention funds that were required by the University compared to the disbursement from the Ministry, which the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education contained that they are well above the requirement of the Makerere University Business School? That is the main reason I really recommend and support the action of subjecting MUBS to a thorough audit. 

I was really caught by surprise by the fact the Chairman of the Joint Admissions Board has a figure of the number of students to be sponsored by Government in MUBS, but the Principal is talking about a different figure and the Chairman of the University Council is also talking about a different one. 

I think there is need for us to look deeper into the administrative problems in MUBS. Those should also be streamlined. If a parent does not know how many children he has, what are we talking about?

Madam Speaker, I was happy to read on page 9 that after several consultations, Makerere University Business School agreed to harmonize the unit cost per student with that of Makerere University. But the other part, which remained un-reconciled, is the amount of living-out allowances for government-sponsored students. I think there is dire need for that also to be reconciled. Otherwise, we might be running into problems

There was a recommendation that live bullets should not be used at students’ demonstrations. I want to extrapolate it and say we should stop the use of live bullets at demonstrations. There have always been problems of loss of lives. I think the Police department should make sure that the anti-riot police are not given this live ammunition, which can cause loss of lives.  

As for the demand of the Minister of Education to extend his period verifying the legal status by another three months, according to the report the Minister had earlier requested for two months, which I imagine expired in June. Now in November he is requesting for another three months, which will take us more or less up to March. That is almost a full year! 

I would like to urge the Minister of Education to handle this matter expeditiously and judiciously. 

I would like to avoid a situation where the weaknesses of Makerere University Business School are blamed on Makerere University. I would like to differ from that proposal of my colleague. I think Makerere University Business School should change both its names and logo. Let its weaknesses be attributed to itself rather than blaming a third party. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.56
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those who have thanked the chairperson of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, in this country we have got many tertiary institutions and these institutions generate their own funds also. We have got Kyambogo University, Mbarara University, Gulu University; all these know how to budget for their money and there are no strikes at their campuses. But when it comes to MUBS, it has got a problem.  

First, for Makerere University that one was solely an administrative problem. They would have sensitised the students before they started telling them to go and open bank accounts. The Ministry of Finance did its duty religiously, so the administration of Makerere University should be blamed for that.  

But for MUBS, there are other causes, Madam Speaker. The Principal of that School is extremely arrogant! He does not even seek advice from his seniors from Makerere University. That is why you find that he is even paying wrong figures. He is paying living-out allowances of Shs 368,000 per student whereas at Makerere they are paying Shs 350,000. 

If he had a good working relationship with the administration of Makerere University, he would not be having this problem. He feels that he is above everybody, more intelligent than everybody at Makerere University –(Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the Principal of Makerere Business School is not a Member of Parliament and cannot come to this House to defend himself. Is the member holding the Floor in order to describe him as arrogant and disrespectful when he cannot come to the Floor of this House to defend himself?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The difficulty we have is that he has been discussed in the report as presenting certain positions and doing certain things. So, it is difficult to debate without talking about him. But what I can say is that, the Committee on Social Services can always give him an opportunity to say something if he feels injured.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for that wise ruling. I have talked with that man several times and I know what I am talking about.  

Madam Speaker, another thing is having two budgets at MUBS. There is a budget for private students solely, basing on internally generated funds. Then there is another budget for government students solely, basing on subvention funds from the Government. 

Other tertiary institutions have got one budget. They make a pool and they all eat from one basket. But here we have got two baskets, one basket here and another basket there, as if the privately sponsored students’ money is meant for the administrators to eat, not to run the institution.  We have got that problem. They have to emulate examples from other tertiary institutions. (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. What we are debating now is going to be read by some people many years to come in the Hansard. 

The honourable member is making a very serious statement, that in the public institutions where they have private students the fees are purely for the administrators to eat. Can the honourable member substantiate and clarify what exactly he means, for the benefit of our future Hansard readers? If he does not, can he be polite enough to withdraw? I want to thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the point the honourable member is making is a very important point and it is very true. What Government gives to these institutions, which have self-generated revenues and their own revenues, is what is called subvention. 

A subvention is just a top-up. What the institution is supposed to do is to get its self-generated income, add the top-up from Government and make only one budget. So, the member is very correct to say that the two budgets should not be treated differently.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I thought the honourable Minister is well versed with what goes on in the management of independent institutions such as Makerere University and others. 

If Government commits itself to pay school fees for a given person, that money is budgeted and goes to that student. Then the funds, which are generated internally, are for different management. They can go to capital development, to making sure that the services at that institution continue properly. But you cannot mix the two. Is he, therefore, in order to confuse this House? 

Madam Speaker, I also want to clarify this; the main problem is because they have been demanding to use the internally generated revenue to top-up what the Government should have paid. If His Excellency the President pledged that Government would pay for a number of students, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to release that money directly to those institutions. 

However, when they fail, they want the internally generated funds to top-up for the failure of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release that money. Is the honourable Minister therefore in order to mix up a government policy on this Floor of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order. What hon. Dombo was objecting to, was the statement read by hon. Byabagambi that there are two budgets, one for the official work and one for eating. I think what he wanted John Byabagambi to explain is the eating part.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I will not accept another clarification. I said other tertiary institutions have got a single budget. It is only Makerere University Business School, which has got separate budgets. And I was very clear, I said, “as if another basket is there for administrators to eat.” I think I was very clear on what I said. On the legal matters –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give clarification for purposes of record. What is true in these government institutions, both tertiary and secondary, is that Government constitutes a body, which manages their affairs. In the case of secondary schools, it is a board of governors, which is authorised to manage all the affairs including funds. 

Although parents collect funds from PTA, which may be put on the account, the funds that come from Government may be banked on the board of governors’ account. But at the end of the day when the budget has been passed, the overall management is from the board of governors, which is authorised by Government.

In the case of tertiary institutions, it is governing councils, and at universities it is the council. I want you to bear in mind that in these tertiary institutions, including universities, we pass government budgets. We approve the Appropriation-in-Aid here, and we allow governing councils to collect those funds on behalf of Government. We pass those budgets here. 

So, it can have three accounts, it can have one account, but at the end of the day they must agree on priorities and give services to the institution, to the students.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you very much for that clarification, which simply means, different accounts and one budget. That is what I was referring to, not different budgets.

On the issue of the legal status of Makerere University Business School, I think we are giving this minister too much time. He was requested a long time ago to do the needful and he did not. 

I am sure this is going to be the last extension. Failure to do that, this Parliament should decide, Madam Speaker, where Makerere University Business School is supposed to be. 

Makerere University Business School students want to be at Makerere University and we have to consider the interest of the students. It is their pride; they want to hold a certificate bearing “Makerere University”. 

Makerere University Business School should become a constituency of Makerere University, not an independent university. Another university will go to East; I will support my sister down there.  Thank you very much.

6.07
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the elaborate report despite the short time they had. I want to thank the Minister and all the parties who really got involved in assisting this country in getting out of the problems at that particular time. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would like the committee to be of further assistance on the question about where Makerere University Business School wants to go. Does it want to become a public university on its own? 

This question is being put to stakeholders and stakeholders have given their views. I have not seen the view of the Ministry of Education and Sports, which was the very organisation that decided to establish Makerere University Business School. 

I do not think there is anything in Makerere University Business School currently. That was the institution of commerce for some of us and we wanted it to remain an institution of commerce. But the Ministry woke up one day and decided to transfer their faculty, which they are now disowning. 

I really feel perturbed by this kind of attitude. I think the Minister should tell us the educational roadmap concerning this institution, what he had in mind in the next 50 years. I think that is what this Parliament should debate. I do not think it should be the stakeholders’ views to be brought here.  Otherwise, I am also a stakeholder. I should also bring my view here to be considered passionately.  

Madam Speaker, this also brings me to the question of the name. This question of the name has brought up a lot of emotion, which to me is unfortunate. 

Some of us are carrying names of those old men who did not go to school; they are not our names. When I say that, I really mean it. Your parent gives you a name and you carry it, but it does not mean that you should relinquish the name. Maybe in some cultures they do, I do not know, but more often we carry those names. 

That institution is nothing else other than Makerere University Business School. You deleted it from Makerere University and brought it to Nakawa so it should carry the name. I have heard about Rubaga in Jinja, Rubaga in Mbarara, Kamuli; so I think we should not debate this aspect with sentiment. 

We should go to the legal situation. After it has been defined, we shall be able to decide what we want. Many people would want to remain with the name for sentimental reasons, or otherwise for identity.  

Another issue is that, we must also appreciate whenever change is introduced. Many scholars of management, including the Rt hon. Prime Minister, will tell us that whenever change is introduced many people, including the conservatives, will resist it. They will resist it and we will have problems If we are not one step ahead, we shall be defeated. 

This is why I am saying this failure is not going to be a Makerere University Business School failure. It is a Ministry of Education failure. 

Ministry of Education should come out and be able to tell us how it is ready to manage this change because it is a change, definitely. It is a different way of education from the one we received in terms of numbers, seed birth, equipment and so on and so forth. So, I want to also point that out.  

The other issue I want to bring out, Madam Speaker, is on Page 12 where they mention the complex –(Interruption)- I will be winding up soon. They say it is a financial, legal, administrative, social, political or personal - I have heard arrogance - issue. 

I just want to add one thing, that there is nobody who is not political. Right from the Leader of Government Business, to the Minister of Education, to Margaret Zziwa Member of Parliament of Kampala, Movement, we are all political. All these people, from the Chancellor to the Vice Chancellor, are political. 

When the issues become hot, you go to your appointing authority. My appointing authority is in Kisenyi. They are the ones who elected me. You go to your appointing authority and confront him with this insubordinate person. Because I think if this is an issue of insubordination, it should not be termed political. 

All of you are political, right from the Executive, Prime Minister, the ministers, those principals, the chancellors and everybody. I wanted to add my voice to that issue. I think we should not be narrow it –(Interruption). 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Zziwa for giving way. The Rt hon. Prime Minister is technocratic and, therefore, almost away from politics. He has no constituency. So, it makes him a bit neutral. (Laughter).

MRS ZZIWA: I thank hon. Kasirivu and it is good the constitutional review process is going on, so I do not know what will happen. 

Anyway, I will go to another issue, Madam Speaker. May I be informed what the development budget of Makerere University Business School is? We want to know how much you, the Committee on Social Services, allocate to Vote 138 for development expenditure? 

Knowing very well that today the Governing Council may have admitted so many students, now in the new era of computers, how much money do you allocate –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Is it the Committee on Social Services, which allocates? I am happy you are a member of the Budget Committee.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you. You recommend to the Budget Committee. When you recommend, we approve. But I want to find out because at times I get –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you should be asking the Minister.

MRS ZZIWA: Okay, and as I wind up I just want to mention that there has been a lot of talk on Makerere University Business School, a child of Makerere University. I would like to know what other reasons, other than personal, are being pointed out. 

I have been able to appreciate the fact that you have asked Makerere University Business School to be audited. I heard some time in 2001 or 2002 that the origin of some of the squabbles was because they thought Makerere University Business School was getting a lot of money and not taking it to Makerere University, and this could have been insubordination of some kind. 

We would like to find out what the other problems are. If they are there, is Makerere University completely exonerated? Is it free, or it should be audited like Makerere University Business School is being audited? Thank you.

6.16
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the Committee on Social Services for the good piece of work they have done in quite a very short time. 

The MUBS scenario is a very good lesson to Government and to this Parliament. Earlier, strikes or demonstrations were taken casually by this Parliament and the blame would automatically go to Government. But I think this scenario has exposed a lot of things. 

One, you hear that external people are involved in the strikes, you hear that some Members of Parliament were involved and later on you learn that even Government had released their funds a little earlier than usual. It is very bad for us, if there is any Member of Parliament that would be involved in a strike, to discredit Government when Government has done its part.  

I have learnt from the report, on Page 8, that it is actually a problem of administration at the School but not of Government. Although the committee has not provided a very strong recommendation in connection with that problem of management, it has been left hanging. 

There is a very big problem of management. This money was released a long time ago, but you can imagine students went on strike well knowing that Government is retaining their money. It is painful! 

I saw how the Minister was battling here to explain that the money had been released, that what they were going to release was only money as an advance. It is painful. So, I do not know what is going to be done to the administrator of the School. There is a problem of management.  

Madam Speaker, I do not know what the problem is surrounding the logo. These people are behaving as if they are co-wives! They are behaving as if they are private business entrepreneurs. These are government institutions but they are still fighting over a government logo. Although it is a Makerere University logo, it is a government logo because the institution belongs to Government. 

Why should one institution say that they must take this logo and the other one must have their own logo, and yet the law actually brought Makerere University Business School to Makerere? So, until that is sorted out by the Minister or this Parliament, the question of the logo should not yet come up. 

This means the leaders of these institutions do not know their area of jurisdiction; they are always in ultra vires. The law that establishes Makerere University Business School is very clear. I do not see any reason why we keep tagging Makerere University Business School to Makerere. 

We already have bad feelers that Makerere University is no longer interested in Makerere Business School. It is very clear. Nakawa was the most popular commercial college in the whole country. Makerere University went ahead and killed it. 

Students who would be going for B.Com at Makerere were going to Nakawa and they opted to study for a diploma in business studies other than doing a degree in commerce at Makerere. So, Makerere opted to kill that institution. It is an allegation yet to be verified. 

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Makerere did not take part in killing former Nakawa National College of Commerce. This was done by a statutory instrument from the Ministry of Education, of 1997. But the statutory instrument was to establish Nakawa as a constituent college of Makerere University. 

Secondly, the current minister passed another statutory instrument of 2000, No. 51, also establishing Nakawa as a constituent college. But the problem started when that statutory instrument included the establishment of a council at Nakawa. 

The council now would be represented at Makerere University Council and yet it was a constituent college. In other words, establishing a council and appointments body at Nakawa made it an affiliated institution, which was now confirmed when the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act was debated and passed in this Parliament. 

That is why, as stated on Page 11, Nakawa behaves both as a constituent college and an affiliated college. You must differentiate the two. You cannot be constituent and tomorrow you are affiliated. Now, if it remained constituent, the question of the logo, the question of a name would not arise. 

So, as somebody recommended, if this institution is back as a constituent college of Makerere University, then all these quarrels would not be there. But they will be there because some forces want to be independent, affiliated to the university. 

Therefore, Makerere University says, “If you are affiliated to me, you will only deal with me through the Institute of Economics at Makerere University. You do not have representatives on the Council.” Now, this challenges Statutory Instrument No. 51 passed by the Minister of Education in the year 2000.

That is why on Page 12 we are saying that the committee should try to find out the cause of this delay in operationalising the law. If the law were operationalised, all these conflicts would not be there. The conflicts are there because the wrong law was passed and it came to this House for amendment. 

However, in April we gave the Minister two months and he said he was going to bring an amendment. The Committee would have recommended accordingly how to iron out these differences. 

So, we are here talking about issues that are in the law, which are clearly written out. They need to be sorted out and Makerere lives alone, Nakawa lives alone or Nakawa lives with Makerere or it lives under the ambit of Makerere. Simple. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I thank the member for giving way. I want to give the member on the Floor information about the “assassination” of Nakawa College of Business Studies (NCBS). You are actually right; Nakawa had two campuses, the Bugolobi campus and the main campus. 

There was even a proposal that instead of killing off NCBS, if the faculty is interested in the structures they could take over the structures at the main campus of Nakawa and let the college move into the Bugolobi campus. It was rejected. The objective was actually to kill off this one. After killing NCBS, they want to kill MUBS.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Muzoora finish and I move this side.   

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I have vital information to provide my colleague on the Floor.

Madam Speaker, I sat here listening, but I want to inform my colleague and the House that I taught at that college and I was a Principal in that college. 

At the time when they were skimming to take that college to Makerere University, I was a member of the Council and I disagreed with the Minister. I told the Minister that not everybody has got to be a graduate. There is room for people who are not graduates. 

I asked the Minister, “Why do you want to kill the endeavour of an institution which is producing very good people with diplomas, with professional qualifications in banking, in accountancy, because there is somebody who wants to come here and spend money and create this as part of Makerere University?” I said, “I do not agree with you, it is wrong”, and I am glad I have lived to see that that it was wrong. (Laughter). 

It was wrong then, it is wrong now. Society is not made up of only graduates. There are people who have lower qualifications and they have a role to play in society. I think the earlier that institution is turned back to the position where it was, the better for the country.

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order honourable members!  Yes, hon. Muzoora.

MR KABAREEBE: I think the contribution of hon. Mwandha directly answers my honourable Engineer, very clearly. I thank you very much for that contribution and I beg to continue. 

This institution should be given an opportunity for transition. The students who are there now can remain under Makerere University but the new entrants enter as different students of a different university, if the Minister can accept to come up with a new law to introduce that place as a university. 

I am surprised that the committee is mentioning something different. I have the document of the students and the student leaders addressed to the Speaker; I do not know why he never got a copy. But I have a copy here, which is saying that their position was that they want this place as a university but on a transitional arrangement. 

I have this document here and I will lay it on the Table to show you their position. These students were called transitional by Makerere University, that those who are already there should continue until they finish under Makerere University but new entrants, under the new law, can come in under a different name.  

Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up.

MR KABAREEBE: Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not respond to the heckling. Hon. Nandala, please do not heckle the member.

MR KABAREEBE: I am a transitional man. I am talking of extension even of the period of the National Resistance Movement so that everybody can organize himself politically. I am the architect of the three-year transition and it is advocated for by hon. Kakooza. We shall come up with a document, which will allow this Parliament to remain in place for three years, even the President, up to LC I. I am sorry for digressing but I beg to finish.  (Interruptions)

MRS RAINER: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Muzoora for giving way. I understand you are a man of transition. For how long do you want to be in transition? When are you ending and where are you ending? Is he in order to remain in transition until he dies? (Laughter). 

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this point of order. 

First of all, I was here in this House after some matters appeared in the press that the Members of Parliament wanted to extend their time and the Speaker sat there and made it clear to the whole of Uganda that we had no intentions of doing that. That put an end to that debate. Is he in order to start bringing it up again when in fact we are discussing other serious matters? 

In fact tomorrow the press may capture that other matter, which makes the public resent us. Is he in order to divert us from such serious matters and bring matters, which may bring controversy and resentment for us from our electorate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he was addressing the transition proposed by the students of Makerere University Business School. Please, wind up.

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I am talking about the transition of MUBS. We shall have the current students continue and finish and thereafter have a new name, if the Minister will have brought it to Parliament. I do not know how the other transition came in.

There is mention in the report about the use of live bullets on students and other demonstrators. It is very unfortunate. But I think also the demonstrators should be organized. They should have protection maybe by the Police, so that we can know that this is a demonstration, which is lawful. 

But you begin demonstrating when we have got the second biggest person of the country at a University, the Vice-President! You think a Vice-President could be escorted by soldiers with rubber bullets and canisters! Then you throw stones and you think you can survive that? 

So, I beg the students that when they are going to demonstrate let the demonstration be lawful; like this one, it was a very genuine demonstration. There was no need for fighting. The Police should protect them. The Police can liase with the Minister, inform him of a discrepancy over which the students would like to make a peaceful demonstration, and they even accompany them. 

However, where they do it privately, and unfortunately the Vice-President is in the place, they should not expect rubber bullets. You expect real fire. That is why I am saying that the students should get organized. Demonstrations should be lawful so that we know when they are going to happen and the students are not hurt. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to other colleagues who have thanked the committee for this comprehensive report, despite the short time. 

I would like to start with Page 14 and thank the committee for coming up with a recommendation that there should be a special audit by the Auditor General on Makerere University Business School. And there is also a time limit to that. 

Madam Speaker, the problem that I see, which actually has also been acknowledged by the committee, is that of the 457 students. Once the Auditor General can establish that these students are there and the releases were either made or not, then the whole matter will be put to rest. That is the crux of the matter; the various institutions not agreeing on this.

Therefore, I would like to really thank –(Interruptions)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I am giving is that as members may recall, even before the committee came up with this recommendation I had undertaken here that we would set up a special audit for Makerere University Business School. We have already constituted the audit by a letter dated 3 December 2003, addressed to the Auditor General by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. 

We require the Auditor General to carry out a special audit on the school. Maybe to be more specific - so that we may save time debating this matter - I want to read the letter and lay it on the Table.

“The office of the Auditor General, Kampala.
Special audit of Makerere University Business School: 

Over the last three weeks, the Makerere University Business School students’ strike over living-out allowances has been under discussion with Government and Parliament. 

However, during these discussions, it became very clear that the details about the total student numbers and the split between Government of Uganda sponsored students, that is resident and non-resident, and private students were not at all clear. 

Equally clear was the unit cost per student and how this relates to the actual fees paid.  

It is necessary for Government to be reassured on how the public funds transferred and collected by this institution are utilized and accounted for.

This is, therefore, to request you to undertake a special audit of Makerere University Business School accounts as soon as possible, as my efforts to get this information from the Accounting Officer have not been successful. 

I am assuming that the audited accounts for the Financial Year 2001/2002 and 2002/2003 are already available and you will be able to draw on findings there to appraise Government regarding the above expressed concerns. 

We would be interested to know how the fees paid by private students compare with those paid by government-sponsored students. In case of cross subsidies, this should be estimated and explained. 

Signed, Permanent Secretary.” 

I beg to lay it on the Table and to say that even before the recommendation, we had constituted a special audit. I beg to inform you.

MRS BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I was actually debating the report of the committee. Nevertheless, I appreciate the information given by the hon. Rukutana. I was just saying that I am so happy because I think the truth will now come out. 

I would like to turn to page 8, the second paragraph, where it says: “It was, therefore, a surprise for it (the committee) to hear that Makerere University Business School had no funds to pay for the additional students”. This was by the Ministry of Education. 

I am also surprised that the Ministry of Education did not know about this problem. Some members would know the governing council has got a representative of the Ministry of Education. There had been correspondence on this matter and I am not going to go into the genesis and end of this. 

I was a bit taken aback when the Ministry of Education came up and said they did not know about this matter. Because if you are part and parcel –(Interruption) - I am sorry I am not feeling well. I want to make my submission and go away. I am surprised that the Ministry of Education is claiming it did not know what was happening there. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to also commend the committee. Actually, they did say that it is a policy matter and, therefore, the Ministry should come up with the unit cost per faculty so that it can be uniform. 

The unit cost has also been a source of contention. Once the Ministry of Education does it, it will be very useful. If it had done it before, I am sure there would not have been a problem even at the Business School.

I would like to turn to the Shs 368,000, which is paid by MUBS. This is different from Makerere University where they said this amount is for first year students in the first semester. For subsequent semesters, they pay Shs 250,000. 

In the meeting that was held here on Monday this matter was put to the Principal. He did say they got this figure from the Dean of Makerere University. What I do not know, however, is whether when he gave them this figure he elaborated that it was for the first semester. I had hoped that at the time they would have been able to handle it and find out why there was this discrepancy.

On the legal status, Madam Speaker, in April this year we had a report from the Committee on Social Services. That report did make some recommendations to this House, and it was adopted. Apparently it seems that between then and now, there has been a change of heart. 

I do appreciate the need of our colleagues who come from Eastern Uganda to have a public university. It is a very noble cause. On the other hand, this should not stop any public institution that could qualify to become a public university. 

There should not be a pre-condition that unless there is a university in Eastern Uganda, there is not going to be another institution in this country. Therefore, I would like to appeal to our colleagues from Eastern Uganda that we are going to be part of you as you lobby to have a university in your region, but you should not suffocate other institutions that may wish to have this status.

Madam Speaker, I would have said much but as I said, I am not feeling well. So, finally, hon. Zziwa asked the chairperson whether there was capital development for MUBS. I have this to say about it. Government does not give capital development to MUBS. The internally generated money has mainly gone to develop the infrastructure at that place. 

I am sure those who go for classes there know how much the management of that school has done to improve the infrastructure in the last five years without capital development. 

Therefore, I want it to be on record that, despite the doubting Thomases and the report, in my view the management of MUBS has done a commendable job with the money that has been internally generated. It has improved infrastructure, which is there for everybody to see. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.43
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make some remarks. First of all I want to thank the chairperson of the Committee of Social Services and the members for good work done in such a short time. Allow me make a few observations with regard to the issues contained in the report. 

When you look at Page 5 of the report, it is noted that the committee learnt from the Principal that for the previous two years mentioned, government did not make the submissions to the School. 

Madam Speaker, these students mentioned here are government-sponsored. If Government did not release the funds for government-sponsored students and they expected them to continue to be paid from the contributions from the private students, would they still remain government-sponsored students?

The committee goes ahead to observe on Page 8 that actually the Ministry of Finance does not owe the Business School any money. I would understand this if it were in reference to the current financial year where all the money has been released according to the budget. 

However, you cannot say that money for two consecutive financial years has not been released and then in the same report you say it has been observed that the Ministry of Finance does not owe the School any money!

On the issue of audit, I am surprised that for an institution of this nature such an anomaly should come up. Some people are talking about 1,090 students, another authority is talking of 1,040 and another authority is talking about 1,136. 

These students get registration numbers. You do not even need to look at the names. Who admits them and who gives them the registration numbers? What are the official names by which they are known through the system? This is a very simple thing to verify. It should be done expeditiously so that the people of Uganda know what is actually happening in public school –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Dombo for giving way. On the problem of money generated from the privately sponsored students, if the ministers were complying with the Budget Act, whereby a minister is supposed to give quarterly reports to this House about Appropriation-in-Aid, maybe these problems would not have come up. But have you ever heard any minister giving reports on Appropriation-in-Aid? Nobody! The Budget Act is faulty.

MR MWANDHA: This matter of Appropriation-in-Aid is very important. Indeed, as the Budget Committee we have appealed to the Prime Minister to call on these ministers whose institutions earn Appropriation-in-Aid, to respect the Budget Act and submit quarterly reports to this Parliament. I have not had a reply yet but I hope that the Prime Minister is working on it. 

When it comes to institutions of higher learning, my colleagues from the Committee on Finance would remember that the Minister of Finance himself admitted that he was getting problems with getting the actual figures from Makerere University. 

When he is budgeting he wants to know what Makerere University is earning, but Makerere University are not willing to part with information with regard to their internally generated revenue. The Minister himself said it and it was in the Committee on Finance –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, for the purpose of a correct record on our Hansard, when I was still the Vice-Secretary of Makerere University three years ago, the Minister if Finance would ask for information about the amount concerning internally generated funds. This information would be given to him. He would not leave out a penny. 

The Minister of Finance would get this information every year whenever he asked for it, and every year these internally generated funds are accounted for independent of the government subvention. 

So, these institutions are supposed to do that, and I hope they are still doing so. They submit two budget accounts for the money, subvention and money internally generated. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, that information should have been more useful if it had been submitted to the committee when the Minister of Finance was raising the objections. At that time it would have been more meaningful because it was the Minister of Finance expressing dissatisfaction with the way Makerere was conducting its affairs with regard to the internally generated resources. I think it is not very useful information at this moment.

Nevertheless, I was saying that when you come to the recommendations on page 12, No. 2 says that the system of communication between the central administration and the students should be improved. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell this House that a few years ago I was the Guild President of Makerere University. And I am happy to note that when I was the Guild President there was not even a single strike. That was basically because all the information that we got was relayed to students in time, and we made them anticipate what was expected.

At that time we had Uncle George Kihuguru, the then Dean of Students. He was very timely in getting information and telling the student leaders what was happening. Right now I think somebody in the University is basically not doing his job to the extent that it required the students to go on strike before somebody could work, day and night, to ensure that the money was paid the following day. Under such circumstances, the students also run out of options.

One thing I want to tell you is that those students are young. Some of them have never been exposed to areas of responsibility. They can quickly think of, “Let us go on strike”. I was a student leader and I am happy that I went to university as a mature entrant. I could tell whether a strike of that magnitude was helpful or not.

Madam Speaker, there is this recommendation that the outsiders should stop influencing students. I want to tell you that unless you make your wound clean, you cannot blame flies when they fall on it. There is no outsider – which outsider now? Many Members of Parliament here are also students at Makerere University. 

Somebody has been talking of many members who are bald and are also students at the University. So, if somebody is bald, it does not necessarily show that he is an outsider. 

What we should be doing in Makerere is that if we should give information let us give it. If we should pay outside allowances, let us pay them. For the whole year I was Guild President, no outsider called me to influence me on any matter. We sat with the students and agreed or disagreed on issues as and when they came, and we ran the matters of the University amicably. 

Prof. Nsibambi was there as a lecturer, business was going on well and nobody was complaining. But now every time somebody fails to do his job, he diverts it and says there has been outside intervention.  

The same thing has been said in AGOA. When our fellow Members of Parliament, the Workers’ Representatives, went to there, there was no outside influence at all. But because somebody was failing to do a job, somebody hurried to say there is external influence. (Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Why did the committee came up with this information? The committee reliably learnt that when the Police went and dispersed students when they had gathered to talk about the “third term”, some Members of Parliament were cited around where the students had gathered. 

Later, the students said, “We are not going to allow any function to take place on this campus because the administration has brought in Police to disperse us”. That information had not penetrated to the management of the University. 

So, when we went for the function of installing the Chancellor of the University, the students were still unhappy that the function they had planned to have was cancelled by the Police. Management did not come to get that information, which would have helped it to handle the students accordingly.  

MR DOMBO: I want to thank you very much but that is a different thing all together. That is not external interference like the report is saying. So, I want –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I have been deliberately keeping quiet because as you know I am the Chancellor and MUBS is affiliated to Makerere University. I want to assure you that I cannot kill one part of my arm, as it has been alleged by the Principal of MUBS. Let it be recorded, I was greatly saddened by that statement. I cannot kill part of my arm. 

But the point being made about external influence is this, if there are political leaders who would like to carry out political activities at Makerere, they must follow proper procedure. They must ask for permission and when it is granted, they proceed to carry out their political activities.  

Obviously, Makerere should not be closed to any external forces. It must receive all external forces but following procedures. 

I was informed by the Vice Chancellor that there was a group, I think it was UYD, who wanted to address students and they did not ask for permission. They merely gave notice to the Acting Vice Chancellor that they are holding a rally. 

Prof. Opio, I think, disallowed the function and that annoyed students very much. So, there is more to what you are hearing. But I was deliberately keeping quiet because as Chancellor I must remain dignified and impartial. I thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add to what the Chancellor has said, that Police was right then because the group, which was going to take the rally there, was one-sided. But at Nkumba University they had the same discussion and there was no Police.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that for the time I was Guild President at Makerere University, I never sought permission to hold a rally in the University but I gave notice. I informed the University administration that we had invited politicians. We gave them information.  

I believe that a university is a centre and focal point of learning. It is a place where people should come to exercise their intellectual ideas. Whereas Police stopped the rally, or the University Vice Chancellor prevented students from inviting UYD because in his perception he would be annoying the powers that be, the same students went to Nkumba College of Commerce. This is a private institution and they went there and talked and there was no strike.  

I want our administrators, and we are lucky now that we have the Chancellor in this House, to have a changed attitude about the way we run the affairs of the students in this country. 

I am a person who would wish to think twice before I seek permission. If you are a Chancellor at the same time the Prime Minister and you want to host the President of Reform Agenda, definitely, you would also want to find out what the mind of the appointing authority is about this particular person before you grant the permission, because this is a public institution.  

So, Madam Speaker, whereas I respect the views on seeking permission the way the Prime Minister would want, I feel that at a university we should be a little bit liberal so as to enable people behave in a better manner.

Finally, on the issue of the culprits, the committee noted that it is not good to use live bullets, but the recommendations were not as tough, Madam Speaker. Recommendation No. 5 says, “Use of live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations must stop.” But even those who used live bullets must be reprimanded! 

Two, what has happened to that innocent girl who was in a lecture room and was shot by a stray bullet? We would wish the committee to go ahead to say that adequate compensation and treatment should be given to that student. I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.27
LT WILLIAM KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee, the ministry and all parties, which enabled this marathon exercise to culminate into such a good report. I also want to make a few observations.  

Before I go into the details of the report, there are major observations I wanted to make about the demonstrations. First of all, I am trying to find out the difference between a strike and a demonstration, in terms of the actual definition and the acts.  

What I know is that, demonstrations are a useful tool if you use them properly. They are even lawful. But the problem comes when you divert and use them unlawfully. 

We have said the soldiers or the policemen and all those parties should not use live bullets, and I support this totally. But I want to add my voice to say that we politicians, or everybody who wants to use these students, should be educated that there are also civilized means of using this type of tools. 

When you are demonstrating, there are rotten eggs and tomatoes that you can use. But the moment you start using the hard objects like stones, it then becomes very unfortunate.  

There is a story I heard about sometime back, that there are people who went into a forest and they wanted mangoes up in a forest where the monkeys were. So they would throw stones up the tree and the monkeys would throw back mangoes. 

So, if you are going to throw stones at armed soldiers, their natural response would be to return with what they have –(Interjections)- well, soldiers were escorting the Vice President but even policemen are human beings. What I wanted to drive home is, let us educate people, even put it in our syllabus- (Interruption).

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have served in armed forces, I am RO 700, is it in order to compare a professional officer with monkeys? Professional soldiers are able to differentiate between stones and mangoes!  

We are talking of professionals who are trained to go and quell a strike. We are talking of professional policemen who are going to quell a peaceful demonstration. Is he in order to equate professional people with monkeys who exchange stones with mangoes?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, professional officers cannot be monkeys. 

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I entirely agree that professional people cannot be monkeys.  Now, I was talking about how civilized society behaves while demonstrating. The point I was trying to emphasize is that, even if it has to be taught to these students that as you demonstrate, other societies use rotten tomatoes and eggs, we should do it.  

If they still insist that rather than walk peacefully they demonstrate and shout then you have to use some of those types of tools. But for heavens sake, let them use those soft tools as we urge the other parties. (Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: I would like to inform the honourable member that these students had not had their living-out allowance, so they did not have money. Where would they have got rotten tomatoes and eggs - all those need money.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, it appears to me that my colleague, hon. William Kinobe, is suggesting that the police were justified to use live bullets because the students were using hard objects. He seems to be saying the only way to counter this was to use live bullets. 

I want him really to clarify what he has in mind. Is he saying that the police were justified to use live bullets because the students were using stones?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think I have understood what he was saying. He is saying we should have a culture of lawful demonstrations where we use rotten tomatoes and eggs. That is what he is saying.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, many members who have been contributing have already talked a lot about the other side and I believed the message had sunk.  Nobody had laboured to attribute part of the blame to the demonstrators; violence gets violence. 

Let us try to urge all parties, the students inclusive, that if they are going to demonstrate in civilized society and insist that they use something other than peacefully walking and shouting, then for heavens sake look for soft objects. Then we will also urge the police to use soft objects like rubber bullets, tear gas and so forth. I am not saying that we should definitely use bullets; I cannot support that.  

Madam Speaker, I wanted to agree entirely with the hon. Minister of Education and Sports that in resolving the saga of Makerere University Business School and Makerere University, there is much more than meets the eye. This House has now received just a bit of the testimonies from members. 

There have been very serious allegations that there is a Baganda conspiracy that wants to kill Makerere University Business School. Then another argument from the Easterners says they do not want Buganda to get another university when they do not have one.  

There are so many underlying factors. The sooner we address the real issues underlying all these matters, the sooner we shall get a solution. There are undisclosed interests underlying the resolution of this problem. I entirely agree –(Interruption).

MR MWANDHA: The information I want to give my colleague is that as far as we Easterners are concerned, if this Government is going to create another public university, in all fairness it should not be again in Kampala. The university must go to the East because we shall be the only region without a public university. What did we do not to deserve a public university?  

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I entirely support the Eastern region, but I entirely agree that the Government is not creating another university. It is just defining what Makerere University Business School is, because it is already there.  They are just defining what Makerere University Business School is going to be, not creating a new one like we recently created Gulu.  

If they are going to create a new one, I strongly support the Easterners. The next university we create, for heavens sake, let it be created in the East.  

Madam Speaker, I have just a few points. The committee tried to address the matters but some of the points the committee raised were left hanging.  The genesis of some of the problems we had in Makerere University Business School, which the committee still did not address, was the genesis of continuous diversions for two consecutive financial years when Makerere University Business School failed to get money. Up to now, that matter has never been resolved.  

I went to the committee when they were discussing and I asked the hon. Minister of Finance, “If you do not owe Makerere University Business School any money this financial year, is it true you do not owe them money for any financial year?”  He did not answer that. I want him to answer that as I conclude my submission.  

What happened –(Mrs Hyuha rose_)- let me first finish this point because this is your report. The committee, on Page 5, first paragraph –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I strongly appreciate that hon. Kinobe is among the Members of Parliament who came and attended our proceedings in the previous two days when we were handling these matter. However, the statement he is raising, that we left this matter hanging, is unfortunate 

If you internalise No. 8, on Page 8, this is our conclusion. We received these contradicting reports about releases, about arrears and about the unit cost they used. 

One group was saying we should have used Shs 2.4 million per student and another one saying we should use Shs 3.2 million. Another group was saying that they have additional students totalling to 457, but the other group was saying, no, they budgeted for these. 

That is why we concluded that we have a special audit to establish this. Certainly, a special audit would come out with the truth on whether funds were diverted or not. It is not hanging.

MR RUKUTANA: I recall hon. Dombo also raised this issue and I want to quote exactly from the report of the committee. Page 5 of the report states, “The Committee also learnt from the Principal that for the previous two academic years, 2001/2002 and 2002/2003, due to inadequate releases from Ministry of Finance…” That is the point hon. Kinobe is raising.  

But when you get to Page 6, there is a table of figures submitted by Makerere University Business School. In the first table, the third column, there is the approved subvention of 2001/2002. It was Shs 2,430,149,004 and the actual release was exactly Shs 2,230,149,004. In 2002/2003, the approved subvention was Shs 2,907,000,000 and the actual release was Shs 2,645,533,000.  

Now apart from this small difference, it cannot be true, judging from these figures that were submitted by Makerere University Business School itself, for anybody to say that Finance did not release adequate funds. Because as you all know, there is no sector or vote holder that gets 100 percent of what it budgets for.  You present your budget but taking into consideration our constraints, we give you what we can afford. We bring it to this House and this House appropriates it.  

These figures submitted by Makerere University Business School show that for 2001/2002 what was appropriated by this House, the Shs 2.43 billion, was released in full. In 2003, there is just a small difference. So, it cannot be true to say that for 2001/2002 there were inadequate releases when they did submit figures showing the amounts that were released.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I think that is misdirected effort. The Minister himself was at that committee meeting. The chairperson of the Governing Council said in his submission that one of the reasons they refused further diversion was because they had diverted the funds and when they got the additional students, the Ministry told them that they would send them money.  The money did not go there yet Makerere University got their money. 

Makerere University was saying, “For us we do not know why Makerere University Business School never asked for their money.”  

I will read what the chairperson of the Governing Council said: “In December 2001, following the failure to get funding from Government, Council had to transfer funds from the internally generated revenue to pay the living-allowances for government-sponsored students.” That was submission for 2001.  

Then he goes ahead to say, “In November 2002, the School Council was again constrained to transfer a sum of Shs 176 million from internally generated funds to pay government-sponsored students because they had failed to get any funding.”  

Now, this is a submission that came to your committee and the crux of the matter has been the arrears. The Ministry of Finance has been telling Makerere University Business School, “forget about the arrears”, and yet you are saying they were paid.  We want to get the actual picture.  

That is why, Madam Speaker, I would suggest that instead of auditing only Makerere University Business School, let them audit the entire government students’ scheme. We shall get to know how much money was released towards this scheme, how much went to Makerere University and how much went to Makerere University Business School in the respective years that are mentioned here.  That is one.  

Two, there are conflicting figures about the admitted students. We all know that the admission of students is under Joint Admissions Board (JAB), which is at the main campus in Makerere.  If there is a conflict in the information, why do you go to the receiving end instead of the starting point?  

Let the special audit also cover how many students Government actually looks after, because really you are going to have problems  When you send money to MUBS, the unit cost is at Shs 2.4 million, when you send it to Makerere it is Shs 3.2 million. You do not know even how many of the students in Makerere University are under high intensive courses and how many are under low intensive ones. 

I think it should be a comprehensive audit of all the government-sponsored students since 2001 to date. This would help us understand the entire picture. We shall then know how much money Ministry of Finance sent to Makerere, how much is remaining -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kinobe, I do not know whether 8(a) and 8(b) on Page 14 do not take care of your problem.

LT KINOBE: I have read 8(a) and that is why as I conclude I will make a recommendation on 8(a). I entirely agree with some of the recommendations contained there. 

However, I wanted to propose an amendment to 8 to say,  “the committee recommends that a special audit by the Auditor General be carried out - other than MUBS – of government-sponsored schemes since 2001 and –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Makerere, Kyambogo or in Mbarara?

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, the Joint Admissions Board in Makerere does the admission of all government-sponsored students centrally. They are the ones who send students to Kyambogo, to MUBS, and they are the ones who retain students at their centre. (Interruption).

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this matter has been discussed. It is a joint admission. The students who went to Mbarara University tally, the students who went to Kyambogo tally, Makerere University they tally, Gulu University the same; it is only one tertiary institution, MUBS. So, why do you go to audit others where from the records it is very clear that these numbers tally?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the Council.

DR BYATIKE: Madam Speaker, this is a question of admissions, that is why they call it Joint Admissions Board. Everybody is represented there so they must all know how many students were sent to their various institutions.  

The question of saying the Chairman of the Joint Admissions Board is at Makerere, therefore, Makerere decides how many are going where is not correct. This is a joint decision taken by the Joint Admission Board, which has got a composition from all these different universities, Makerere, Kyambogo and Mbarara. This is why it is called Joint Admissions Board. 

There is no question of Makerere trying to play monkey tricks – I do not mean Makerere are monkeys, no. So, that is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Byatike, are the private students also admitted by the Joint Admissions Board?

DR BYATIKE: Yes, it is the Joint Admissions Board, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both government and private students?

DR BYATIKE:  Yes.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, can I clarify? What the honourable members are asking for is exactly what the audit group is going to do. 

If you are to look at the number of students that were admitted at Makerere University Business School, definitely you have to go to the records of the Joint Admissions Board. So, you do not need to say, “Look at Gulu, or look at this” Definitely, all the admissions will be looked at, even the finances will be looked at.  

In other words, if members want to be satisfied by adding that all other institutions should be investigated, I have no problem with that. Let it be like that. But the practical aspect of handling it would really entail looking at all the admissions of the universities. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I want to strengthen the point of hon. Kinobe, that it is a dangerous state.  

According to this report, at page 8, the Ministry of Finance was insisting that they gave MUBS money, but the university itself was saying it was not enough. But the report says here, “However, by the end of the meeting MUBS accepted to use Shs 2.4 million”. This means the accountability was not proper. So, it needs a proper audit of the entire university.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I am wondering why we have a stigma around a special audit. I think this is the best way of handling this matter of government-sponsored students. We want to know how many students Government has been supporting every financial year, from 2000, 2001 up to date.  

When you go to the Joint Admissions Board you will establish that in the year 2000, 200 or 500 or 800 were sent to this place. Since we have problems with MUBS, you will now follow up the MUBS lot after you have established authentically what the number of students admitted is. That is why I want the scope to widen and start from the source. That is one -(Interruption).

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I strongly believe that the entire system must be audited. But in the process of admission I know there are many students who are admitted by the Joint Admissions Board for other courses, and the students opt to go to private universities for the courses of their own choice.  

Whereas from the Joint Admission Board we can get the number of students admitted, we shall only need to go to the real institutions to establish actually how many students Government has sponsored. This is because many who are admitted by Joint Admissions Board opt to go for studies outside. That is the only way it can be sorted out.

MRS KAVUMA: If anything, Madam Speaker, the numbers should be lower. So, when we get higher and higher numbers of students from the institution, then there is a big question. From that argument, definitely, from submission the numbers should be going down all the time. 

I just wanted to also inform the members that we have been talking about Shs 2.4 million, but when we work out the figures with 1,136, what was given from those figures is Shs 2.55 million. You know, it is still higher than Shs 2.4 million, which was agreed on then. We get puzzled and that is why the audit -(Interruption).

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, let me use up my time effectively. That is why I am saying a comprehensive audit is going to help us solve this problem. 

Let us even know the basis of the disbursements. We also want to even know how much. This will even help me, politically, to tell the people out there that, “your government has put in so much money for your students every year for the last three years.”  

Therefore, I would suggest that we amend a bit of your recommendation, Madam chairperson, to widen the scope. Let us have a comprehensive audit of the government-sponsored schemes from 2001 to date.  

Madam Speaker, I briefly want to give information on what was said in the report on page 8, about the private-sponsored students and how much they pay.  First of all, the committee says that the Ministry “alleges”. Now, to me, the issue of alleging does not arise. This is something you can ascertain. 

If you say that the Ministry alleges that MUBS makes privately sponsored students pay less than the government-sponsored, this is ascertainable.  By looking at the figures, you can actually know who is paying more and who is paying less. 

I approached one of the students in MUBS and got this information about one of the programmes called Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA): 

A private student under BBA pays Shs 750,000 per semester as tuition fee. They pay examination fee of Shs 60,000, registration fee of Shs 50,000 per semester, medical fee of Shs 50,000, accommodation fee of Shs 340,000 and Shs 1,500 for renewing the identity card (ID). This adds up to Shs 1,251,000 per semester. If you multiply that by 2, it comes to Shs 2.5 million. That is what a private student pays for her academic year under the BBA programme.  

What does Government pay in MUBS? Government pays Shs 2.4 million –(Mr Tibarimbasa rose_) Let me finish this point first, you will give me the information. (Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: That is the figure we do not know about.

LT KINOBE: If you are going to dispute this, I do not have any problem. Your report did not bring the figures, I did my research and you can ascertain if it is wrong.  

Madam Speaker, Government pays Shs 2,440,000 of which Shs 736,000 is returned to the student as living-out allowance. So, the School retains only Shs 1.7 million. Now, who pays more? Is it the government or the private students? 

This student alone actually pays much more when you add on the living-out allowance, if he has to pay for his own living-out allowance. The private student actually pays over Shs 3 million. So, it is true – (Interruption)

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: In view of the way the debating is going, basing on all these contradictions that are not clear; and in view of the fact that we are recommending an audit, which will make these matters clear for us to debate when we are well informed, I wish to move under Rule 46(1) that we adjourn this debate and go to the recommendations so that the audit can go ahead. When they are ready, they will bring this clear issue and we discuss it properly. So, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you have not talked about the time frame. Do you want us to go to the recommendations now?

MRS MATEMBE: What I am moving is that, when people are debating, they are just talking but matters remain unclear until the audit. So, I am moving that the debate on this very report now moves into the final recommendations, we adopt them and then we finish. So that these other matters will be debated when a report with clear evidence is before us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay to adopt the report, but what about the proposal by hon. Kinobe that the scope be widened?

MRS MATEMBE: It will come when we reach that recommendation. He can move that when we reach that recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not going to go through the recommendations one by one, they are very clear. These recommendations are extremely clear. All I want is that if you are happy that we increase the scope, we just make a small amendment to 8(a) to provide for a wider scope of investigation to cover all government disbursements.

MRS MATEMBE: For that matter, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Kinobe, you want it at Makerere, Gulu and Mbarara?

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I think our motion should say that a comprehensive special audit should be carried out to cover all government-sponsored students since the Financial Year 2001 to date. 

When the auditor goes down, he will know how to follow up these figures. He will go to Ministry of Finance, look at the money that was sent and follow where it went. He will also look at the students and follow where they went. Then he will report back with that comprehensive information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question?

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, before you put the question, he needs to polish his statement. When you talk of government-sponsored students, we have those who go to public universities and those who go to public tertiary institutions like UCCs and NTCs; it becomes too wide. 

Therefore, does he propose a comprehensive special audit in the four public universities, on government-sponsored students? Then he should state that. If anything, it will also help us discover the allegation that money for MUBS –(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the chairperson of the committee that from what you have recommended, the crises have risen at the universities. 

From the contribution of hon. Kinobe, he talked of all government-sponsored institutions, that is, the universities not these others. Because according to the presidential pledge, he said he will sponsor 4000 students to universities. I think that is our focus.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, given the information that he has given, then I would encourage hon. Kinobe to amend his motion so that we concentrate on government-sponsored students in the four public universities, and from 2001 to date. That would help us also clear that allegation that money for MUBS could have ended up in Makerere. I welcome that.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I concede to the improvement on that motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then I put the question that recommendation 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Kinobe.

(Question put and agreed to)

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I have another amendment. I want to put a rider on recommendation 5, on the use of live bullets. It should read, “The use of live bullets to quell student demonstrations must stop and the students must be urged not to use violent tools in their demonstrations.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? I put the question that recommendation 5 be amended as proposed by hon. Kinobe.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Madam Speaker, you had actually promised that I would speak after hon. Kinobe. But since the mode of debate is now changing, I might as well use this opportunity to make my contribution to the recommendations and the amendment, which I want to move.  

Madam Speaker, the use of live bullets could occur anywhere and the amendment I want to make is to provide for such eventualities in future.  Therefore, it should read that, “All VIP protection detail should have riot-combat gear.” 

Madam Speaker, I am moving an amendment to add that all VIP protection detail should have riot combat gear and I will give justification. What happened at Makerere could as well happen anywhere else where VIPs are involved, and it is possible that they could resort to the use of live bullets again. 

In order to have a fallback position for the security detail accompanying VIPs, they should be disaster-prepared. They should be prepared to confront rowdy groups. If they have within their possession riot combat gear, then they can use it. Of course I cannot go into the details of what riot gear is all about. But I think it is a necessary provision that they should have it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I have understood what hon. Wagonda is saying. That in addition to the ordinary security apparatus that our people use, they should also have a kit to –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the people are referred to as close guards. Close guards are supposed to provide protection for VIPs. They must be swift. They must not carry cumbersome equipment because VIPs meet dignitaries, go to offices and they meet people. So, the people must be swift and must not be scaring. 

When we are talking of combating riot, it is a mission. To combat riot is something you are deployed for. So, I have a problem with my colleague’s proposal. 

For instance, Madam Speaker, you have close guards. Supposing you are moving around town and you have people with headgears and canisters, it becomes a problem. You are going to get into an ambush and those people will be crashed, they will not provide protection for you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, since I am the one who has moved it, may I clarify? I am not suggesting that close escorts should go with hammers and headgears that are scaring. I have worked very closely with some of these security details and I know about them. 

The escorts use discretion, Madam Speaker. There are situations where they will use pistols and where they will use AK-47s. When I talk of having some equipment to deal with a riotous situation, it does not mean that they will be carrying a gas canister all the time. But if they have a toolbox in the car, they can then revert to it; it can come in handy.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the point hon. Wagonda Muguli is trying to put across. It is very well justified, but it is not practical. That is what hon. Rwamirama was trying to develop.  

Two, he is talking about escorts and bodyguards who are trained to protect their principal. Their prime duty is to make sure that their principal does not get any problem. What I would suggest, maybe to improve his motion, is that where the state anticipates anything like a riot and so on, they deploy the appropriately trained people to go and curb that riot. 

Otherwise, a bodyguard is not trained on how to disperse mobs, crowds and so on. He is trained as a VIP’s protector, to make sure that the principal does not get any problem.

MRS KAVUMA: What happens is that those bodyguards are still there guarding the principal, and they are still armed. Whether you have the others who are supposed to calm down a riot, which is expected, these ones are still present. How are we going to know that they will not react, thinking that the principal is being hurt?

LT KINOBE: The words I used, which I did very carefully, were “once they observe”. They are trained people, once they observe that the principal is in danger, there is a natural reaction because of their training. But the moment they assess the situation that there is a counterforce that would take care of that, they stay back. 

You see there is a practice in what we are trying to talk about. This is a security matter. For a trained bodyguard, if anything happens to the principal, you will not even be there when he is being tried. Let us have appropriately trained people to do what they are supposed to do. 

The people who are supposed to prevent riots should always be deployed where we anticipate trouble.  This now goes to information gathering, and the security departments detailing guards who are supposed to be strategically placed wherever they anticipate a problem. 

Secondly, let us also now try to continue teaching our people the culture of demonstrations. We are going into democratisation and governance, so let us teach them how they are supposed to behave. 

There is a difference between a demonstration and a strike. Once you decide to strike, then somehow you have consented to some of the consequences. But if it is a peaceful demonstration, then the trained policemen must know how to deal with a peaceful demonstration. 

Makerere University Business School demonstrated, the Police did not come in. Actually, what I read in the papers is that the Police persuaded them to board the buses and they returned them. Makerere University went on strike and they returned with fire. 

So, let us try to balance out the approach to this problem. Otherwise, siding and trying to cool off one side without addressing the real problem will never solve this matter.  

Therefore, I suggest that we amend your motion to say that, “The security departments concerned with foreseeing security events should always deploy appropriately where they anticipate trouble.”

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, we have been debating for the last two or three hours. One member moved a motion that we look at the recommendations and I thought we would go recommendation by recommendation. However, now it seems we are jumping from this side to the other one. 

With due respect, Madam Speaker, this report has got eight recommendations, but it seems there are only a few, which are attracting the attention of the members. Procedurally, I think that we should look at each one of them as the committee put them. We can dispose of each, agree on each and then move forward. 

If we begin with 8, go to 3, then go to 2, Madam Speaker, I see we are going to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, nobody really took issue with the others. The only bone of contention was in No. 3 and No. 8. Nobody said anything about the others.

MR BESISIRA: I have something on No. 1.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I accept the advice and the modification of my amendment by hon. Kinobe. Can I also make another proposal regarding No. 8? 

One issue, which I intended to debate and that did not come out clearly, is the role of the Internal Audit Department of the Ministry of Finance. For every vote, there are internal auditors from the Ministry of Finance and ideally they should have detected these flaws. They should have detected the wrong formula of payments, the wrong unit cost and the divergence in the numbers of students. Then advice to management would have been appropriately made. 

We do not have to wait for special audits when there is a crisis. I would recommend that the work of the Internal Audit Department should be strengthened to routinely take care of these audits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about their general performance as an internal audit section, where there is Ministry of Justice, the Parliament? 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I am talking with specific reference to MUBS. They have a vote and every vote has internal auditors. These auditors are supposed to routinely audit that vote and advise the accounting officer and the Ministry of Finance. 

My submission is that if the auditors in MUBS had been doing their work, Ministry of Finance would have detected these anomalies much earlier and probably could have nipped this problem in the bud.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, we have called for a comprehensive audit and when that report comes out, it will highlight the weaknesses and make recommendations upon which we must base to make further recommendations. Now to begin making such short-term interventions when we have recommended for an investigation would be prejudicing what we are expecting from the internal audit. 

I would strongly recommend that we go ahead with the external audit and when that external audit exposes the weaknesses, we then base our subsequent recommendations on the recommendations that will have been found out. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was motion on the Floor that we handle the recommendations and it was supported.  

MR MWANDHA: What I must have had in mind is that we adopt the report as it is with the recommendations as amended so that the audit can go ahead. We cannot simply adopt the recommendations without the report. 

As an amendment to hon. Matembe’s motion - it is a pity she is not here - we should adopt the report with the recommendations as amended, so that we can go ahead and get this special audit carried out and hope to receive this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Besisira did you want to amend any of the recommendations?

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that, since I started listening to this House, the majority have not been mentioned. We are looking at government-sponsored students, who have brought a problem, and this has now taken us so many hours. How many are they? What percentage of the university population do they constitute? Who are they, Madam Speaker?  

Madam Speaker, the majority of government-sponsored students are sons and daughters of the well to do in this country. These are the people whom we are arguing about for all these hours, saying that they cannot afford money for opening banks and so on. It is interesting; these are sons and daughters of the well to do and when someone says –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Besisira, what exactly do you want to add to the recommendation in relation to those students?

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, among those recommendations, the committee should have asked the Government to look at the way it sponsors students in universities, because it seems the bulk of the people sponsored are well-to-do. 

The other day the same committee brought something to the Floor of this House – (Interjection) – I have a lot of information, Madam Speaker, allow me to finish – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Besisira, when we find out who the parents of these children are, what do you want us to do to them? You must have a reason for wanting that information.

LT KINOBE: I am seeking clarification from the honourable member. Is he talking about the policy of admission or how the funds that Government sends are utilised? I want him to clarify. 

I do not know which of the two matters he is addressing. Are you talking about the policy on how students are admitted or you are talking about how the money, which Government sends there, is utilised?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I also remind the honourable member that just before we went on recess, we passed a motion here that the Government should increase sponsorship to areas that are disadvantaged. In May, that motion was passed in this House. That is why I do not know what you want us to do with these children when we discover who their parents are.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I am saying, that I wish the quota system was introduced. Yes, we agreed on it, but I do not see it implemented. It hurts me to see that we are spending so many hours discussing sons and daughters of well-to-do people. Madam Speaker, that is the fact. Thank you.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: I want to move an amendment on recommendation 6, to take care of hon. Besisira’s suggestion. In addition to getting the unit costs, can we say that the Government should come out with a clear funding strategy for the students at public universities? The quota system will still not solve the problem, because the problem is delayed release of funds to some of these institutions, whatever the number.

Two, it is very clear, as he said, that eventually it is the rich that will go to these schools.  Even when we start the quota system, it will be the sons of the rich who stay in Kampala but come from the districts that are disadvantaged, who will benefit. 

We have sometimes suggested that it might be better that all students going to public universities be allowed to pay some little money like they do for secondary schools, of about Shs 300,000. That would help. In other words, we can add to recommendation 6 that, “A strategy for funding students in public universities should be made clear and be brought to this House” I also wish to add an amendment to No. 7 when we come to that.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is that this is a committee, which was set up with specific terms of reference. The terms of reference are contained on Page 1 and they say:

“To make an inquiry into the causes of the students’ strike at Makerere University and Makerere University Business School.

To investigate the contradictory reports about the releases made to Makerere University Business School.

To examine the controversies surrounding the legal status of Makerere University Business School.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the recommendations under this report can only emanate from the terms of reference. We cannot broaden the recommendations to include matters, which were not in the terms of reference, because those matters would not have been discussed by the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Elioda, I think we cannot go out of the terms of reference of this report.

DR TUMWESIGYE: The terms of reference talk about the causes of the strike. When you give a report on the causes of the strike, ideally you would also add on the long-term solutions. This could be a solution for this strike. It may not be a solution.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague here is a member of the Social Services Committee. He had every opportunity to offer his wise counsel to that committee. 

Is it in order for him to try and bring matters that have already been dealt with at length by his committee at the eleventh hour? Is he in order to even try to expand the terms of reference given to his committee, when actually we have already dealt with the matter at length?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Elioda, I had forgotten that you are a member of that committee. You are the vice chairperson, is it not? He is not? Ok, he is a member. But I think we cannot really expand the terms of reference.
  
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have an amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendment to which one?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I want to delete No. 3, and the justification is that this is hearsay. You can only tell people to stop if you know them. The committee has failed to identify these outsiders. 

As Members of Parliament, if we know people, we must come out and put our heads up and tell them. But now that they have not been identified, this is hearsay. I beg that we delete.

MR TIBARIMBASA: We knew them but politely we thought we should not put them in the report. But we know some members who have been going to Makerere and addressing students and these addresses have been seen to be causes of these unrests in higher education institutions. We have them but we can mention them.  

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Social Services was given comprehensive time. Is the honourable member in order to come to the Floor and say, “We know them but we decided to hide them” when actually the essence of us giving them time was for them to give us information? 

Is he in order to withhold information and come and confess on the Floor that they actually withheld the information, which we actually sent them to look for?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think we gave them very little time in which to do their work. So, maybe they could not have really covered everything. But on a very serious note – (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, the matter that hon. Tibarimbasa has brought up is very serious.  He alleges that they know of members who have been there, making inflammatory addresses to the students. Can he lay the information on the Table so that we can actually peruse the document that he purports to have in his possession or else withdraw? 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister. Maybe he wants to amend.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I would approach it differently but since it has come up, I oppose the deletion of recommendation 3. 

The recommendation says, “According to Makerere University officials, the increased strikes and insecurity at the university is sometimes instigated by sections of outsiders. The committee recommends that those outsiders should stop.” 

First of all, this is a very balanced statement, and I think that the committee did a good job.  I think that we should retain it because Section 27 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act actually spells out the members of a public university, and there is a long list of those members. 

“Sections of outsiders” must be referring to those people who do not have an immediate stake in the university but who come and instigate these troubles. I think this is a balanced statement. 

We should be fair to the people who run the institutions. They are the ones who gave this information and I do not see anything basically wrong with it. I beg to move that – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when you say “sections” and you do not name any, you are really leaving this hanging.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable, it is safer. I have now understood what the chairperson meant. It is safer to leave it like this because they are not indicting any particular person. Nobody has been named as the one who is the outsider. Those who know that they sometimes venture, will now conduct themselves differently.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Whereas I would not have any problem, I am just seeking clarification as to the method of delivering this advice to those unknown sections of the public. Can the Minister elaborate how he intends to deliver that advice?

MR ARUMADRI: I would like the honourable Minister to appreciate that a university is part of the community. You cannot build a wall around a university. A university needs to interact with all sorts of people, and it is in order. It is for the growth of the intellectual capacity there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are saying that those who go there to instigate strikes have to stop. They are not saying they should stop going there. They are saying do not go there to instigate strikes. That is what this is saying.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, nobody will go to the university and say, “students I am here, let us start a strike.” No, there is an exchange of ideas and it is up to the students to sieve. That is why they are there to judge wrong and right, good and bad. That is the only place -(Mr Basaliza Araali rose_) Excuse me, let me finish this point.  

In the 70s I was a student at Kings College Buddo and we used to have very controversial intellectuals like Ali Mazrui, David Rubadiri who would go there and say all sorts of things, but we did not go on strike. In Nairobi University we used to get intellectuals, but we would not go on strike because outsiders are coming. 

If we were going to muzzle, yes, but it is not because of outsiders, there were issues there. We used to go on riot because of budgets. When we saw that a budget had touched the poor person, we would demonstrate. We wanted an underground tunnel to be built on State House road and we barricaded that place until it was built. No live bullets were fired. That was 30 years ago. 

Now in this century, colleagues, what are we trying to do with our institutions? Do we want these people to come out half-baked, not to hear views from Members of Parliament, from the public? No, I will not sit down and say Madi-Okollo was part of this decision. Thank you.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was an administrator for very many years in secondary schools and I noticed that outsiders came to schools to investigate not to encourage students to go on strike. 

I remember I was doing my Masters at university and there was a problem with a son of Amin. He brought soldiers and we were caned at the university. So, outsiders can come and cause problems within the university. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the son of Amin was not even a student.

MR DOMBO: It is Amin who sent the soldiers to the university and he was also the Chancellor. That could never have been an outsider.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was a student there and I know that. Hon Ruhindi.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have a problem with this recommendation. As much as it seems to be inserted here in good faith, to our highest institution of learning it is actually an intimidating clause. Where do you draw the line? 

If I am a “section” outside the university and I go there to deliver a talk about the third term, for instance, I will go there and talk, how will you be able to decipher whether what I have said is instigating a strike or not? 

If you go there to give a talk on any subject, like on the third term, where do you draw the line? I think there is a big problem. I think we would rather caution the public, and we have already done so in No. 5. 

Here we are saying that for any demonstration to take place, it must be lawful, it must be within the provisions of the law. For a higher institution of learning, that is enough. Recommendation 3 is really intimidating for nothing.
  
MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I would like to totally disagree with the proposal to retain No.3. We would be inviting more problems With due respect to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, this business of saying you must get permission before you address students, you are inviting more and more problems 

I have had the opportunity to go to a university and from the way I understand it, a university is supposed to be inward looking and outward looking. It should have the opportunity to receive information from anybody. 

Now, if you talk about outsiders, and that includes members of this House, you are making a very big mistake. By the way, how are you going to enforce it? I do not know how the Minister is going to enforce this. Will he go to these universities everyday and find out how they are operating? How are you going to enforce this? 

There is no way you can enforce a recommendation of this kind, absolutely no way. Unless you are going to have Police all over the place, there is no way you can enforce a thing like this. 

You know, we are getting obsessed with this because everybody is suspecting everybody else. Everybody believes that once you allow people to go there, then people are going to do this. This is going to damage our institutions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Prime Minister give us an amendment.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, I wanted to clarify by saying that according to the university rules, people get permission so that they must know where they are going to do it, because so many people could vie for the place. So, I was just referring to the existing university rules, unless you want to amend them. 

What I would like now to suggest is that, we could say that, outsiders wishing to - not instigate - carry out political activities should follow university rules. That is all. Just to follow -(Mr Dombo rose_) - Just listen please. May I complete please? 

MR DOMBO: Will you accept me?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Yes. They should follow university rules, and if they instigate they will not be following university rules. I think we leave it at that. It will be safer to say, “they must follow university rules”.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to give information to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. The University already provides for those rules and it is an institution. Must we have a resolution of Parliament in order to enforce the university rules? This would be a very redundant statement, and it is in your interest as Chancellor of the University, Mr Prime Minister.

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, let us read that recommendation with our hearts and eyes. When you read that recommendation, first of all they say that there are increased strikes that are a result of instigations. What they are developing here is that some of them are incitements. 

Really, if we are all parents and you send your children to that university and they incite them and they land into problems, definitely that is a serious concern. But we should also consider the concerns of other members who think that this recommendation may be abused to stop those who want to address the students politically. 

I want to improve this by saying, “According to Makerere University officials, the increased strikes and insecurity at the university are sometimes instigated by sections of outsiders. The committee recommends that outsiders who go to the university with intentions of instigating students should stop”. Then at least we establish their intention. If we have gone there in good faith and there is no problem, - (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to give information to this House. Unless the committee tells us the year they are basing on, this information is completely false. 

To the contrary, strikes in the university have been continually on the decrease. I recall very well in 1990 before I became Guild President in 1991, we had increased strikes. The university on two occasions was closed. We had to go home and apply to the districts to be allowed back. We came back and again the University was closed. 

To the contrary, the university strikes have been going down and down because of the liberalised systems within the university. To begin creating these artificial regulations, which we will not be able to impose, makes this, honestly, redundant. We just need to build trust within the institutions in order to govern the institutions as universities. I want to thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Kinobe has urged us to open up our hearts, let us open them up. Holding an intellectual debate at Makerere University will not necessarily mean a strike. 

The instigators we are talking about here can organise better, without a formal kind of discussion on any subject. Let us open up. The more you subjugate them, the more you throw them underground. The more you make subterranean, the more they will strike. Let us be frank with each other.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural problem with the proposal to delete this recommendation. When we set up this committee, we gave it terms of reference. They have shown us their methodology of work and the people they met. They listened to testimonies, made findings and made recommendations based on those findings.  

On Page 4 we have one of the findings by the committee, which states: “The Vice Chancellor of the University informed the committee that sometimes strikes and demonstrations are instigated by outsiders.” This is the person who appeared before the committee. They listened to him, they looked at his demeanour, they chose to believe what he was telling them as the truth and they made this finding. 

Now, consequent upon this finding, they come and make a recommendation having believed the witness they had before them. That witness is not before us here. How can we challenge his demeanour? How can we start saying that it is a lie? 

This witness testified before the committee, they found his testimony to be truthful, and based on it they came up with a recommendation. What weapons does this House have to disbelieve the findings of the committee?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I agree that Parliament works through its respective committees and that is an accepted method of work. But is the honourable Minister in order to insinuate that the Committee of the House has no authority to question what a committee of Parliament has recommended? I think the basis of the committee reporting to the House is for the House to pronounce itself. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the report is brought here so that it can be debated and enriched by all of us.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I was rising to give this information on the basis of the submission by hon. Dombo, who said that this is hearsay, but the honourable Minister of Finance has stated it. 

The information, which the committee put here, are  the findings from the cross-examination of the witnesses who appeared before us. This recommendation is based on a detailed explanation of the kind of strikes, demonstrations and insecurity in Makerere University. 

This Parliament has already adopted reports of the Social Services Committee whereby we have stated that some students were killed. Now we have been looking for possible solutions and some allusions are that this may be due to outside influence. One of the recommendations we made, and which was adopted here, is of the construction of a perimeter fence.  

When you look at the recommendation 3, it is combining both increased strikes and insecurity. We are trying to look for a way we can protect the students. An institution of learning must have some regulations to safeguard the learners and the trainers. 

So, certainly, this recommendation is not based on hearsay. It is based on facts, which were given to the committee, and I beg to stand by this recommendation.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I do respect the views of the committee really, but in most of the findings we would want to do work where there is empirical evidence. 

I stand here on the Floor of this House to say the strikes in the university have been reducing. They have not been increasing. This is factual. 

I have been a student of Makerere University for the last two years, and I have been a student of Makerere University Business School. For the two years, the only strike that has been there was when they could not pay the raised funds. This was a strike, which was being supported by the administration. It is not a strike, which is being instigated by outsiders.

I want to respect the chairperson, but I am telling you that the people gave you wrong information to justify that type of recommendation. Makerere University strikes have been going down. 

In 1991 students died; two students were shot dead. Hon. Oulanyah here was shot and his intestines were cut off. Hon. Oulanyah was the speaker the time the strike was there and the university was closed. For the last two years, there has not been any significant strike in Makerere University.  

So, Madam Speaker, to say that the strikes in the University have been on the increase is wrong, because there is evidence. You cannot say they have been on the increase when you cannot justify it.  

Until the university administrators failed to pay the money, there was no strike at the university. So, Madam Speaker, we are passing a resolution to cover the inefficiencies of the university administrators.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, given the fact that recommendation is not talking about strikes but it is also talking about insecurity, and given the fact that we have been debating for four hours now on this matter, I beg to move that we pronounce ourselves on hon. Matembe’s motion as amended by hon. Mwandha.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we have been here for quite a bit of time. We have actually been handling hon. Matembe’s motion on recommendations. So, I want to propose that we adjourn and reconvene on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. to deal only with recommendations. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday afternoon.   Thank you.

(The House rose at 8.19 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 9 December 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)
