Thursday, 9 December 2004

Parliament met at 3.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to apologize for our late start. We had gone to Gulu to launch the state of the World Report on children, prepared by the United Nations. So, that is why we delayed, but I think we shall try and gain the time.  

In the gallery, we have some retired senior citizens from Entebbe Municipality. They are here to listen to the debate and their visit has been coordinated by their area Member of Parliament, hon. Dr Byatike Matovu. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, yesterday we informed you that Mrs Kato our former manager of the canteen had died and that we would inform you about the service. Tomorrow the service will be at St. Andrews Church, Bukoto at mid-day. So, those who are able to attend, please do the needful.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of national importance, that is, to do with the problem of electricity. I noted that the problem of electricity is intensifying; the problem of fluctuation, the problem of switching off and so on, and even industries. People are dying in hospitals because when you are on the operation table and power goes off, and there is nothing the doctor can do. You just seem to be keeping quiet yet without this power, the development of the country, the security of the country and everything is bound to go wrong. I request that the Government must come with statement of what is happening with power generation and distribution, because we cannot go on like this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does anyone know where we can find Energy ministers? Oh, “lugubriousness”. Yes, Prime Minister. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is an excellent question. We discussed it in Cabinet and advised the Minister of Energy to make a statement, but she was still carrying out consultations, and I have no hesitation in directing that she makes a statement next Thursday. Since she is not here and the Minister of State is not here, I am sure they are grappling with the problem. I will ask the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs to let them know of my directives. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AGGREY AWORI:  Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Information on energy?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is supplementary to what my hon. colleague has just said, and also in response or additional information to the Right hon. Prime Minister on the issue of power. Madam Speaker, I am sure you have noticed that from time to time, our public address system here fails, not so much for overloading, but has been deteriorating as a result of power outages; in-out, in-out, affects the amplification.  

So Madam Speaker, I would like put it to the Right hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, that the august House should get a direct and dedicated line from sub-station so that we do not have interruptions. I am sure that is the arrangement with State House and it should be the arrangement with the august House. Thank you Madam.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, as if that was not enough, even before these power cuts came, the billing situation continues in a way that even the bills do not even go down. If you do not have electricity today, it would mean that you have low consumption and therefore, the cost should go low, but it has instead done the opposite. I think we should do more than asking the Minister to make a statement, because a statement is just a statement.  We need actual action, either there is a complete review of the billing programme of Uganda Electricity Distribution Company or we make an inquiry, why they do that, because a lot of Ugandans are being cheated on a daily basis. The bills are going higher and electricity supply is almost as good as nothing. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would request that action is taken, but not only making a statement. The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company should be directed to come up with some alterations in the way they are billing the people.  Thank you.

3.18
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to tell his Minister in charge of Energy to give us a comprehensive statement in respect of primarily what hon. Omara Atubo asked, these power interruptions and so on.  

Secondly, and more importantly, the overall Government policy on the rural electrification.  There are not even very many Members of Parliament here who know including myself, until recently, the Policy about power extension in the countryside.  More often than not, Government really puts us on a collusion course with the population in respect of a number of issues, and this is one of them. Even the President when he is on public functions talks about power extension in the countryside, and rural transformation it. When you visit hon. Migereko, hon. Bbumba, they tell you, “Form a company” and that “The power sector has been privatized”. So we want a comprehensive power sector policy by Government on paper, which we can take to the population and say, “This is the policy and position of Government”.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, mine is slightly different.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not electricity?

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While those of us here in Kampala and the surrounding areas are complaining about erratic supply of electricity, our situation in Arua is worse. On the 12th of October, His Excellency the President of this Republic went to Arua and ostensibly opened the Wenereko Power Station. This is a hydro-power station which is in the outskirts of Arua Town and we were told it is supposed to run for 18 hours. But as I talk now, our situation is worse off than before the President went there to open it. 

Actually, if you went to Arua now, what the people of Arua are saying is that “If you have no disco lights in your house, walk to the town because what will be blinking is the disco lights from Wenereko Company”. We were better off with archaic and old generators from the then UEB than Wenereko generators. I will also appreciate if the Minister responsible for Energy will also give us an explanation as to why a new plant which was set to give hope for the people of West Nile cannot even consistently run for 30 minutes.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: The information I want to give the hon. Member and the House is that things have not become only worse for Arua after establishing something new, but even here what we are suffering from is after building a second dam there. Having put that second dam and opening it to get more electricity and then export some, things have become worse. I really trust that when the hon. Minister comes to give a statement to this House, she will speak the truth about what happened in establishing that second dam. Thank you.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Prime Minister had told us that there was no Minister here in charge of the Energy Sector, and now there is one, therefore, I must admit that what I wanted to say has been overtaken by recent events. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister for General Duties. Now, hon. Minister of Energy, there is concern that the power shortage has escalated to an extent that even the hospitals and other vital institutions are being cut off. There are also a lot of other questions Members have asked. The Prime Minister had said you would bring a statement next week. I do not know whether you have something to say about that.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. This is a directive from the Prime Minister and I would like to confirm that we shall be in a position to come up with a statement next Thursday, because actually we are ready. Madam Speaker, we have this statement and we shall communicate it to the House next Thursday. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Clerk extract these additional questions Members have asked, transmit them to the Minister so that they can give a comprehensive answer.

3.25
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just wondering how things are done in this country. It is several months since we begun to realize the problem of power shortage and yet it has taken Parliament to bring up this matter before an adequate explanation is given to the country and yet even after a request is put to the ministry or to Governments by Parliament, we are still talking about a period of one week more to produce such a report! I would have expected, Madam Speaker, that this information should have been at the fingertips of –(Interruptions)

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to my colleague is that last week when Members were presenting a problem of floods in Kampala, I raised this issue because the Minister had given an explanation that the power failure and shortages was because of the drought in the country, and I raised to ask a question that if we are experiencing floods in Kampala now and the explanation was that there is drought, how come that we are still having power failures and shortage? So my colleague, I raised this about two weeks back, but the Minister had kept mum. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for that information. It only highlights how things are not taken seriously in this country. 

Number two, Madam Speaker, I would expect that when the Minister comes to present a report here, the Minister should come armed with technical information. What the hon. Matembe raised is of importance. The purpose of putting another power plant in parallel with the Owen Falls Dam should have been to boost our capacity to produce power, but instead we see that we are unable to meet the needs of this country. Where are we going as far as our technology is concerned? It is necessary for that explanation to be made to this House so that we are able to inform the rest of the country about what is happening with our power sector.

Number three, I think this is something that relates to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, because of power shortage, there has been lots of problems in the manufacturing sector and through the Uganda Manufacturers Association, the manufacturers have cried out. It would be interesting for the ministry, and I hope the Minister is paying attention to what I am saying, to be able to tell this House the economic impact of this power shortage. It is very important because we need to know what we as a country, are losing in terms of production. 

What we are losing as country in terms of benefits and what this has caused he country? I know some manufacturers have got so much discouraged; they are unable to produce. For example, the manufacturers in the plastic industry, once you have put your material in the machines and there is a power break you are bound not only to loose the material that you have put into the machine, but also to go through the burden of dislodging that material from the machines. So this is a very serious issue. 

I know most of us are talking about merely lighting but I would like us to go further and identify where was the problem in as far as the designs of the new power plant was concerned. Somebody should take responsibility; this country is a poor country. We are not going to throw away money the way we are throwing it today. I think this is a very serious matter and this Parliament must rise up to the occasion.

3.30
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): I thank you very much Madam Speaker. In addition, I am happy that the Minister is going to come up with a report. I only request that when he brings the report, he could also explain to us. In most cases, when power goes off and then it comes back, the voltage becomes twice as high and most households are affected. Women are complaining that their cookers, fridges, flat irons and other electric appliances are affected.  What is Government’s policy? Do you intend to compensate families that are affected?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, my colleague had talked about the power plant in Arua. Indeed, I want to recognize the fact that if something was not there before and then it comes on, people even expect more, and within a short time. It is true for a long time in West Nile we have not been seeing what really Government has done for us as far as electricity is concerned, but for the first time, we now see a big power plant in a place called Awindiri; people’s expectations are high. 

The President went and launched the project and we expected to have power the next day. Now, we do not know what happened. I do hope in hon. Migereko’s submission he will give us a reason as to why what was said was not implemented. What is happening, is it just a plant or there is something technical? We would like to know?

Finally, -(Interjections)- I do not think it is air; the things are there. Finally, you have a plant for Arua. Yumbe is not very far from Arua, it is a new district, there is nothing like electricity, there is nothing like a generator, so we cannot even talk about power cuts. So, please, when you come here on Thursday, give us an explanation on what plan you have on the electrification of Yumbe as a district and other new districts. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members this item was not really on the agenda. I know it is important to every Member of this House, but why don’t we give it two hours on Thursday to deal with electricity -(Interjections)- two hours on Thursday. You cannot respond now. No, honourable Members, if you have special areas you want, can you write them and pass them to me, I will send them to the ministry.

MR EKANYA GEOFFREY (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have an Order Paper but it keeps on shifting and introducing new business and yet we are aware of urgent Government business. If we proceed like this, our level of debate will degenerate. On the order paper of yesterday and the whole of last week, there was a consideration of the UPDF Bill; today it is not there. We also see the report on Election Violence shifting position and other things coming in. Can you guide us on how we are going to proceed to make sure that we prepare in advance so that we are not ambushed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, concerning election violence, I think yesterday it was on the Order Paper but the ministers who have been named were not in a position to respond to the contents of the report and we agreed that he would come on Tuesday. I do not know why the Clerk has not reflected it because it is what we agreed on yesterday.  

Then the UPDF Bill, I understand that the committee and the Minister were due to discuss two or three of the clauses and I think that meeting as of Monday had not taken place. So it will probably come, but I agree with you that we are not moving well as we should. I think we should apply ourselves more seriously.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I rise to invoke your discretion under Rule 17, Sub Rule 3 of our Rules to have item No.4 withdrawn from the Order Paper and in the same breath to request that the circulated document be taken to be withdrawn. The reasons are that after we had submitted this document we found that there were a number of errors and omissions, which we must put right before we can present it for discussion.  

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I earnestly apologize but I beg that it be withdrawn from the order paper today and that the documents as circulated be taken as if they were withdrawn. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The item is deleted from the Order Paper.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think my issue has partly been solved.  I was getting up to request you to move this Item No. 5 on the agenda to 3.  My concern was; at the rate at which we are moving, and given the time in which we started here, that possibly will be able to reach and yet today the issues pertaining to the cotton pricing are going to be set. But since the hon. Minister of Finance has withdrawn his, I think we can be able to accommodate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall come to it.

MR ATUBO: Guidance. Madam Speaker, I note that the Minister would like to make two important statements at the same time (a) and (b). I would like you to guide us whether he is going to read the first part (a) of his statement, we discuss it fully, when we finish it, then he moves to (b) because these two are not related. I do not see how he is going to read the full statement then we discuss. Somebody stands up to discuss (a), then you can mention (b) like that. These are two important statements which are not related to each other and I know the Minister, with due respect, may have wished in very good faith to save time and so on but when it comes to actual debate, after you have read them, the Members are going to choose which one to say this one and then the next one and so on and in the process, you may actually find that the debate may not be as logical and relevant as we would wish to be.  

So Madam Speaker, I would like you to guide us on this; how we to go about it? These are two important ministerial statements on two different issues and not related to one another.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you know some of these matters have been outstanding for a long time. So why doesn’t he present all and then we respond. You can choose what you want to handle, if you want to discuss the riot, you discuss the riot.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, looking at what hon. Atubo said, this is a very serious matter and yet what hon. Okupa says, the farmers down there are suffering. I would seek your guidance that we discuss the motion of cotton first and then this follows. I am seeking your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is at issue, which must be done now on cotton? I want to know, what is the justification?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker as we speak now, several farmers are losing money in billions. The Cotton Development Authority are taking decisions that will impact more negatively on the price and the farmers – (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we are engaged in now is rather confusing to some of us. What is the role of the business Committee in this case, because we are turning ourselves into a Business Committee to determine what is going to be handled here! I think that is not within our mandate. We have a Business Committee that should guide us on the business to be followed in this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the Minister had been asked to make a statement, isn’t that so? Dr. Nduhuura you had been asked to make a statement and when I asked you on Tuesday I think you said you would do it today?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I am ready with statement and it has been circulated.  Unfortunately, when I came to the House this afternoon, I did not find myself on the Order Paper. Madam Speaker, it is the answer that was circulated not the question.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on point of procedure. Rule 17(2) is clear; it sets out the procedure of this House; how items follow one another on the Order Paper. Among others, under Rule 2 it is prayers, administration of oath, election of Speaker, communication from the Chair, addresses by the President, message from the President, (h) is Bills, (i) statements by Ministers then personal statements. The motions and others come under (p).  

So, Madam Speaker, I would implore you that we follow our Rules of Procedure as prescribed under rule 17 so that we receive the statement from the minister first. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for citing the Rule.  But the Rule also very clearly says that that shall be the order whenever it is possible. So it gives the discretion to this House and the Speaker to alter order according to the needs and requirements of the business of this House. I thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I think some of us who represent constituencies that largely depend on cotton would also, under Rule 40(1)(b), be justified to move a motion of public importance that is urgent. It states:
“The following motions may be moved without notice-…” Although he has moved on notice under 37 we could also do this as an issue of public importance and urgent. Because, like he said, today these people are sitting to fix prices and yet our people who are selling cotton need to be helped by this House as this motion is suggesting. The strikes took place long time ago; this is something important for us in Northern Uganda and other parts where cotton is a very important issue. Thank you.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Makerere has been outstanding and although the strike has taken place, people are languishing in prison. We should consider our children in the university now. We should consider lives then this will come. We have wasted too much time; why can’t we follow the Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members all these things are very important and this statement was requested by this House. You are the ones who asked the Minister to come with a statement on all these four areas. The difficulty I have now with the cotton sector is that the Minister’s document is not on the Order Paper and they have a motion. So one of them might pre-empt the other.  

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, my answer is general, it is not specific to cotton; it touches on a number of commodities. So, if we want to deal with cotton, I have no problem; hon. Okupa could come up with a motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we have an additional seating tomorrow to deal with some of these things?  

MS JALIA BINTU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. But tomorrow there will be an installation of Isebaruli in Nakasongola. I believe all of us have including your office, been invited. Since we have been attending and leaving those days whenever they have been installing these cultural leaders it would be a disservice to the people of Nakasongola. So, I propose that possibly we can sit on Monday.  Thank you very much. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. This morning we had a big meeting with those who set cotton prices in this country. We advised them to defer the decision until this afternoon so that Parliament can be able to input in what they are going to decide. So, as we talk now, there are actually locked up in Cotton House behind Crested Towers and they are waiting for an input from Parliament.  

So, I would therefore think that we tackle the cotton matter now and we dispose of it as early as possible so that we give an opportunity for these people to proceed.  Moreover, the cotton business has run on illegally for the last one and half months and they want now to take a decision. So, I think let us handle this matter and proceed with other subsequent businesses normally.  Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA:  Madam Speaker, for about fifteen minutes now, we have debated whether to proceed with item number 3, or 4, or whatever, and yet the rules are very clear. Under Rule 17(3), the Speaker has the discretion to alter the Order Paper. I beg that you use your discretion to determine which item should proceed so that we can proceed instead of wasting time on arguing which one comes first and which one goes the second.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Now honourable members, considering that the statement of the Minister of Education covers five areas and may require more time, I think we shall defer this to Tuesday and I think we should put nothing else on the Order Paper. We just give that to Education so that we can discuss the riots and all these capitation issues. For now, if our population is being endangered economically, I think we should come to their assistance. Let us bring forward the motion on the cotton crisis.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE LIBERALISATION OF THE COTTON SECTOR IN UGANDA

3.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, I must thank this House for allowing me this opportunity to present this petition this afternoon on behalf of the millions of Ugandans who depend on cotton production as a way of living. 

Madam Speaker, the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the liberalisation of the Cotton Sector in Uganda: This motion is moved under Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure.  

WHEREAS the Cotton Development Act, CAP 30, establishes the Cotton Development Organisation to monitor the production, processing and marketing of cotton so as to enhance the quality of lint cotton, to promote the distribution of high quality cotton seed and generally to facilitate the development of the cotton industry; and

WHEREAS there is no statutory body established specifically to cater for cotton growers as has been the case for tea growers in the form of Uganda Tea Growers Corporation;  

RECOGNISING that the provisions of the Cotton Development Act limit competition in the sector by restricting the cultivation and the movement of cotton within segregated areas and prescribed zones respectively, but empowering the Cotton Development Organization to announce indicative prices and by requiring ginners to only gin cotton grown in the specific zones where the ginneries are situated;  

WHEREAS current statistics do indicate that cotton production has deteriorated significantly despite the statutory regulation;  

AWARE that this could be attributed to the weaknesses in the regulatory regime and the fact that cotton farmers face excessive charges as they pay levies to Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters’ Association, face a deduction on their farm-gate earnings to cover the cess payable by ginners and also to pay for cotton seed;  

FURTHER AWARE that the payment of the cess to the tune of eight percent (two percent being the operational funds levy and six percent constituting the seed fund levy) is unlawful as section 26 of the Cotton Development Act provides for a cess not exceeding two percent on the sales value of lint cotton sold at every ginnery;  

WHEREAS from 1998 to-date the Cotton Development Organization has collected Shs 31,433,191,350 in the form of cess and seed cotton levy from farmers;

CONVINCED that the restrictions in the law are counter-productive and defeat the goal of liberalizing activities in the cotton industry;

DETERMINED to ensure that cotton industry in Uganda is managed in such a manner as to meet the goals of liberalization;  

NOW THEREFORE this motion is moved that this House do resolve that, as a matter of urgency;

1. The Committee on Agriculture studies the Cotton Development Act in comparison with other laws regulating cash crops namely; coffee and tobacco for purposes of addressing all the weaknesses referred to herein above as well as others that are impediments to liberalization of the cotton industry and make recommendations before the commencement of the 2004/5 cotton season.

2. All pricing and taxation arrangements are reviewed with a view to addressing the issue of excessive and prohibitive charges.  

3. All cotton zoning in so far as it affects trading and causes monopoly for the purposes of ginning should be reviewed and abolished before the commencement of the 2004/5 cotton season.

4. The Cotton Development Organization presents to Parliament an update on the progress of the cotton industry in this country.

5. The Cotton Development Organization accounts for the Shs 31,433,191,350 collected in cess and seed cotton levy from farmers since 1998 and refunds the said amount to Government for deposit into a Cotton Development Fund to be formed in a manner as the Tea Development Fund.

6. The Cotton Development Act should be amended to make provision for the establishment of a statutory body to cater for the interests of cotton growers, as has been the case for the Tea Growers Corporation.

7. The minister responsible for agriculture presents answers to the Parliament and the cotton farmers and addresses the above concerns and handles the amendments proposed herein within three months.

If the Members so wish to adjust the time, I have no problem with that. Moved by Elijah Okupa, Member of Parliament, Kasilo County; seconded by hon. Juliet Rainer Kafire, Member of Parliament for Kibuku County, Pallisa district. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Rainer, are you seconding?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, can I speak for the motion.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has seconded; I wanted her to second first.

MRS RAINER KAFIRE: I second the motion.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the resolution of Parliament for the liberalization of cotton industry. 

The humble petition of the undersigned honourable members of the 7th Parliament presented by I, Okupa Elijah, and hon. Juliet Kafire, Member of Parliament, Kibuku County, Pallisa, states:

a) The Cotton Development Act Cap.30 should be amended to liberalize cotton trading and removal of cotton duties and cess borne by the farmer. 

b) The Cotton Development Organization accounts and refunds Shs 31,433,191,350 it has collected from the farmers through the ginners since 1998.  

Madam Speaker, the grounds for this resolution are as follows:

1. In six years since 1998 to-date, cotton farmers in Uganda produced 589,401 bales of cotton or 374,865,680 kilograms. 

The cotton farmers have paid Shs 25,241,213,600 in levies to Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters Association since 1998. The cotton farmers have in addition paid Shs 6,191,977,750 in cess to CDO since 1998 after charging the ginners Shs 50 per kilogram. 

2. The cotton ginners who are charged Shs 50 per kilogram per cess on lint by CDO simply pass on this tax to the farmers by offering the farmer the farm-gate less the expected CDO cess. So, UGCEA is simply a tax collector for CDO and the farmers the taxpayers, not the ginner. 

3. The ginners are also allowed to levy their own duties on the farmer, which duties, since 1998, have averaged Shs 72 for every kilogram produced. In the 2000/2001 season, for example, the farmer was taxed Shs 150 for every kilogram produced. 

4. This tax on the farmer is explained as a price for the cottonseed on planting material. But the farmers have repeatedly said they are ready to pay for the seed separately rather than have the ginners who get their profit from the sale of lint and also from the farmers i.e. double pay.

5. These duties in the 2003/2004 season stood at Shs 100 per kilogram and were intended to cater for the promotion of cotton growing, distribution and export, and CDO was tasked with this responsibility but the results are the opposite. Statistics from CDO on, for example 
(a), cotton production in bales per year before CDO was created was: 

1970-71	 - 411,935 bales, 
1971-72	 - 410,292 bales, 
1972-73	 - 428 543 bales, 
1973-74	 - 270,059 bales, 
1975-76	 - 172,464 bales, 
1975-76	 - 133,403 bales, 
1976-77	 - 73,309. (Members will know the reason why it had to come to this level at that time.) 
1977-78	 - 119,332 bales, 
1978-79	 - 41,053. 
Total 		- 2,051,390 
Average 	- 227,932  

For comparison purposes, let us look at the production of bales under the CDO. 

1992-93 	  - 	50,000 bales. (That is a drastic decline.)
1993-94	 -	25,000 bales, 
1994-95	 -	32,885 bales 
1996-97	 -	56,419 bales, 
1996-97 	 -	110,708 bales 
1997-98	 -	31,808 bales
1998-99	 - 	80,000 bales  
1999-2000 	-	115,888 bales  
2000-01	 -	99,514 bales  
2001-02	 -	117,303 bales  
2002-03	-	106,698 bales  
2003-04	-	150,000 bales
Total 		- 	976,270 bales
Average 	- 	81,351 bales 

When you compare this with the previous 10 years before the establishment of CDO, the total for those years was in millions, it was 2,051,390 and the average was 227,932 bales. But here we have 976,220 only and the average is 81,351 bales! 

The conclusion here is that a lot more cotton was produced when there was no CDO. Even when this previous period was characterized by civil war, economic isolation of Uganda in spite of receiving government subsidy.

The imposition of statutory regulation of cotton farming, ginning and export has not yielded the expected results. 

The imposition of duties and cess on farmers has not led to more production, more ginning or more exports.  

3(a) Total acreage 

Ten years CDO watch is lower than the 40 years national average since independence, which is one million acres. In 1993 how many acres were cultivated? They were only 154,348 acres. 

1994 - 154,968 acres 
1995 - 182,780 acres 
1996 - 296,400 acres 
1997 - 367,042 acres, 
1998 - 238,335 acres 
1999 - 450,000 acres
2000 - 677,949 acres 
2001 - 500,000 acres 

Average acreage - 335,313 acres

(b) The El Nino and other natural disasters have not only hit Uganda under CDO’s watch, but also the farmers have in the past had to go through much more devastating famines, political strife and international price fluctuation as it is common for most of the agricultural products. But Acreage cultivated was almost triple the present acreage of 335,313 acres.  

Comparison with the Tea regulation

There is the Uganda Tea Authority, which was set up in 1974 by the Uganda Tea Authority Act Cap. 36. 

Section 13 imposes a tea cess too, which is set by the Minister of Agriculture and it is collected by the Tea Authority. The 

Tea cess is however payable only by persons holding a tea-manufacturing license. 
There is no tea duty on the farmers and the tea growers are regulated by their own statutory Tea Growers Corporation. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY  (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okupa seems to be reading a text, which we are not privy to. Is he in order to continue when we are supposed to answer yet he is reading very fast, the figures are written? It is actually a text, so could he – if he had availed it to us I would not be putting or asking for your guidance. But Madam Speaker, you could guide us on this very matter. It will be very difficult for us to follow especially those of us who need to respond when he is reading from a text, which we are not privy to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, do you have an additional set? You give it to the Minister.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, I do not really know what the Minister wants. He says I am moving so fast, then two, he says he needs the copies, but I will answer, Madam Speaker. Madam speaker, when I submitted this resolution to the Clerk, I did submit this attachment as well. I had expected it to be circulated with the report that has been circulated. It is unfortunate if Members do not have it and I am presenting this because this is a detailed thing. I needed specific facts not to talk from the blue. I could not have in my head 20 years figures, because I am comparing 10 years before CDO with 10 years after CDO.  

Madam Speaker, I will lay this on the Table later after I have finished presenting it, but I had submitted this together with the resolution. But I leave it to you, Madam Speaker, to make a ruling on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can one of the Clerks go and get a copy from the Clerk’s Office for the Minister because, I think it is important for him to follow what is going on so that he can be able to answer.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, some honourable members have copies so they will take it for recycling, more especially if they can give it to the hon. Minister.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. Pass that one to the Minister. Okay proceed. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling on this matter that affects most of these Tea growers. 

Madam Speaker, under the cotton regime it is not the Minister who sets the cess; it is the CDO itself, that is, under section 28(1)(f). The Minister only comes in later to vary the cess under section 28(2), which ambiguity has lead to CDO to routinely vary the cess to eight percent, to the detriment of the Cotton farmer. What is provided for, Madam Speaker, is two percent. This six percent is a levy tax to farmers to come up to this figure of eight percent. 

There is no statutory body set up by law to cater for the cotton farmers. Even the UGCEA is for the ginners and exporters and is a limited liability company, which we all know is motivated by a profit and not accountable to farmers or Parliament.  

Comparison with the Tobacco Farmers:

a) The Tobacco (Control and Marketing) Act Cap.35 regulates tobacco farming and marketing. Again the tobacco cess is imposed under section 10 by the Minister by statutory instrument. The guidelines for determining the tobacco cess are set by law. 

b) A Tobacco Development Fund is set up by section 10(2) into which all monies collected as tobacco cess are to be deposited. This fund is governed by Government under the Public Finance Act section 16 and the cess collected from the Tobacco Farmers shall be used for the purposes connected with the development of tobacco production, tobacco research, tobacco process, promotion and marketing, that is under section 10 sub section (4). 

c) There is no duty imposed on tobacco seed and the monies collected from tobacco are not left to tobacco processors or authority for the misuse. It is farmers’ money collected to help farmers increase production.

I want to make another comparison with dairy farmers, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Elijah Okupa, you know you are going to crowd the cotton issue; it will disappear in the tobacco, tea, and the other things. It is going to get buried. You want a solution on cotton; those will bury it –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I totally agree with you but I had thought I would give specifics, but if the Member so wishes I can gloss over through this.  So, Madam Speaker, I have given those comparisons but also if Members compare it with the dairy farmers, you would find that that is the same matter. If you did compare it with a cotton farmer it is totally different. 

Madam Speaker, the common denomination in all these other cash crops regulatory bodies is to liberalize production and trading. It is to encourage rather that stifle competition; it is set up authorities to protect the farmer and not the trader only; it is to make these authorities accountable to the farmers and the minister, and all collected cess is on processors only not farmers.

If Members also looked at the cotton regime and the Cotton Development Act Cap. 30, there are so many issues that are raised that need to be addressed, Madam Speaker.

It raises a lot of issues and, Madam Speaker, allow me to quote on this cotton statutory regime that has been flawed and misapplied as follows - as I summarize, Madam Speaker, this presentation. 

a) “It is wrong for the cotton price determination to be given to CDO because this has resulted in the farm-gate price being fixed rather than liberalized basing on export prices. The same person who levies cess and takes the proceeds of the seeds will naturally end up taxing the seed producer, that is, the farmer, and the cotton producer, which is also the farmer.  

b) The creation of zones where cotton movement is restricted has resulted in the blanket monopoly given to the area ginner - to fix his price as low as possible - as the farmer cannot sell elsewhere where there is a higher price.  

So, there is restriction on where to market the cotton. You cannot move beyond a zone you are operating and yet this is a liberalized economy.  We expected the forces of demand and supply, ceteris paribus, to determine the price of this cotton. 

c) The cotton traders too are cut out of zones where there are ginners and the farm-gate price is not made competitive. This is in fact contrary to the liberalization of agricultural produce, which other farmers in Uganda enjoy. 

d) It is counter-productive, therefore, to require the registration of farmers at all and their production - because this, Madam Speaker, is what happens. They have to register them, their production. 

e) They have the power to announce when cotton buying should start and stop; they have the net effect of commanding the farmer to sell during given periods only and taking away the ability to bargain by hoarding. This benefits traders not the farmers, Madam Speaker. 

f) The statutory restriction imposed on ginners not to gin cotton produced outside of their regions has the effect of preventing farmers who are being underpaid by their nearest ginners to seek a better price elsewhere.

g) It is a provision on all proceeds of cottonseed going to CDO that has exposed CDO as a taxing body on the farmers, the ginners are therefore clearly tax collectors for CDO. It is not fair for this tax to be imposed on cotton ginners at all and the proceeds to go to CDO, which already levies a cess on the lint. 

h) The cess was fixed not to exceed two percent, but to date it has been raised arbitrarily by CDO to eight percent.  

On the government subsidy, all this is going on in CDO. Whereas Government granted a cotton subsidy to CDO, so far only nearly Shs 6 billion - Madam Speaker, I beg to stop here and I beg the Members to support this resolution to enable the poor people who get their living from the cotton to get out of poverty, Madam Speaker.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Hansard staff are directed to transcribe that document and include it in its entirety into our records.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I lay this detailed document about the cotton production and resolution on the Table.   

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I rise here to support the motion, but –(Interruption)- Oh, the seconder is -(Laughter)

4.32
MRS RAINER KAFIRE (Kibuku County, Pallisa): I rise to support the motion, Madam Speaker. Why did I support this resolution? Pallisa people have been, and are still, cotton farmers. They depend on cotton, they pay school fees from cotton, they pay taxes to government from cotton. 

Last year, when the farmers took their cotton for sale, some of them were stopped on the way by armed police. They were told, you are not allowed to cross from Pallisa to Iganga with your cotton. You are not allowed to come from Pallisa and go to Tororo with your cotton and we are in Bukedi. This is why I joined hon. Okupa to bring this resolution here so that we can amend the Act, which is very unfair to the farmers. 

The farmers in Pallisa in particular are really suffering. As you may have heard from hon. Okupa, a lot of money has been collected to the tune of Shs 31,433,191,350 through cess. I process meat in my small factory. When I sell raw meat, I am not taxed. How come that the farmers are taxed from their own farms? Just to make them poorer! 

Madam Speaker, it is not only Pallisa; there are 33 districts of Uganda that are suffering the same fate and here we always say the peasants are our supporters. But when it comes to economic empowerment, you take the little they earn and who does it?  We in here! You are asking me, how?  You allow CDO to levy the two percent. They have not only stopped on two percent; they have gone now to charge eight percent as of this year. What do you expect the farmers to do? You are going back in year 2006 to ask for ‘ekisanja’. I wonder with this –(Interruption)   

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from either hon. Kafire or hon. Okupa on the cess. Has it just been introduced or it was there even during the previous regimes? And if has just been introduced (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Members, the hon. Member wants to know.

MS BINTU: I am seeking clarification and I want to know even what cess is and if it has just been introduced. It looks to be the major problem of the cotton farmers. So I am seeking clarification. Thank you.

MRS KAFIRE: The cess was introduced recently with the Cotton Development Organization as a source of revenue; at the same time and they get money from Government. We have given them, through Parliament, Shs 6 billion to run CDO, but they still steal money from my poor father who gets little from the cotton. I will tell you how they go about it. They charge everything - motor vehicle maintenance, labour, bank statement, any thing on the farmer. By the time they give us the price, they would have taken off their expenses. I understand they are going to give us less than Shs 300 per kilo. My farmers in Kibuku say they are no longer going to grow cotton if it goes below last year’s price.

Secondly, I feel we are doing harm to the farmers. People went in for vanilla; when the prices were up, everyone was happy. As soon as the farmers were starting to enjoy their sweat, the price was slashed. Why doesn’t Government come in to stabilize these prices? We can find money for kisanja, why can’t we find money for the poor farmers? Why? Somebody is asking me what is kisanja?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, do not respond to heckling, just second and conclude.

MRS KAFIRE: I feel that this Parliament can do a lot to help the farmers down there in the villages and I feel sorry for them. To get a kilo of cotton, you have to put in over six hours everyday. If you do not clean the gardens, you do not get cotton. On top of that, what CDOs have done: They pretend to be giving every farmer insecticide and then they charge them. For example, I have put in four acres of cotton, nobody has given me insecticide, but they are going to charge me. It is unfair!

So Madam Speaker, my request to the Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want my colleague to put her record right. It is not CDO that provides the pesticides; it is the ginners.

MRS KAFIRE: Thank you very much. Those are agents of CDO, I am sure in Wakiso you have cotton farmers, you will find out from them.  

Lastly, what I would ask Government to do is to look at the farmers as citizens of this country. The farmers are suffering; the prices must be looked into, as we ask them to help us to get back to this place, we should also help them to survive. In the year 2006, from the President downwards, we are all going back to those peasant farmers.  You better get the farmers in their right mood before you go back. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, now that the Mover and the Seconder have spoken, I will give the rest you just five minutes each. Hon. Odit - Let us hear from the Committee of Agriculture, then we go to the Minister.

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion and I want to appreciate Parliament in its wisdom to give us this afternoon to debate this very important motion. 

There are very good reasons for giving this item priority. The law says CDO, in consultation with the Minister of Trade, should announce indicative price of cotton prior to the buying of cotton and we have been receiving this information every 15th day of November. This year we have been kept in black out up to this morning. I have before me what they considered to be the indicative price for cotton for this year, but some of these unscrupulous dealers had already gone on a buying spree for the last two months. 

In some districts, they are buying cotton at Shs 250, in others Shs 270 and some lucky ones are receiving Shs 300 per kilo.  Now, I say these were illegal operations up to this morning, because as far as we are concerned, the minimal indicative price announced by CDO last year was Shs 600 and anything below Shs 600 should be illegal, and there are penalties to follow which should be implemented by the Ministry of Trade or the Ministry of Agriculture.  

The question is; why have these two ministries and CDO kept quiet for the last one-month or so? We want to know. This morning, CDO under pressure proposed that the new price is going to be Shs 300. When we wondered why they delayed all this time, there was a very simple reason. They said they knew of the price fall well in October, but they were worried that if they announced Shs 300 in November, the farmers from Kasese who had just planted their cotton would abandon the cotton maintenance. 

Now, this is a very interesting development. They have also told us that the price fell from the international market, but we wonder; why did Government make a provision for cotton as the only commodity in the agricultural sector whose price must be indicated before buyers can come in? We want to know; what was in the mind of Government to set this provision in the law? If there are answers here, we want to know.

Now that the price has fallen to the minimal acceptable rate, is government willing to come in to fill in the gap? This is very unacceptable. 

Then number three, as – (Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, chairperson, Committee on Agriculture and Animal Industry and Fisheries. There has been talk about last year’s indicative price issued by CDO, which was Shs.600 per kilogram of cotton. Last year the international price for cotton per kilo of lint was 72 US cents per kilogram of lint.  

This year the price of lint at the international market has fallen as low as 37 US cents per pound of lint. The fact of the matter is that the bulk of the cotton, which is produced by the farmers here, which is ginned, is sold out of the country without adding value. Therefore when prices for lint on the international market collapse –(Interruptions)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want the Minister to help me in this. The ginners were complaining about power fluctuation and it is one of the things that heighten their overhead expenses. Can he also explain this one such that we can know how much it has contributed to the crisis we have?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope we are not now going to the Energy sector. We have given Energy time next week. Hon. Mutumba, we have given energy time next week; let us deal with cotton; we agreed it was urgent.

MR ONEK: Just on the figures. You stated that last year the price for lint was 72 US cents per kilogram. (Interjection) Oh, it is now pound, because I was going to say the price is higher if it is pounds. Thirty-seven US cents per pound is higher than 72 cents per kilogram.  Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: I thought that I should provide that information so that when we are debating this important subject, it is not perceived that may be CDO on its own or somebody in the country is denying the farmer a fair price, but may be we should try and find a solution, taking into account what is happening on the international market and may be the need to come up with a clear policy, to be in a position to deal with such vagrancies within the sector and in future years.

MR DOMBO: Hon. Minister, I just wanted to seek clarification, because, Madam Speaker, when the hon. Minister talks of the international market prices of lint, are these prices also fixed like we seem to be doing here in Uganda on the international market?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When a minister talks about the fall of the cotton prices affecting the cotton prices here in Uganda, what I would like him to help us understand is; if there is anything in our history which takes note of the fact that coffee prices have also been falling internationally, if there has ever been a situation where we ended up releasing indicative prices for the coffee farmer, arising from the international situation.

DR NDUHUURA: I think coffee should not be confused with cotton. I am saying this deliberately because –(Interruptions)- give me chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, hon. Minister.

DR NDUHUURA: We have seasonal crops as distinct from perennial crops; I think this is very clear to you. So, whereas cotton is a seasonal crop where you have to give an indicative price probably before farmers grow it or plant it, the farmers of coffee will have planted it years back, before you have the berries.  So, the two shouldn’t be mistaken.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we are all aware that this is a liberalized economy. A liberalized economy is not applied selectively to whether the crop is annually grown, seasonally or perennially grown.  Is the Minister now in order to say we have selective liberalization in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, the case the Members have been making is that cotton is treated differently from all the others and it is adversely affecting the farmers. Can you explain why in a liberalized economy the prices of cotton are fixed?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Probably, I did not make myself very clear. I also sympathise with the people who grow cotton. In trade, the fixing of prices is really distortional; it is not generally correct fixed of prices. I agree with those who are saying that prices should not be fixed. In the case of coffee, prices are not fixed. In the case of cotton, what is given to farmers is an indicative price to encourage them to grow. But of course market forces are also at play and when the words “international prices fall” then the CDO has no alternative but to act accordingly.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to find out from the hon. Minister if the indicative prices given to the cotton farmers are meant to boost production. At what time in the marketing cycle are the prices given? Are they given before the farmers plant the cotton or after the farmers have started the marketing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you want to answer now?

Madam Speaker, I have been reminded that CDO falls under Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture is in a better position to answer. So from now on, since the question of seasons is coming in, when to grow, when to harvest is coming in, I would rather leave it to the Minister responsible for Agriculture to answer. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that case, honourable members, can the Minister of Agriculture take notes of what Members are saying and then you respond.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, the confusion, which we are getting from the Front Bench, clearly calls for an urgent reason for an investigation.
One, the whole Minister of Trade does not know when and why the indicative price should be announced and yet he is supposed to be part of the decision-making (Interjection)- it is there in the Statute.

Two, when the hon. Minister responsible for Energy rose up to attempt to explain the prices whether it is against a pound or against a kilo, he even got more confused. Now which one is heavier? It is the pound; it is lighter two times 0.2. So, that cannot be the basis for curtailing our price now. In fact, that is the very reason why the farmer is still entitled to Shs.600 per kilo today. (Applause) They are using the farmers’ ignorance, now they cheat us by getting the pound as international price then they cost the farmers here on a kilogram. This is a very serious matter.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, issues pertaining to cotton are very controversial every year and I want to provide the following information for our consumption to help the Minister if it can. The one-pound, a pound in which lint is sold is valid against the kilo we buy from the farmers in the following way: When one kilogram of cotton is ginned, only one third of that cotton which has been bought from the farmer as a kilo is lint, two thirds includes the seeds and dust and whatever rubbish you can think about. So, when we talk about the price of cotton this year being US 37 cents per pound, we are talking about 37 cents for one pound of lint out of the one kilogram. So you can see Madam Speaker, hon. Members, it is much less in pound terms. 

The other information we must look at is that there is what we call ginning costs. The ginning costs include: the cost of electricity which is the common problem, we talk about baling hooks, we talk about the materials used for baling the cotton and other costs incurred such as labour and so forth. So this must be included in the 37 US cents for a ginner to get money out of his activity of ginning the cotton. Therefore, how much we should charge the farmer must be valid against that.  

I think Madam Speaker, the question we should look at is a broader question involving cotton; it is not a question of whether the farmer is being cheated by the ginner but the question of the overall policy governing the processing, of liberalization itself vis-à-vis the issue of developing our own industries. I thank you.

MR ODIT: I think the hon. colleague has only helped to say the obvious because, when you talk about price it is part of the policy we are querying and the worrying thing is that when the ginners sit, they sit to decide on what should accrue to them.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I would also like to inform the House that whereas the cotton price world over has gone down, Uganda is one of the few countries that is producing organic cotton and organic cotton is regarded as a premium.  

MRS IDAH MEHANGYE: Thank you Madam Speaker and hon. Odit for giving way. I particularly want clarification from the chairperson of the Agricultural Committee. In my district Kamwenge, one of the sub counties, Mahyoro, is actually cotton producing and it is one of the sub counties where we get a lot of cotton. I would like to get some clarification; I am failing to get it right.  I thought there has been privatization and liberalization on most of the items in Uganda. 

I remember one time on this Floor of Parliament, the Minister of Trade telling us about vanilla. When the prices of vanilla fell, he explained, he said the prices fell but the market forces are like that, Government cannot come in to increase or to change anything about prices and therefore, let the market take its course.  

Now when cotton comes in, and there is this thing called CDO to me it is acting as middleman somewhere.  How does it come in if we said there is liberalization and the market prices take their own course? How does the CDO come in now to determine prices of this or that?

Secondly, what policies do we have on these price settings? Do we have different policies for different crops or do we have general policies that manage the market? I would like to be clarified Madam Speaker. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, let me start with a simple one. I want to appreciate the innocence of my honourable Colleague on the law. She is very innocent and I appreciate that. When I started I said cotton is the only crop whose price is set by the Statute. This Statute is an Act of Parliament enacted in 1994. Cotton is not fully liberalized for that matter. Government must have a say and section (5) of the Statute clarifies on the duties of the organization which is CDO. 5(f) says CDO has to announce the indicative farm-gate, ginnery buying and export prices and monitor prices actually paid at these levels together with the prices of cottonseed for planting, and it is here. So, it is a unique crop; we cannot just jump and say the whole thing is liberalized, this and that; let us look at our laws. For us we are talking on behalf of the farmers.

Two, we are blaming CDO for abdicating its role because it has divested itself from its responsibility to organizing the farmers into associations and groups so that they can talk with a common voice when they are meeting the buyers, ginners and yet that function that is part of CDO role is more active with Uganda Ginners and Exporters Association than with the farmers. It is fully provided for under 5(l) where CDO is empowered to promote the formation of associations among different groups in the industry.  

So, as we talk now we have Asians who are investors, we have the Bazungus, we have the Africans, these are people we have invested in establishing the ginneries and they are meeting CDO. There is not a single farmer, who is representing the position of the farmer when these people decide tomorrow to announce the price and yet in the course of cotton production, they pretend that they are providing the seed free to the farmers, pesticides and other packages. When they announce the farm-gate price this costing covers all those areas, which must be recovered from the farmer. Some of this costing probably, which requires us to critically investigate, are double costing. These are things, which are impacting on the final farm-gate price, which the farmer receives.  

In civilized organizations, I think when the farmers reach this stage, Government should be able to come in to support the farmer, because a price drop from Shs 600 to Shs 300 is a very big shock; it is very serious and yet CDO is mandated to ensure that the farmers, ginners and exporters live in harmony. So that gap has to be addressed.  

Madam Speaker, I think if Parliament allows us to investigate this conduct, we should be able to come with details of how the ginners and exporters have arrived at their costing, which has guided them to come up with the Shs 300 as the final farm-gate price this year to the farmer. If we do not do that and Government remains silent, and yet we are treasuring cotton next year, it will be very difficult for Government to find a crop like cotton in our country. If we insist that cotton should be one of those crops, which is being supported - by the way - under strategic intervention for export, and this Parliament appropriates a lot of money to support that industry, then the best thing is for us to pull out totally from fixing the price, so that the farmer can take a decision whether or not to go into cotton production without necessarily coming to burden the institution of Parliament to find out what is going to be the new price for cotton. 

If we continue to tie ourselves with this law, which was put in place with the imagination that things were going to be well and Government would be strong enough to fill in the gap in case the price falls and support the farmer, then we are going to deceive ourselves and the farmers will rise against us for no good cause. 

Therefore, I definitely support this motion and I also call upon Government to prevail on CDO and think twice before they announce this Shs 300 as a price. It is a very discouraging price. I thank you.

4.59
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I am really concerned, actually as I was seated here I thought that CDO has outlived its usefulness and should be abolished, because instead of protecting the farmers, it is conniving with ginners to oppress the farmers.
Two, it has become a parasite to the farmers. Of course there is a lot of data here I can substantiate but also hon. Okupa put it very well when he was justifying his motion that since CDO was put in place, it has not managed to increase production of cotton. So, why should it continue in existence?  
You are saying we have liberalized, the Minister tried to justify the fixing or giving of indicative prices without success. As far as cotton is concerned apparently, everything else is liberalized except the freedom of farmers to sell their cotton wherever they think they can get better prices.
Honorable Kafire told us you cannot go with cotton from Palisa to another district or to another ginner who can maybe offer a better price. So what kind of liberalization are we talking about? I think if CDO is not heavily reformed, it should be abolished.
Two, I think this a policy – (Interruption)
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you very much hon. colleague for giving way. This morning when we interfaced with the CDO, we demanded for the cost of production per kilogram. One person from Nyakatonzi Cooperative Union in Kasese said they had computed the cost of production per kilogram.  For them that side it is mainly mechanized tractors and production cost is Shs 360 per kilogram of cotton. Now when you talk about selling it at Shs 300 per kilogram it goes hand in hand with what my colleague has just said; that this is now being parasitic on the farmer.

Secondly, the pricing of cotton, for the sake of my hon. Minister of State for Trade, I understand according to CDO, there is a body called the International Cotton Advisory Committee, which comprises of producers and consumers. They are the ones who fix the price. Unfortunately, this year, they only sat on 29th of November to 3rd December to fix the price when the cotton was actually due for market. That is the information I also wanted to help you with. I thank you.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much for that information.  Actually, I was coming to that point.  Madam Speaker, when these people are fixing the indicative price, they take into considerations the costs of the ginners, that is, Uganda Ginners Cotton Seed 2003/2004. They put in everything including loading and off loading, NSSF fees, printing, insurance, security but they did not take into consideration the cost of production, how much the farmer is putting in to get this one kilogram of cotton. It is sincerely very unfair. 

I am calling upon our government to rethink this strategy and especially our President is known for promoting AGOA investors in that line. A lot of money was spent on his trips to America to lobby for the extension of AGOA and this Act has been extended. We are supposed to use our own cotton and linen, but there is no affirmative action for this industry. 

I know cotton is supposed to be among those major intervention areas, but at what level? If the farmer is not encouraged to produce more cotton, where are you going to start from? Are we going to import the cotton then do the linen? It does not make economic sense. 

Madam Speaker, Masindi is one of the districts, which grow cotton, and the other sensitive crop is tobacco. I am going to mobilize my people to stop growing cotton and tobacco because they have not benefited anything. You are talking of liberalization; these small farmers cannot be left completely at the vagaries of these businessmen. They do not have the information; they put in a lot even when – (Interruption)

MR SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give additional information to hon. Kabakumba. Just now the Buganda government was planning to restart a campaign of growing cotton but if the prices are so miserable, I am afraid that campaign may be dropped. So, something has to be done not to discourage cotton growers.  Thank you.

MR PETER OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, my concerns are basically – (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, the information I want to give on this very aspect is that there are tendencies of Government trying to do better things in one way and deal with another thing in another way.  Madam Speaker, when we talk about Coffee Development Authority for this very case, why are these people going into the issues of the ginners? It is basically because they are the ones who know, but the situation here, Madam Speaker, is that the person who is in-charge of –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, my colleague stood up to give information. Now he is in a fully-fledged discussion. So, is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please give information so that it can assist hon. Kabakumba’s point.

MR OCHIENG:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that the person in-charge of the Cotton Development seems not to either know or not bothered. So when my sister continues talking about the same, I really want to inform her that there is really very little will about Cotton Development. Because of that little will, next time it is going to be a problem for this government to come and use us for mobilizing farmers to the extent in case such kind of things are going to happen. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Kabakumba is that as if that was not enough, the Cotton component is one of the components, which forms our National Coat of Arms. So, hon. Kabakumba is correct. If government cannot promote the sustenance of cotton growth, let her people boycott growing cotton.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much for all that information. I have already given the way forward, that is, CDO should be scrapped. Hon. Odit, Madam Speaker, I think they will not have to ask for permission to review this sector and even to review the Act. This you should do immediately with the view of abolishing CDO.

Lastly, all the costs which are enumerated, there is also a development fund levy. This levy is illegal. It is not provided for anywhere in the law. How do you assist us hon. Minister? Through this motion, I want this country and the peasants who grow this cotton to be assisted to get the profits that are due to them. I beg to support this motion. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA  (Bulamogi County, Kamuli District):  I thank you very much Madam Speaker for accepting that the issue of cotton at this material time is a hot issue, which could send the whole of Eastern, Northern Province and some parts in the West into flames. As we talk now, most of the people in Bulamogi County and indeed in most parts of Busoga which produce cotton, Madam Speaker, where you come from, there will be completely no Christmas this time because of cotton. 

We were mobilized, Madam Speaker, to tell our farmers to switch back to cotton aggressively because cotton is now an important crop which needs to be attended to in order to seize the opportunity of AGOA.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA: Thank you for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me. I want to give my colleague information that it is right and correct that in Busoga we are likely to face a problem in growing cotton because of the prices that have been floating around illegally. I tried to follow what my colleague is saying to show people that cotton can be grown by anybody in the area and I want to declare my interest, that is, why I was seated here quiet a bit. But I want to declare my interest that I have planted 30 hectares of cotton hoping that the price will be beyond Shs 600, but this morning we were told it is Shs 300, so you know where I am. So if you do not see me, you know that I have lost, so I am still nursing my problem. But the Cotton Development Authority should be helped to help people to grow more cotton. I have a problem on my hand to maintain cotton with that type of price.  Thank you.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask, hon. Members this matter is extremely urgent; is there fire brigade action which the ministry can do about the prices because, they are being set today. Can you propose how we can help those farmers apart from the debate?

MR MUKAMA: I want to propose Madam Speaker. I think before CDO announces the price, let the government give some kind of price stabilization. They can get money; I know government is able to get money to help that industry to go ahead; that is what we want. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when they are determining the price, the farmers like the Mukamas and the others should also be involved so that we tell them our cost of producing. But these costs of theirs, I can read you some of the expenses; workers’ welfare, overtime, travel and subsistence, staff house rent - these are not related because even when we are growing cotton we do not put such cost, they are at our place. But government stabilization fund is urgently required and please, I would like to ask government not to listen to these other people, our friends who say, “leave it; liberalisation; do not set prices, do not do this”.  Thank you.

MR DOMBO:  Additional information, Madam Speaker.

MS NAMUYANGU: Point of clarification, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, additional information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you let hon. Wambuzi –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I am informing this one.

MS NAMUYANGU: I am seeking clarification.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, one time in this House you reminded Members that the only time they were allowed to switch on the microphone is when you recognized them. But now we have a kind of cattle market going on. Members are switching on the microphones and consequently you have several of them switched on addressing the House at the same time. Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence that you take charge and make sure that the hon. Members only switch on their microphones when they are recognized by the Speaker. Therefore, Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable members to break the rules of Parliament and switch on their microphones when they are not recognized yet by the Chair?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are out of order. And honourable members, one of the reasons we gave those directives is that when you switch on those machines at the same time, it causes a break and items are delicate. Please, you stand; I will see you and recognize you.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. Since the beginning of this session you have been ably in charge of this House, and Madam Speaker, right now one hon. Member has been calling upon you to take charge as if you have not been in charge. Madam Speaker, this is dis-respect to the office of the Chair. Is the Member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I am totally in charge. So he is out of order, and now that I am in charge, the hon. Member on the Floor is hon. Wambuzi.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, when we talk about the issue of cotton this is a very important aspect of the economy of Uganda. It is a pity our economists have not taken this issue very seriously. Uganda, because of its speciality in organic cotton, is competing very well with China.  But our problem, as you see, the acreage is increasing and the farmers are getting less money and the ministry of industry and CDO are actually abandoning our farmers. Even a whole Member of Parliament has stood up in this House -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that CDO is directly under the Ministry of Agriculture.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, this is the second minister I have heard on this Floor maybe from the same ministry asserting that the role of marketing, which we are talking about now, is under the Ministry of Agriculture. Are they in order, Madam Speaker, to abdicate their responsibility and re-allocate it to the Ministry of Agriculture?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Ministry of Trade, Tourism, Industry and Marketing is out of order to deny its responsibility. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker for that ruling because even the hon. Minister who stood up to propose that she is not responsible for CDO comes from Pallisa where cotton is grown. Even her voters are asking her what is going to happen to cotton. It is a great pity that -(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, it is true I come from Pallisa and I represent people who grow cotton and I am a cotton farmer. But it is also true that Parliament, which made the law to establish CDO did not put it under our ministry and much as we are in charge of marketing, in that law which established CDO, they did say that it is CDO that would liase with the ginners to announce the prices. So, there is no way the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry can take charge of CDO, which is not under us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but honourable Minister, are you satisfied with that position both as a farmer and as a representative of farmers? Are you satisfied with that arrangement because we are trying to find a solution?

MS NAMUYANGU: Of course, I am not, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI: I think, Madam Speaker, you can see we are getting down actually to doing the business with the Executive today in that our farmers are certainly getting a raw deal and they are being abandoned a situation which is going to cause us problems. You know very well when you go to speak to Balamogi, the first question they will ask is, when are they announcing the price for cotton?  When we were planting they told us it is Shs 700 as of now the people are robbing us they are giving us only Shs 200. 

This is not tenable because it is the responsibility of the Executive and Parliament to protect the weak ones in the economy. It is not the responsibility of the Government to protect the big ginners and biggest exporters. Those have got enough muscle and enough wisdom and enough intelligence to be able to fight their wars. But when you take a farmer who is only going to get very little money from an acre and you find that the CDO is protecting the ginner with a schedule of all the costs of ginners and the CDO has not produced to this Committee of Agriculture what is the schedule of costs of the peasant farmers. It is only when the weak ones, that is peasant farmers, schedule of costs is tendered to this committee and then equity is seen by the Executive, equity is seen by the Parliament that our voters are being protected. We must rise to the occasion and protect our peasants on this particular issue today.  Madam Speaker, I would like to propose, I think because of time you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi please, complete; the matter is so emotive that I want to give other Members time to contribute.

MR WAMBUZI: So, I think it is very important to state:

(a) Controlling CDO
(b) All things to do with cotton should be considered and I think they should be considered by Parliament.

In 1953, there was war about cotton in Buganda to the extent that Baganda actually abolished the issue of cotton and even the Bazungu accepted that the law was – that is when the cooperatives were brought in. The cooperative movement was brought in to protect the cotton peasant farmer. It is unfortunate that independent Uganda today is now actually surrendering its independence to the vagaries of private enterprise. 

I think China is a giant in cotton because China’s Government takes cotton as a very important thing and does not leave anything to vagueness; it is ever there for every peasant. I think it is the responsibility of this Government because of the other secondary goodies, which are likely to come out of a booming cotton industry. The secondary effects are that when you actually develop a cotton industry you employ very many people. If you kill your cotton industry, you cause yourself a problem as a Government because you then actually get a lot of people who are going to be against the Government. It is a very important industry to be developed, if you get 5 million people in the cotton industry you know you have solved a lot of problems, people will be busy with work. 

Sometimes we may actually produce cotton even at a loss and on this occasion, Madam Speaker, the Government must rise up to beef up the price of cotton back to Shs 700 in this season while other things are being discussed. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me the space.

5.26
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion and to thank the movers for finally coming in to address the legal and policy troubles we have had as cotton farmers in this country. In 2003, I moved around my district and I told the farmers, since they were producing at a cost of negative of 150,000 per acre there were safer dropping cotton production.  When the Committee of Agriculture went there, the farmers in Soroti told them that Alaso has said we should not produce cotton. I am happy that the committee and the movers of this motion have come in to help us address the problem. My major problem here is that we all take note –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, proceed hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, one of the big issues in cotton production that has been pointed out is the setting of a price, which motivates the farmer to jump into production and then after he has gone into production, you cut it. Then as people who are in charge of this country we do not compensate them whatsoever. The moment the farmers have been “murdered” by that move, we all leave them and forget about them. If we are going to continue setting the prices to motivate them to produce, we should also take the full responsibility of compensating them should the price fall below what we told them. That is what is called accountability.  

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I appreciate about this motion is that, the movers have come in to show us how much the Cotton Development Authority has robbed the farmers in this country.  The robbery has to do with that illegal levy which is nowhere in the law to begin with, but they continue to levy it on the farmers. 

The other thing is that, while it has been pointed out that there is something up to Shs 31 billion that should be recovered, my feeling is that if this money is recovered as we pass this motion, it should be recovered and be given to the farmers. It was the farmers who are robbed not the Government. It is actually Government that failed in the business of protecting the farmers from being robbed by the Cotton Development Authority. So, this motion should be seeking to recover the money from the robber and giving back to the rightful owner. 

I support my colleague hon. Kabakumba, when she says that the Cotton Development Authority should be abolished. The biggest justice we can do to the cotton farmers in this country is to get rid of the robbers they have done injustice and find a better way of helping the farmers.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the whole process of managing the services to the cotton farmers. I am aware that the ginners are the very people who advertise the tenders to distribute chemicals to the farmers. Once they do it they also win the same tenders; then they go ahead and distribute the chemicals. They also distribute substandard chemicals in order to maximize profits.  Madam Speaker, this is the worst form of injustice we can subject the farmers to, and as a result, I feel that if we pass this motion as it is –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Just some information to hon. Alice Alaso, Madam Speaker. I just want to make some correction because when we talk of distribution here, we would think that they are giving them free of charge. In fact, they are selling to farmers.  So, they are selling not distributing.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information regarding pesticides. Actually the ginners are subsidizing prices on pesticides to farmers.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to inform Members for purpose of record that if the United States Government had refused to extend AGOA, the price of cotton would even be Shs 1000. But the American Government accepting that the Uganda Government should continue to use cotton material from outside to process garment and export, that has made Government not to focus on supporting farmers because –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, thank you. First of all, I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Ekanya to confuse us that United States Government is allowing us to import raw materials, when it is actually true that it is because we do not have raw materials that even AGOA programme was extended so that we get enough raw materials of cotton and be able to produce our raw materials of cotton? (Interjections). Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members are very excited. Order.

MR MUTULUUZA: What I am saying is that it is not true that United States allowed us to import in order to suppress our cotton producers. It is because we do not have enough cotton that we are allowed for the time being to import cloth materials so that we continue exporting. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are looking at this matter from different perspectives. For him, he thinks that because we still import materials from outside, that is why we are not facilitating the cotton industry. That is what he understands. And for you, you are saying oh no, we do not have, that is why we are importing.  So, they are saying the same thing.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was actually –(Interruption)
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, I did not know this cotton is so exciting.  Hon. Alaso please, wind up.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually going to wind up, but the issue raised by hon. Okupa actually captures the question of selling to the farmers. The issue I was raising has to do with the ginners winning their own tenders. So, they win the tender, they distribute and they buy. That is a total conflict of interest, which should be addressed.
 
Madam Speaker, I want to end by asking that probably at an appropriate time, I move an amendment on five so that the money that is with the Cotton Development Organisation be refunded to the farmers. That is what I will want at an appropriate time to move. I thank you.

5.36
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion in line with the liberalisation and privatisation policy of the Government, which has earned this country increased foreign exchange base, which has increased the productivity of agricultural crops and provided employment for our people.

This motion is addressing the problems of marketing of cotton. Madam Speaker, the issue of marketing of cotton has created a lot of problems in this country and provides avenues for enriching the few elements who are involved in the ginning of cotton. You are aware that under monopolistic situation, monopoly encourages the cheating of the farmers because there is no free entrance and free exit and where the law of demand and supply determines the price. You find that in Uganda we are under a liberalised economy whereby people are free to sell their products where the price is high and take their products in any location where there are good opportunities for them to get higher prices. You find that under monopoly the prices stagnate, the farmers are cheated and it reduces the productivity.

Honourable members in this House, I am aware that if Cotton Development authority fixes the price to Shs 300 this season, I can assure you, you will not get cotton in the next season and I am also ware under the Cobweb Theory it is very difficult to fix the prices of agricultural products because they keep on fluctuating pacing on the demand of the world market.
 
Madam Speaker, in the financial year 2003/04, the marketing of cotton caused a lot of insecurity in this country. In Hoima the marketing of tobacco caused a lot of anxiety in this country and in Pallisa the few businessmen abused the policemen and put roadblocks throughout the road leading to Busoga where the prices were a bit higher. You find that the price of Shs 600 was being paid in Pallisa and in Busoga it was Shs 1,000. So, this promoted the smuggling of cotton from Pallisa to Busoga which undermined the principles of liberalisation and –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the honourable Member on the Floor. First, he has just informed us that the prices of cotton are going to be low because of international fluctuations. And according to the mover of the motion, I heard that the price actually was set by the Cotton Development Authority in collaboration with the ginneries.  Now, how does the international prices come in?

Secondly, when you talk of liberalisation, these people are not liberalised, that is why the motion wants to liberalize them. So, in the context of liberalisation, there is no way this motion would have come on the Floor. I want to be guided really, how you arrived at the liberalisation of the cotton sector yet the motion itself is about the same?
  
MR OPANGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification the honourable colleague is seeking is this. It is a fact that the Government of Uganda is promoting liberalisation and privatisation policy and I am also aware that there are few organisations, which are benefiting because they are not following the policies of Government. For example, in Uganda, Government has distanced itself from managing of companies, from managing of other production of things here. Therefore, the liberalisation policy is in place, but we can only strengthen it by passing this motion.

Then, as far as the prices are concerned, we are also aware that the world market can also affect the prices at the local setting and I am also aware that, when the world market price is high, the people of Uganda are denied the information from the world market. That is why I am saying –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my colleague for giving way. In respect of the world or international market, I think there is one thing which we are missing, what has been the cause of the fall of cotton prices in the market and what type of cotton? 

Madam Speaker, I am a very important organic cotton farmer. We are talking about cotton, I think it is time to clarify that there are two types of cotton growing in Uganda; there is conventional and then organic cotton. Now, we have been talking about cotton, cotton even in my constituency where organic is grown and it represents this country and Africa, and cotton growing in Lango sub region is second to California in the world in respect of organic cotton. I would like to inform my colleague that, even in America, which is responsible for production of organic cotton, I think they give their farmers subsidies and in order for us to benefit, it should have been in order for the Government to come in with subsidies.  

Madam Speaker, I attended a farm record workshop at Mukono in the year 2000 where those who were producing cotton using the manual labour and hand hoes, gave in their cost; and then those who produce using the animal traction also came in their cost; and then those who use the tractors and then the mechanized system in America. What we realized was that the hand hoe cotton farmers were claiming that they should be paid about Shs 500 per kilo and then when you go up to the tractor, it was about Shs 1,000 per kilo. Now, I do not understand why when these costs have been going up, then the Uganda ginners and the export association are the ones who are benefiting. 

The question I have never understood is that, is the cost of producing cotton been going down or going up or constant? So, my colleague here should therefore understand that the question of international prices is because ours here, we have not been given duly attention because Government has not subsidized and that is why we are suffering. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a contribution.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, the information the honourable colleague has given this House is very pertinent and that is why I am saying that this motion will address all these things.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the investors, they claim that they have put much money on experimental gardens and that is why at times when they are deciding on the prices here, they consider the cost that they have used on these demonstration gardens.  But you can find that whatever output that they get from these demonstration gardens, it is the investors themselves who sell the output and generate money to settle their cost and I see no reason why they should claim that they have invested money on this issue.

Madam Speaker, the most important things that I urge the honourable members of this august House to do is, they should investigate the composition of ginners in this country. Most of these are members of CDO, most of these political leaders are members of the ginners association and they have taken most of these places like Kasese, Pallisa and the rest.  Most of these ginners are either the relatives or what from the members of the CDO. That is what I want the committee of Parliament to investigate and come up with the solution because there is a deliberate intention to defraud farmers of this country from this sale of cotton.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the sales, Pallisa District charges Shs 50 per kilo on sales and the ginners are transferring these costs to the farmers and you find that when they are measuring the cotton, at times they deduct two kilograms to cater for this Shs 50 and other costs, which is a direct deliberate attempt to defraud farmers of the money.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Trade and Industry should be restructured to address the issue of marketing cotton, because the problem is, the Ministry of Agriculture cannot tell us that they are responsible for the marketing of cotton.  When you come to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, they are not also in position even Cotton Development Authority. Madam Speaker, I was in the honourable minister’s office and I asked a pertinent question -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which minister?

MR OPANGE: The Minister of State for Trade in charge of Industry hon. Namuyangu. I asked a question that, when are they announcing the indicative price for cotton? Because the buying of cotton say in Pallisa, started two months ago and people are cheated Shs 200 or Shs 250. She said that she was contacting Ministry of Agriculture.  So, I urge the head of -(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, hon. Opange, for giving way. I am seeking clarification from you because I heard you visited the office of the Minister of State for Trade. I am the Minister of State for Trade, and I have not seen hon. Opange in my office. Was he referring to me or somebody else?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said hon. Namuyangu.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. I wanted to also seek clarification from the honourable Minister in charge of Trade. A couple of years ago, there was a deliberate programme of Government to revive the cooperative movement in Uganda and the then Vice President, hon. Kazibwe, was put in charge and there was a directorate where Mr Fagil Mande was deliberately mandated to ensure the revival of the cooperative movement in the country. Do you not think that the continued neglect of the cooperative movement in the country has resulted in the outright neglect of the farmers and it is creating this problem that we are going through now?

MR OPANGE: Finally, Madam Speaker, the only solution for these problems we are facing in Uganda, Cotton Development Authority is a middleman and all of us did Commerce some good years ago.  When middlemen are involved, they will always keep their interest number one such that they cheat the farmers. So, we should amend the Act and have CDO abolished and institute the cooperative societies in this country to protect the interest of the farmers. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be brief. If a matter has been raised, do not dwell on it.

5.51
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank my colleagues for presenting this motion and I would also like to –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did want to raise it as an ambush in the last minute, but I can see the House is unanimous. I also support the motion. But Rule 72 (2) of our rules says:“A Member having any interest in any matter before the House shall declare the nature of his or her interest in the matter and shall not vote on any question relating to that matter.” 

72(3), “Any Member who makes a declaration of a personal interest under sub-rule (1) and (2) shall leave the House immediately after the declaration of such interest, and at any rate, before voting takes place.” 

This is a reason why I was saying that I did not want to raise it in the last minute because I know at a certain point in time we are going to vote on this matter. I wanted maybe just to seek a clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do not know whether this is really so contentious that we need to eject Members. I do not think it is so contentious that we need to remove the Members who are farmers and I think we are gaining valuable information from those who are in the industry.  

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank my honourable colleagues for presenting this motion. I would also like to support this motion, but I just want to express my fears. 
 
Madam Speaker, as far as I know, it is unfortunate that market forces determine prices of our farmers’ produce. I believe that the biggest determinant of these prices is the international market. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, that is her perspective.

MRS SENINDE: Secondly, Madam Speaker, I feel that the decline in prices of these agricultural products is not affecting Uganda alone, even other agricultural producers are affected in other countries though we are concerned about our farmers here in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, my other concern is that cotton farmers need training. They need seeds almost every season and they need pesticides. But the question is, who supports these farmers? As a Member on the Agricultural Committee I know that ginners have tried their best to give subsidies to these farmers in terms of pesticides and in terms of seeds at a lower price. [Honourable Members: They pay.] They pay yes, but at a lower price.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that will be a matter for us to establish, it can be investigated.

MRS OGWAL: I am rising on a point of order because I think I must also declare my interests. The Committee of Agriculture visited my family farm and they were able to confirm that my family is a commercial farmer, and we specialized in cotton growing and this year we have increased acreage from 100 acres to about 150 acres. So, I want to declare my interests. If there is any voting on farmer’s side, I will not be on that side. 

But the point of order I want to raise is that, as a farmer, when you get chemicals or you get any help from the ginner, you have to pay for it at the farmer’s gate when they are buying the cotton. As the Chairman of the Committee of Agriculture has explained, so that is the situation. Is the honourable Member on the Floor, therefore, in order to mislead this Parliament that actually the ginners do subsidize farmers when I have never been subsidized? Madam Speaker, is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I am not very familiar with the practices of ginners in different parts of Uganda. I do not know what happens in Wakiso, I do not know what happens in Lango. But I think for me it is a matter, which we can establish through the process we are going to set to motion. 

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  But what I wanted to make clear is that we have been visiting farmers, we have also visited ginners. I think we should not politicise this kind of issue. What I wanted to put forward is that, according to the information we have been getting from farmers –(Interruption)

MRS KAFIRE: Is the honourable Member from Wakiso in order to say that we are here playing politics? You come to Kibuku, you will find out how my people are suffering. You are lucky you are in town. Are you in order to tell us that we are playing politics?

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, my honourable colleague.  But, Madam Speaker, what I was trying to explain is that, according to the information we got as Members of the committee is that, yes the ginners give farmers the pesticide but at a somehow reduced price compared to what is in the shop.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Member for giving way. I want to inform my sister that there is no subsidy at all. Even the money they give them, they charge interest on them and the paper is here which they presented to the Agriculture Committee, there is no subsidy at all.

MR ODIT: To justify that there is no subsidy at all, I want my honourable colleague to reflect seriously on the loan recovery. Government guarantees loans, this loan is administered through CDO to the ginners. The ginners pass this in form of inputs to the farmers and the loans are being recovered with interest; so there is no subsidy, there are all here, the list is full and established here. Thank you.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that such price fluctuations demoralize our farmers leading to a fall in production hence a decline in our economy. But it is true that CDO sets a minimum price for cotton; but my biggest fear is that if we liberalize cotton industry, will our farmers not be more oppressed? For example, if the ginners are given mandate to set prices and, for instance, they say, “We are buying the cotton at Shs 200” now the farmers may not have a choice and at the end of the day they would be disappointed and decide to drop the growing of cotton. Anyway, I am just expressing my fear.

Now, Madam Speaker, maybe we have not given enough support to the agricultural sector as a Government and I feel it is high time the Government gave subsidies to our farmers like it does to the coffee growers because coffee growers are given seedlings.  I think it is high time Government thought of subsidizing or giving such things to our cotton farmers. 

Madam Speaker, I feel zoning will also be another answer. What do I mean? The ginners have also been expressing their problems, for example, they give seeds and pesticides to farmers and then another ginner or another buyer may come from some other place and buy at a higher price from these farmers and then at the end of the day, these ginners are losing. So, I think that will also be an answer.

Finally, the issue of pricing cotton is such an urgent matter, which cannot wait. But I would suggest that the Committee on Agriculture should be given the mandate to investigate further about CDO functions because, I think it is high time we reviewed the CDO Act. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.01
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank hon. Okupa and hon. Rainer Kafire for their pro-people, pro-poor motion. I am extremely grateful and I want to thank Parliament because I am seeing unanimity amongst Members of Parliament who are here and a general acceptance that there is a problem.  

Secondly, I want to say that what we are discussing today, honourable members, is a symptom of a broader economic policy issue. On Sunday last weekend, when we were in Mbarara, the President was presiding over a function in Mbarara and he said in his own words that on the household incomes things are not quite impressive, that the performance on the front of household incomes is not good. These are his own words. Hon. Bright Rwamirama was there and others. I want to submit that this is an absolutely correct statement. 

What, however, was not said is that there cannot be an increased performance on household income, in my own view, as long as we have some defective, wrong economic policy. In my own view, as long as we have a defective economic policy and I had said the point we are discussing brought by hon. Okupa and Kafire is a broader economic policy issue because - look at the cattle keepers in the county, how much have they progressed? So, the policies generally speaking for the rural people are not working. Our colleagues and Parliament particularly the front bench should go back on the drawing board and ask our selves, what are we doing? It is not enough to say we are not performing well on the household income level; we are not performing at all.  

In 1997, the country was producing about half a million cotton bales statistically. To-date, it is about 160,000 bales. So what is the problem? The yarn we are using in this celebrated Bugolobi factory is imported. About 80 to 90 per cent cooking oil we are using is imported. So, this is a broader issue, Madam Speaker, I do not want to delve into the details. So generally I support the motion entirely that it goes to the Sessional Committee on Agriculture for the necessary surgery to be done and to report to us. (Mr Mao rose_). I have limited time, Madam Speaker, but I would not mind information. 

MR MAO: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable Member for yielding the Floor. The policy matters and the emergency measures need to be separated. I think the broader policy issues on economic vision for Uganda will continue to be debated at a political level, but what I know is that we had agreed in Uganda that we shall have a liberal market economy. Now, a few years ago, a man called Joseph Stallings was awarded in Economics for showing defects in the market economic system.  He pointed out what we now know in Economics as market asymmetries. It means the ground is not level and, therefore, you cannot behave as if the ground is level between the international buyers who process the cotton into finished product, the ginners and the farmers. 

Madam Speaker, because of market asymmetries, you need state interventions. State interventions are not unique to poor countries like Uganda.  Asymmetries can be a result of a racket of self-interested big players; it can even be a result of terrorism or war. Madam Speaker, let me inform this House that after 9/11 and the war in Iraq fuel prices short up, airline industries were collapsing. The Government of President Bush injected billions of dollars to resuscitate the American Airline industry. Not because he loves the owners of those companies but because Americans were going to loss jobs, fail to pay for their children in school, fail to provide food for their families and, therefore, create social instability as a result of poverty. 

Even here in Uganda, Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba’s industry, which employs so many people, was facing distress. I know our Government intervened; there are many others that will need that kind of intervention in all parts of Uganda.  

In this very House we intervened in the hotel industry by removing VAT on hotel inputs. That is why Mr Karim has been able to put up that six star hotel. If he were to pay VAT he would never have bought those expensive inputs. We have even removed taxes on import of milk inputs to support those who produce milk. Now, those who produce cotton are saying what about us?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But your information is really a contribution. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that the President’s manifesto did indicate that the volume of production of lint cotton from the Republic of Uganda should increase from wherever it was to 1 million bales by 2006/07. This is a very important statement. Right now as I talk it has increased from 100,000 bales of lint cotton to about 160,000 and this has been a very great achievement because we have moved from 100,000 bales to 160,000, which is 60 per cent. Now, it is upon the Executive to see to it how best as a nation we can move from the current 160,000 bales of lint cotton to 1 million bales. I am giving information, Madam Speaker.

Mr Speaker, right now in my constituency in one acre of cotton we get only 200 kilograms of seed cotton and we spend Shs 100,000 to produce those 200 kilos. When you sell that at Shs 250 per kilo of seed cotton, you get exactly Shs 50,000 having spent Shs 100,000.

Madam Speaker, it is possible for this nation to increase the yield per acre from the current 200 kilograms of seed cotton to even up 1,500 kilos per acre through appropriate agronomical practices, which we as a nation have the competence to give.  If you give that opportunity I will give my own contribution but this is only information. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification. Hon. Mao said that the economic policy will be debated at a political level. For me it is not a question of politics, honourable members, it is a question of whether something is right or wrong. If it is right, I will support it; if it is wrong, even if I belong to that political family do not expect me there. Defective things must be thrown over board and that is my line. It is not guided by politics but it is guided by right or wrong.  

About the asymmetries hon. Mao is talking about, I was coming to a statement to the effect that liberalisation as a policy is necessary but is not sufficient and this is where the Government is getting it wrong. It is necessary but it is not sufficient, it is a total abdication of the responsibility. We have told colleagues, I have moved and talked to Keith Muhakanizi a brother, people do not want to listen. People in this state are impermeable to ideas so we should stop lamenting about the failures, about the proliferation of poverty of failure in the countryside because the capacity to listen has been eroded. 

State intervention, yes, at a certain extent you do not liberalize a subsistence economy to the levels of liberalisation we are witnessing in this country. It is a total abdication and things are not going to work on this economic front, I can tell you they are not going to work. Let Members of the front bench, let everybody really go home and rethink rather than talking of Neem tree tomorrow, today pepper. 

When we came in 1986/87 we told the country to grow pepper and soldiers grew pepper in Magamaga and all over the place. There was no price, there were no buyers, there was silk worms, there was vanilla, today there is Fitoloka in Runyakole we call it Omuhoko, mangoes and so on and so forth, because I have heard also people talking about it. So, let us redirect our people and we stop this confusion.  

So, I 100 per cent support hon. Okupa’s motion and Madam Rainer, that this motion of theirs goes into a committee for the necessary surgery, the necessary anatomy to be done and a proper detailed report is written, a bigger inquiry is conducted so that we can really do something. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo county, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually I, to a great extent, concur with the contribution of hon. Mao and hon. Guma. In effect, liberalisation of economy to market driven, private business driven economy creates economic asymmetry that is true, because basically it is driven by the selfishness of men because in the drive to make more profits, make more money they lose table manners. They just move on without really caring what happens to the farmers and the rest of it. That is where CDO, which was created by Government to regulate and control these excesses, have failed in their performance. 

In fact, that now draws my attention to a thesis I wrote for my MBA, “Organizational competencies.”  What are the criteria? There are basic elements of organizational competencies, which must be lacking in that organization. Those are partially the manpower capabilities, the logistical support and a range of other inputs that organizations require in order to perform efficiently. Then if that is the case, then the ministry concerned has to take it seriously and ensure that CDO performs and protect the farmers.

I am representing a cotton growing area. In my area, along the road, peasants have been made to cut the trees and clear the roadside to minimize the chances of ambushes and my people have resorted now to plant cotton along those road reserves which have been cleared and really for them that is the only source of income. Those who cultivated will get abject poverty that they are going through.  

So, I am interested and I will vote. I will not walk away from here because in this House we debate matters of national economy, national security, national concerns which all of us are interested in and we must have a say in it. So, I will suggest that hon. Ogwal should not walk away. She must vote. So, it is a fundamental issue of management here we are talking about. The intervention required for these economic asymmetries actually is very essential because, even America does intervention to their farmers through subsidies and through other measures, tax exemption in some cases and direct subsidies that enable those farmers work. Cotton is a labour intensive business. Me, I grew up in – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Onek, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that even Europe which has for many years have to leave the subsistence life, they do subsidize for their farmers.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, do not give way unless I have indicated. You know, for you you just sit and then disorganize our programmes.  

MR ONEK: Sorry, Madam Speaker, for really interfering with your role. Cotton, as I develop my point, is a labour intensive business. It involves tilling the land, planting, weeding, spraying, picking and also sorting. Sometimes you get the yellow portions to be removed and doing all this, you are scratched - it is a labour intensive. It can tear off the clothes you are putting on and you need to replace those clothes. All those costs cannot be recovered by this low rate by which cotton is being marketed. So, the principle of any business is the cost of all these labour and toil must be recovered and the loss is involved.  

Finally, I would like to express my concern for the unfair treatment of cotton producers vis-à-vis tea growers and others who have got better regulations and better protection under whatever authority is created for them. I think Government must harmonize this for all agricultural productions particularly cash crop production. It must be harmonized, the law must be uniform to protect and safeguard all the producers including the producers of cotton.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES) (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathize very much with the cotton growers although I am not able to do much about their plight, and that is why I would say that I would agree with the spirit of the motion moved by hon. Okupa although at the end for my deliberations I request that we have an amendment to that motion. All has been said but I would wish to clarify as follows: -

One, we in this House are educated peasants as compared to most of our voters down their and we all know that this country and its population are doomed as long as we remain producers of raw commodities. This is a fact. All producers of commodities are in trouble except the producers of oil. Those are the ones who are okay. But as long as you produce agricultural commodities or even these minerals, you may be okay for a day or two but then sometime later the prices will just collapse. 

Now, in the case of cotton, cotton is actually a low price commodity and many people have told us that it should actually be a plantation crop. It is not the crop for the small farmer. That you need to produce large volumes in order to get some good produce and on top of that as some of you know, in many parts of this country, there has been soil degradation and our productivity has fallen greatly because where we used to produce 800kgs per acre we are producing 200kgs. When the prices are not as high as last year, then you find you have produced at below production cost. 

Now, the farmers got excited by last year’s prices but the last year’s prices were also artificial. The last year’s prices occurred because Pakistan suffered a drought and China also suffered a drought. The two countries Pakistan and China got a shortage of three million bales and that is why the prices went up. Now, according to what we see on the Internet, it would appear the production has normalized and the prices are back to where they used to be. The only hope is that there have been some negotiations – (Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. You have quoted a case of last year where the catastrophe befell China and Pakistan, but now there is a problem of over production to the tune of about, is 35000 – 7 millions bales of production and hence the fall in price.

MR ERESU: Thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way so that I can seek the following clarification. Honourable Minister, you have come out very clearly and said that because of drought last year in those two respective countries you mentioned, prices went up and they were artificial.  But because this year those two countries, which experienced that drought, have resumed production, it is therefore responsible for the reduction in the price to the farmer in Uganda. In view of this, I seek the following clarification: Are you suggesting that in the event of increased production of cotton Uganda, therefore, should accept any price and do you think Uganda cannot do anything possible like those other countries, like the United States which still subsidize their farmers, like these other countries even China which still places a lot of subsidy for their farmers?  

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: I wish the honourable Member had waited for me to continue because I am going to give him the answers. So, the only immediate hope we have is that, there is talk of an agreement between the USA and the West African farmers in the side talks of WTO. So, in case the USA drops or reduces cotton subsidies for its farmers, then we may get a rise of price in the coming season. But, as Uganda, we can do something about cotton and we can do something for our cotton farmers. 

Pakistan and China still grow cotton profitably because they have got a fully integrated cotton industry. All the cotton that is produced by Pakistan is turned into textiles before export.  But for us, although we have this very little production, we are still exporting 95 per cent of our production. So this is where the emphasis should be and once we have the industries, the ginning, the spinning, the weaving, the garment industries then Government will get the taxes and will be able to subsidize now through some smart arrangement either to subsidize the farmer or to stabilize the prices.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, is there a plan in the near future to inject this money into the industries?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government is now in the process of identifying funds for assisting our textile factories, that is, the Southern Range that is the former Nytil and Phoenix Logistics. These plans are in advanced stages but I cannot say now how far we have gone, and when we have solved that problem we think we shall be in a position to produce world-class fabric, which Tri Star today needs so that we can stop importing fabrics for making garments here in this country.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: The Cotton Development Organization (CDO) is actually a product of liberalisation. The Cotton Development Authority is a product of liberalisation because Government was fed up with the operations of the marketing boards. Government liberalised the marketing of these commodities and in order to do so, it had to create organs that would promote and regulate the commodities and that is how the Cotton Development Authority was formed. But, within the law that created the Cotton Development Authority, Government empowered CDO and the minister to zone the country because, we have a number of varieties of cotton and once you allow the seed to mix, then you will no longer to be able to have pure seed to plant. And it happened in this country in the 1980s that the seed got mixed up and we were unable to get seed to plant and had to go to NARO to again purify the seed and separate the seed and start a new seed wave. This zoning is also good in the reduction of spread of diseases. When we fully liberalised the marketing of cotton -(Interruption)



MRS KAFIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way.  You said that you started zoning because of seeds.  What happens to other seeds like maize, like beans like – they are all seeds and they grow in different areas -(Interjection) - Do not tell me; I am a well-informed farmer. I know there are different seeds and I am better farmer than you hon. Kagonyera, in the way of farming. So, why do you not zone with other seeds? I will give you an example. The coffee you are telling everyone to put in clonal coffee whether it will grow there or not. Why do you not zone for coffee? Thank you very much.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: Let me answer; it will clarify you. I know some of you are cotton traders and you are also cotton farmers. Cotton is marketed by staple the length of the wool of the fibre and each variety has got its own length. Once you mix them up in one bale, then the quality of that bale is lost and you will sell at the lowest price. Even coffee by the way, you cannot mix Robusta and Arabica coffee in the same bag and sell; even with beans you have got to sort them out. But fortunately, with certain crops like coffee for example, Arabica and Robusta do not inter-breed so that even if you have them in the same garden you are not going to get a cross of Arabica and Robusta. Whereas if you have these different staples in your garden, you are going to get crosses. This should be coming from experts and I am not an expert, but I know there are very many agricultural experts here who can explain this business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have some technical information? Let us have technical information from a senior scientist.

DR ESELE: Madam speaker, up to a few years ago, Uganda was producing two types of cotton, that is, Satu, which was produced in the East and North and BPA produced in the West. It was extremely necessary that these two cotton zones were zoned separately because the two cottons have different types of fibre. Now today, there is what we call segregated areas. The cotton that we produce in Uganda is a product of a multi-line; actually they are multi-lines, which after about six years they segregate to individual lines. So, at the moment, we zone the production of cotton according to the year of the seed wave. Every two or so years, a new cotton variety comes into production. The first year it comes into production the seed is produced in a segregated area. Another seed spreads in a kind of seed wave. This is all to avoid mixing of the cottons. So, zoning is a necessary application in cotton production.

DR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Dr Esele. He has given us the scientific explanation, which I was not able to give. But then that also brings me to the zoning of marketing to, which the motion was opposed to. There are two aspects: One is to keep the cotton segregated as Dr Esele has explained.  But secondly, I have to confess that CDO alone failed to promote the growing of cotton by itself; with all Government assistance it did not do well because production stagnated at 100,000 bales. 

But we got ginners and some of them were representing strong companies from South Africa, from Brazil and so on and so forth. These ginners said why can we not, since we want the cotton, assist in production, why can we not assist in promoting the growing of cotton, why can we not facilitate the farmer to grow this cotton. Now some ginners are renting out tractors, some are giving fertilizers, others are giving –(Interjection)- they are loaning fertilizers. Others are loaning pesticides and the experience is that our people are good at looking for credit but very poor at paying back. 

There is a cotton buyer – unfortunately he is dead now - the late Jack Busingye. He came to my home area in the western rift valley around lake George and ploughed for our farmers and gave them all sorts of credit. But when the harvesting season came, they did not sell to him they sold to the Indians in Kasese. In the end, he had to go to court and I know that by the time he died, he had not recovered all the money from these people. So, there has been some gentleman’s agreement that the person who has facilitated the growing of this cotton in this zone, where he actually has a ginnery, should be the one to purchase the cotton in order to keep that cotton variety in one place and secondly to recover his money.  

Then the issue of cess. The law allows CDO to collect up to two per cent cess -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think it is important that the minister should be honest to explain to this House how the zoning is operating today. I am saying this actually with a heavy heart because I have already declared my interest, I am a farmer identified with the poor and that is what I do to serve, to feed my children and those that my late brothers and sisters have left. So, I want you to appreciate the clarification I am seeking from you.  

Madam Speaker, the zoning as explained by the minister is not what is happening. What is happening is that, areas are given to certain ginners; they call them lead ginners. That ginner is supposed to buy cotton in that area and no other person should buy, not even a new ginner is allowed to register to gin in that area.  That is the first important thing.

The second thing is that, when a farmer has found an agent who is able to buy cotton even within the district at a higher price, is not allowed to sell to that ginner; you must only sell through this lead ginner.

Thirdly, the issue of seed. Please, Mr Minister, you are a whole minister. You know me I do not like to disgrace anybody. It is not true that this zoning is being done for the purpose of promoting certain seeds. Please, in the name of Jesus Christ –([Honourable Members: Hear, hear!]) - it is not true at all. So, we must say this thing is done for a purpose and if you do not know it repent and let those people who know it tell us. That is the truth because it pains me. I associate with the poor and I know what it means and you know very well that for that facilitation you are talking about, a farmer whether has received chemical or not, whether has grown organic cotton or not, which means has not received any assistance whatsoever is taxed Shs 50 per kilogram. Shs 50 per a kilogram is what a poor farmer is paying every year and not only that the same farmer also pays the statutory two per cent in a name of cess to CDO. So, in other words, poor as I am, I have to maintain CDO. CDO is in existence with all its vast expenditure at my expense and on top of that they come with another tax of Shs 50 per kilo and –(Interruption).

MS TIPERU: Madam Speaker, I have listened to my mother hon. Cecilia Ogwal whom I respect, but I was not impressed about something she commented on and that is the issue of saying that zoning is not done in good faith. She claims further that she is a farmer. As a farmer, I do believe she is aware that not all crops can grow anywhere and we believe that zoning was aimed at ensuring that crops, which do well are concentrated in those particular areas. Is she, therefore, in order to say that zoning was not done in good faith and that Government should apologize? Is she in order because I am aware that cotton has done so well in Lango for a long time and we are just beginning to introduce it in Yumbe?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think what hon. Ogwal was saying was that she does not believe that it has worked, as it should. This zoning has not improved the seed. I think that is what she was saying.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give a clarification about the zoning of marketing. (Interjection). Yes, I was a board member of CDO.  There was an agreement between CDO and the ginners, the ginners to support production of cotton in specific areas, in the area of pesticides and extension service. Actually the ginners have been providing extension service for cotton –(Interjection)- yes, it is true. There are demonstration crops. So, the agreement was that each ginner who supports production in a specific area recovers his money through purchasing of cotton in that area.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Otada read one of the clauses of our rules and requested Members who have serious interest in this sector to declare it. Is it in order to have a Member who is alleged to be a consultant, a former board member of CDO and a serious beneficiary to confuse Members here and yet he has personal interest? (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, unfortunately, I do not know the composition of that board. I think it was information. I do not know the composition of the board. Are you a member of the board?

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I have been associating with cotton production for the last about 50 years.  And as we speak now, I am probably the largest cotton farmer in Teso. Secondly, I was responsible for cotton research for 10 years. Thirdly, I was on the cotton board for six years.  So, I am very well informed about the cotton industry.

MS KABAKUMBA: Information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now information to who?

MS KABAKUMBA: To hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Madam Speaker, I think let us agree that the ginners are not giving anything free to the farmers. Everything is here. If you gave me the opportunity hon. Kagonyera, I would read to you the cost they include: I will start with the agents fee, transport to ginnery, cess, loading and off-loading of seed cotton, bale wrapping materials, bale ties, gunny bags for seeds, electricity, repair and maintenance of equipment, fuel and lubricants, permanent salaries and wages, casual labour, performance bonus for ginnery staff, overtime, Pay As You Earn and NSSF contributions, seed cotton handling expenses, bale handling expenses, seed handling expenses, this is seed cotton handling expenses and seed handling expenses, printing and stationery, insurance, security, vehicle running expenses, power and water, telephone and postage, office and administration expense, audit fees, transport and subsistence, staff house rent, staff welfare, field operations - I believe this is the extension honourable is talking about - lint classing fees, ginnery overhaul, bank charges, bank arrangement fee for seed/cotton loan, interest cost on seed/cotton finance, interest on capital finance for ginnery, development fund, depreciation on plant and building and this is the total expense.  

Then down if they fix for example per kilo Shs 550, a ginner will get a profit per bale of Shs 66,000 and how they fix the prices after considering all their costs. Ginners are not subsidizing in any way to the farmers. I beg to give that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam, I had not finished seeking clarification. The last point I wanted the minister to clarify and I am asking this in good faith is, if the zoning is for promoting quality seeds, why is it that the ginners would not allow any new ginner to enter into the sector? And not only that, why is it that the CDO whom we have mandated to license ginners, would not license you until you first go to that lead ginner who will tell you, “If you want to be a ginner first pay me something.” Now, that is why I am saying, this thing must be investigated, you maybe very innocent about this, but this is what is happening.  

I know, there is an attempt by NAADS, which is a governmental institution to promote the growing of cotton in Lango sub region. NAADS was condemned by CDO and not only that, when farmers attempted to gin their own cotton it has become a tag of war, why? So, clarify all this if you are honest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, how long are you going to take?

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I cannot claim to have all the facts on me right now, because I actually saw this motion today. I would be able to answer all the issues that have been raised by hon. Cecil Ogwal if I am given sometime. I am not aware of the Shs 50 that is being charged. If it is there, I do not know why. But I just want to – let me give you the facts that I have and then I will propose the way forward. 

I was explaining zoning and after zoning I would wish to explain the pricing. The Government under a liberalised system should not have set or would not have set up these Cotton Development Authority, Coffee Development Authority if we had strong farmers associations. We would only have set up a regulator and then the farmers would have been able to do their business. But in the absence of strong farmers associations, then Government uses its – now in the pricing, it depends on CDO whose chairman of the board and quiet a number of other members and farmers do sit down with the ginners and study the list hon. Kabakumba was reading, because they come with costs to study and argue and come out with some price that does not hurt all the stakeholders in the industry.  

But the practice has been, I do not know whether it is covered by some statutory instrument, that before the price is announced, the CDO chairman together with the executive director bring what they have come out with to the minister who endorses it before it is - and as far as I know, this price has not been an issue. (Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, the only cash crop we have in West Nile is cotton, and as we are debating here, I went out to consult with the manager of a ginning company called COPCOT, that is trying to promote cotton production in West Nile region.  He was expressing their own fears because he told me they were in a meeting today with CDO and tomorrow morning, the prices might be announced. They are already fearing that they have encouraged so many farmers to grow cotton and if the prices are not fixed at a rate more than Shs 400 per kilogram the farmers will not benefit. 

This company has invested so much, next year they are going to rehabilitate our ginnery, they have rehabilitated a ginnery at Madi Okolo, they are rehabilitating the one in Pakwach and they are now planning to buy up to six tractors this month to facilitate farmers.  They are planning to buy ox-ploughs for the farmers and so forth and now they are worried whether they are even going to continue supporting the farmers if these prices are not fixed properly. I call upon the relevant authorities to ensure that these prices are not announced tomorrow until the matter is resolved, Madam Speaker.

MR ALINTUMA: Now, Madam Speaker, this is the way I would do things if I were the honourable Minister.  I would not allow someone who is not the end seller to dictate the price to my farmers. The actual person that is supposed to dictate the price is the international market. Why do we not find out first of all as a ministry, how much does cotton cost internationally? We are looking at the US market, how is the cotton there in the US before you can propose anything.

Lastly, why does the honourable Minister not verify how the demand is internationally because if we allow these CDO to dictate the price to the farmers, they may be interested in taking off the difference after selling the cotton at the international market.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, this emanates from the information given by hon. Jessica Eriyo. In her information, she seemed to say that she has been consulting with the ginner who was concerned that if the price is announced and is below Shs 400, that the farmers are not going to benefit. And if this is what the ginner in her place is saying, why should we not proceed to liberalise this thing and people determine the price according to supply and demand? Because it seems for now, instead of the Cotton Development Authority protecting the farmer, it is dictating a price proposal in this letter at Shs 300 yet a ginner in Adjumani is willing to pay Shs 400. Then what is the CDO doing if it is not just robbing the farmer because this is something which is vivid?

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I have information to the minister. The minister does not seem to be aware of the decision of the Cotton Development Authority on the price. Let me inform the minister that this letter was addressed to me this morning dated 9th December from Cotton Development Organisation. It reads:
 
“The Chairman, Sessional Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

RE: CDO Indicative price for the year 2004/05 cotton season.  

We here present our calculations for the farmers’ seed cotton indicative price for the year 2004-2005 cotton season.  

Due to drought between June and August in major cotton growing areas, this season most of the cotton was planted late July- September.

Compared to the same time last year, the world lint price fell from US67 cents one pound of lint to US37 cents ex ginnery price this year. That is a drop or a decline of 44 per cent. The shilling has strengthened against the dollar from Shs 1950 to Shs 1730 at the same time last year.

Due to the above facts, Cotton Development Organization is announcing the price of cotton:
(a) To allow the young cotton to mature and avoid farmers abandoning the gardens if a low price was announced earlier than this.

(b) The International Cotton Advisory Committee (ICAC), which is the world cotton body where producers and consumers of lint meet annually to discuss world cotton situation, pricing inclusive, held its meeting from 29th November to 3rd December 2004 a date much later than usual which is normally in October of each year.  

CDO, therefore, waited for the final outcome of the world cotton price in anticipation for a likely increase. Unfortunately, the final estimate has been put by the International Cotton Advisory Committee that is between US45 cents, US55cents per pound of lint, CIF Europe, which translates into 37cents ex-ginnering in Uganda after transport charges. The major reasons for this drop is total world over production of up to 7m tons of lint approximately 35m bends. Given the stronger shilling and collapse world price the net effect is about 55 per cent reduction in the farmer’s price in our case.  

Yours faithfully,
For and on behalf of CDO

MANAGING DIRECTOR “

They are preparing to announce tonight, they have gone back to their meeting board and I am surprised that the minister who has the right and even the second Minister of Trade who should be consulted under the law before they decide on this price are not aware and I want to lay this on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Minister, really show us that you have those powers and you are going - (Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I told the House that after they have consulted internally, the CDO its board with the ginners will come to the minister before announcing the price and, therefore, that is why I wish to request for a few days until Tuesday or Wednesday to be able to report to the House about the price of this season. Then also, I request the mover of the motion that he amends it to the effect that all that is raised by the motion is referred to the Committee on Agriculture so that they can do an in-depth study on the entire cotton sub sector and be able to come to the House in the shortest time possible so that we can really work together on a way forward for this sector.  

Honourable members, as I said at the beginning, all our commodities have suffered this problem, the coffee farmers are in total disarray. They have suffered a reduction of price from say Shs 1500 for Kiboko to about Shs 400.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I really did not want to interfere with the minister but it is on record that this Government established the Coffee Stabilization Fund. When the price of coffee was very high, Government collected money, it was put in Bank of Uganda and this money has been “sterilized” and the farmers of coffee cannot access it. Is the minister, therefore, in order to say coffee farmers have suffered because of price fluctuations and yet they have suffered because of Government negligence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not really at home with some of these issues. I am sorry. What can you say about the established fund?

DR NDUHUURA: Honourable Speaker, even if you set up a stabilization fund and you get one year of good price and you collect that money, do you think it will cater for you over the 20 years of poor prices you are going to get? For example, in the case of coffee, we have had bad years since 1993, even if Government had tried to stabilize, how far would it have gone. So, that is why honourable members, I was begging the House that let our Agricultural Committee study this sector in detail and be able to advise on a way forward for this sector, which may also be the way forward for other sectors because all commodities are in the same problem.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AMONGI:  Madam Speaker, much as I agree with the proposal of the minister, I think there are issues that can be referred to the committee but the immediate question and concerns of Members is the price which might be announced today if the minister does not take action. Other concerns could go to the committee. 

Therefore, under Rule 39 which says:

“The Speaker may permit the Member to move in amended form, without notice, a motion of which notice has been given if in the opinion of the Speaker the amendment does not materially alter any principle embodied in the motion of which notice has been given”, I want to move a motion to the effect that the minister takes immediate action to stop the announcement of the price by the CDO and should by Wednesday issue an indicative price for cotton which should not be below Shs 600 per kilogram.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I had wanted to propose that we defer the question of the actual resolution up to Monday because I saw some amendments there, I think the minister has amendments. I was thinking that we take 45 minutes on Tuesday and deal with the amendments in detail before we go to education.  

MS AMONGI: The immediate situation is the announcement of the prices.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, can you undertake to suspend or pre-empty the announcement of those prices tonight?

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: As soon as I get out of this Chamber, I will look for whoever is responsible and tell them not to release the price until Government has studied it further.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us adjourn for now, on Tuesday the first 45 minutes we will deal with the resolution in detail, but the other urgent matter is to be handled now then we shall go to the education, okay? Thank you very much, honourable members, for the work and for the support.

(The House rose at 7.14 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

