Tuesday, 4th December 2001

Parliament met at 2:49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, due to unforeseen causes, we have not been able to start on time, and I apologise for that. And also, over the weekend we had the sad news of the demise of the wife of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who was buried yesterday. And for this, I would request you to stand up for a minute of silence 

(A moment of silence was observed).

May be we should adjust the Order Paper. I understand the Second Deputy Prime Minister has a statement to make.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES: (Brig. Moses Ali): Mr. Speaker, as we are all aware, on Saturday evening December 1st 2001, we learnt with disbelief and shock, of the sudden death of Rhoda Nsibambi, wife of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. 

She developed difficulties in breathing on Saturday at about 4:30p.m. This was immediately after she and her husband had toured their dairy farm in Buloba. The breathing became worse and she breathed her last at about 5:30p.m immediately on arrival at Mengo Hospital. The immediate cause of her death was a blood clot that lodged in her lungs.

Rhoda Nsibambi, 61 years old, was an Associate Professor at Makerere University Department of Languages, where she lectured since 1968 up to the time of her death. 

We would like to thank all people who visited the Prime Minister’s residence immediately on learning of the sad news. These included Her Excellency, the Vice President, the Speaker, Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice, the First Deputy Prime Minister, former President Godfrey Binaisa, Ministers and Members of Parliament. 

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister received messages of condolences from various personalities, including His Excellency, the President, whose message was delivered on Sunday morning by his son, Capt. Muhoozi. 

On Sunday evening, the Cabinet sat under the chairmanship of the Acting National Political Commissar, Dr. Crispus Kiyonga, and agreed to send a collective sympathy, which was delivered during the funeral service at Namirembe Cathedral by the First Deputy Premier/Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Eriya Kategaya. The Cabinet also agreed to give their contributions towards funeral expenses through the Cabinet Secretariat. In this connection, Members of Parliament could also make their contributions through the Clerk to Parliament. 

At this juncture, we would like to thank, in a particular way, the First Lady, Her Excellency the Vice President, the Chief Justice, the Speaker, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Ministers, Members of Parliament and all other people of different categories who joined the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister in his sorrow at his residence in Makerere University, at funeral service at Namirembe Cathedral, and finally at Kasero Church of Uganda, Buloba, where burial took place yesterday, December 3rd 2001.  

Lastly, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister expressed his deep gratitude and appreciation to all those who joined him from the time he lost his dear wife up to the time of her burial yesterday. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. On a very rare note, I stand here on a point of procedure. Since Friday last week, a group of over 100 people; women and men and children, including very aged people who could even collapse in the course of the night, have invaded the premises of Parliament – (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, first of all, what is the point of procedure you want to raise? You just do not stand and then start making a contribution. What procedure do you want me to guide you on?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am obliged with your advice. I am standing on a point of procedure related to today’s Order Paper. I am wondering whether we should proceed with the Order Paper as it is without seeking an explanation from Government as to why, since Friday, the premises of Parliament have been invaded –(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Then why do you not ask the Minister whether he has any explanation to make?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: I was coming to that. So, in summary, Mr. Speaker, it would be very prudent – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister in charge – (Interruption)

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Could the Minister in charge of Luwero Triangle give us an explanation as to why, since Friday, people coming from Luwero  - and we treasure Luwero because it is the basis of the struggle for the Movement Government. Why have we up to now not got an explanation as to why those people have not been attended to?

THE SPEAKER: Is it directed to the Minister of Luwero or Internal Affairs? 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Luwero.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWERO (Mr. Tim Lwanga): Thank you Mr. Speaker. As to why the people have invaded Parliament, I have no answer. But all I can say is that ever since I became Minister of Luwero Triangle, a committee to verify the war debts, which is actually the main problem with Luwero, was set up towards the end of October. This verification committee is carrying out an audit or a final verification on the Luwero Triangle war debts.  

‘What are they doing?’  We are checking on who claimed and who is claiming what; we are checking on how much and who has been paid so far.  We are also checking on the authenticity of the debts, the amount of money that is being claimed or the things that are being claimed.  We started the above exercise late last month, and we have had to go through over 4500 files. I am happy to report to Parliament that we expect the report to be ready by the 15th of this month.  

Now, I do not want to pre-empt this report, but when it is ready, Mr. Speaker, Government is prepared to let you have a copy of that report, which will be the final document showing all the –(Mr. Sebuliba Mutumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for him to finish and then you can seek your clarification?

DR. LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, beyond that, I have nothing to add.  Thank you very much.

Mr. Richard SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Minister whether he has been in contact with the people who are gathered outside there, whether he has even informed them regarding their plight because here we are being informed about the steps Government is taking, but why are these people there sleeping in this stormy weather? 

They are shown on TV - no toilet, no nothing and it is a rainy season. Are they aware of the developments or the steps you are taking to ameliorate their situation? Otherwise, it is very appalling! They are our sisters, they are our mothers; why don’t you talk to them or take them somewhere - (Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, protect me from the hon. Minister of Ethics, she is here trying to throw out bubbles. These are citizens of Uganda. Have you taken any steps to inform them, at least to have the knowledge –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba, your question is; ‘have you talked to them’?

Mr. James MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, among the people that are camping outside our gate are men and women with disabilities –(Laughter). I do not understand, what is funny that among them are people with disabilities? It is the fact!  I have learnt from them that these people came to Kampala on appointment, they were told to report to that spot on the 29th of November because His Excellency the President was going to see them on the 30th of November.  I understand that His Excellency the President instructed the Minister for Presidential Affairs to find them lodges, on the 29th of November, so that they can meet him on 30th November. 

Mr. Speaker, everybody knows; one, that they have been there since the 29th of November, and two, that they have not seen His Excellency the President, and three, that they were promised accommodation which has not been provided to them.  They continue to live outdoors as if they are animals. Sometimes it rains and there are no facilities of any kind.  

Could the Minister inform this House whether it is true that they were told to report on the 29th so that they can meet His Excellency the President on the 30th? And can he explain why the Minister did not make arrangements for their accommodation while they wait to see the President?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

Mr. Kassiano WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to seek the following clarification from the Minister responsible for Luwero Triangle.  I am reliably informed that the men and women, who have been here since Friday, are from the Luwero Triangle.  In my own simple mind, Luwero Triangle is not just a matter of Luwero District but comprises of many other districts like, Kibale, Hoima, Masindi, where during the war members gave support. 

At the same time, ever since NRM Government came to power, we have also continued to have a lot of civil strive raged on us by the ADF in the West, the Lord Resistance Army in the North, the West Nile Bank Front in West Nile where people are also making sacrifices to enable Government succeed in overcoming these strives.  

Therefore, can I seek clarification from the hon. Minister as to whether all other people who have continued to make sacrifices for Government to bring peace to this country are going to be equally rewarded the way it is with Luwero Triangle? My people are also making sacrifices; are we not opening a way for every Dick, Tom and Harry to come and say, ‘yes, I helped NRA while they were in the bush, therefore, I also deserve payment’? Do we have the resources?  Mr. Speaker, those are the issues that I would like to seek clarification on.  Thank you.

Dr. Yefusa OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, let me start by giving information.  When the people of the north lost cattle, and there was a cattle-restocking program, we almost thought it was just going to cover that area, but it ended up covering a much winder area than the north.  So, the honourable Member who has just spoken before me might be raising a similar scenario which happened in the restocking exercise, which was supposed to be within a restricted area but ended up going beyond. In fact it almost covered the whole country in the long run. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my point of clarification is this: Some time back in the Sixth Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee asked the office of the Attorney General to produce the legal instrument in support of this compensation of the people who lost things in Luwero Triangle, and I hear the honourable Minister responsible for Luwero Triangle talking about verifying the validity of the claims. But what is on the record from Public Accounts Committee, and what is in the report, which this Parliament has considered? 

First of all, what was the legal instrument for this exercise, which has been going on for so many years?  I am now seeking clarification from the Minister responsible for Luwero Triangle, whether there is any legal instrument supporting this action.  We are all very sympathetic with the people of the Luwero Triangle, and nobody should question that concern, but the thing is, things must be done according to law.  Can we get the legal instrument?

THE SPEAKER: So, the question is ‘what is the legal basis of making this compensation and the claims’?

Mr. Aggrey AWORI: Thank you Mr. Speaker, for your summary.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to your summary, is there a structure of limitation to that law, if there is one?  In other words, is there a limit; is there a legal parameter of one year, two years, seven years or eternity? If there is a law, what is the structure of limitation?

Number two; there are other people who also incurred a lot of expenses in terms of goods and services to a legitimate Government.  These people have gone bankrupt waiting for their payments.  In terms of priorities, do we give priority to those who camp in front of President’s office or those that calmly put in their claims, and are generally ignored?  

THE SPEAKER: Okay; now the Minister can really get in because this was a question from hon. Lukyamuzi.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWEERO (Mr. Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are all aware that one of the most rare commodities in this country is honesty, and the other one is discipline.  Mr. Speaker, what we are trying to do in Luweero Triangle is to institute order, discipline and honesty. And I believe we will do the job.  Mr. Speaker, it is always nice to talk from an informed position.

Mr. Speaker, have I talked to them?  Yes, of course, I have; I talked to them this morning. I could not do it yesterday because I was involved in the funeral arrangements. 

I had a lengthy discussion with the citizens who have camped outside and we did discuss, we did also let them have some information on what we are doing and they were amazed to find that some of the people who are claiming to be owed money actually are not owed any money. And this is the authenticity I am talking about. But I will not go into the details, Mr. Speaker, because this will form part of our report. Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)- may I continue? (Mr. Lukyamuzi rose on point of clarification).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there are rules governing a point of clarification.  If you raise a point of clarification and the person holding the floor resists, then you do not put it. It seems he is not - then resume your seat.

Mr. Tim LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, “there are men and women with disabilities. They came because they had an appointment with His Excellency, the President.  Did the President give them an appointment?”  The answer is yes!  He gave them an appointment sometime in October.  Then at the beginning of November, it was discovered going through the President’s programme that actually on the 30th of November he was supposed to be in Arusha.  I think you are well aware that he was in Arusha for the East African Community.  

On discovering that, announcements were sent out on radio and in newspapers, letters were written to the RDCs, to LC.V Chairmen and LC.III Chairmen.  We did not even stop there; we even made phone calls to the leadership of the various districts. Luwero Triangle covers 22 districts.  They were given ample information, and those who came to the office about a week ago, I did personally speak to them. I think the total I talked to was about 100 people before the beginning of last week. And we again informed them that the President was not to be present. Therefore, there is no budget for those who chose to come despite knowing very well that the President was not going to see them. And that is the truth.

“Luwero Triangle covers 22 districts, what about other areas?”  I am not qualified to comment on other areas and the reason is simple because that is not in my mandate.  I think if Government so feels that there are particular people who have contributed to an extent that they need compensation, I think that is a matter for Government to decide on. I am not qualified to decide on that one.

“Is there a legal instrument?”  That is a big question, and I will be honest to you. I have no answer for you at the moment. But an answer can be found once I have gone back to the office and checked the documents thoroughly. I will report back to this House.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MWANDHA:  We are not properly answered, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. James Mwandha you asked about persons with disability, and you asked about whether arrangements were made for accommodation.  I think he has answered you by telling you that when they looked at the diary of His Excellency the President, they communicated to the people concerned early enough that ‘please, do not come because His Excellency will not be there.’  Therefore, the question of arranging accommodation would not arise if you believe the answer he has given to you.

MR. MWANDHA:  I think in fairness to this House, the hon. Minister should have told this House what is now going to happen. Are those people now going to be left there indefinitely, or has Government got any plans of ensuring that they explain to them or send them back?  Are they going to simply stay there day in day out? 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, if you believe him that in very good time they were informed not to come -(Interruption)- hold on, hon. Members. Since you have heard even the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee questioning the legality - actually, the chairman, hon. Okulo Epak and another Member are really saying this payment is not justified in law.  I think this is what I have gathered and, therefore, it is necessary, when the Minister brings us the report, to tell us the legal basis of spending this money.  I think that is the most important thing.  It is not that people came when they were told not to come.  If you believe his answer that they were informed, what do you want to do? 

Hon. Members, I think it is fair because you are not going to get good answers when there is a probe. The Minister has told you there is a probe, let us give him time to bring us the report, then we will be able to discuss when we have every information.  

Now, because hon. Aggrey Awori raised the issue of time limitation, he is asking whether these claims can stand for 20 years. I think that is another question, which the Attorney General maybe can answer. I think Members, representative of people are questioning this payment.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT SCHEMES BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Felix Okot Ogong): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Collective Investment Schemes Bill, 2001” be read the First Time. I beg to move.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EDUCATION SERVICE BILL, 2001

(Clause 1 agreed to)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs. Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee has proposed an Amendment on the interpretation of the term “licensed teacher” which is on page 4 of the Bill. In line one of the definition of licensed teacher, insert between the words “is” and “issued” the following words: “not professionally trained as a teacher, but”; so that the new sentence would reads thus: 

“Licensed teacher means a person who is not professionally trained as a teacher, but who is issued with a license to teach by the appropriate authority, and has been entered on the roll of licensed teachers.” 

The justification for this amendment is that, we want to show the distinction between a teacher who has completed training in teaching and an untrained teacher. I beg to move Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is clear. I put a question to the proposed -(Interruption)

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, whereas I agree with the Amendment by the chairperson of the Committee, I am wondering why this Amendment remains vague even in the original Bill by saying “appropriate authority”. Why are they not firm to say by the Ministry of Education or Education Service Commission? I mean, it is something to do with education and all these things are under Ministry of Education. Why do we say “appropriate authority”? 

MRS.HYUHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Member is right to question that, but currently, the body responsible for licensing the teachers according to the Education Act 1970, is the Chief Education Officer. But time and again, it has changed. From Chief Education Officer, we are talking of the Director of Education. So, we have left it open so that as we keep on making various bodies responsible, they can be the appropriate authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

Mr. Jonathan NYENDWOHA: Mr. Chairman, I do not have a quarrel with the Amendment, but somewhere it says nobody should step in a school without that license. Ninety per cent of our so-called licensed teachers do not have those licenses. I do not know what the Committee is considering to make sure that those people have these licenses before they start teaching.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member that is a different matter; it is a policy matter. We are now dealing with Clauses of the Bill. The Committee has said it is necessary to deal with a ‘licensed teacher’. As to how we implement that, it will be a different matter. So I put the question on the proposed Amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 2, as amended agreed to)

Clause 3

MRS.HYUHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In Clause 3, the Committee has proposed a new sub-clause (c) so that it reads as follows:

“professional, administrative and support staff as may be appointed by the Commission for the efficient administration, management and delivery of education service in Uganda.” 

The justification for this new Clause is to cater for the non-teaching staff. During the general debate, we indicated that the Education Service has expanded. We have had new training institutions transferred from other Ministries to the Ministry of Education and, therefore, the public officers in such institutions who may not necessarily be professional teachers, and who may not necessarily have a license to teach, can be accommodated. For example, we have instructors in medical schools. They are neither necessarily professional teachers, nor do they have a license. We have registrars in tertiary institutions and other non-teaching staff.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear. I put the question to the proposed Amendment.

MR.MUGAMBE: Mr. Chairman, we have got new terms now, “support staff” and “non-teaching staff” but it is not well defined in our –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think the Committee’s proposal is to cater for all those.

MR.MUGAMBE: But they are not well defined. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But that is why he has made that proposal.  He is adding (c), because we had (a) and (b) and then now (c).  Is that not the case?

MRS.HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, if the Member can look at the Bill, Clause 3(a) caters for professional teachers who will be appointed by the Education Service Commission. Clause 3(b) caters for licensed teachers, but then we have people, who are neither professional teachers nor do they have a license. But they are to be appointed by the Education Service Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is clear. I put a question to the proposed Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 3, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 4

MRS.HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, here the Committee has made a number of Amendments. I want your guidance whether I should finish them ago, then we pronounce on the whole Clause. 

In Clause 4(1) of the Bill, the Committee has proposed that we delete the words “the” and “four”, and replace them with “all” so that the new sentence reads as follows: 

“The chairperson, the deputy chairperson and all other members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament in accordance with Article 167 of the Constitution.”  

The justification of the Amendment is to cater for situations where there might be only one deputy chairperson. Secondly, to cater for all the Members rather than using the numbers. I wish to give an example for clarity. 

The appointing authority can decide to appoint a chairperson, one deputy chairperson and five other members so that the Constitutional requirement of the Commission being composed of seven members is still maintained. But if we leave the Clause as it is, it means that we are pinning the appointing authority that at any given time, he must appoint the chairperson, two deputies and four others. So we are leaving the situation open, Mr. Chairman. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you please read us the constitutional provision.

MRS.HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the Constitutional Article 167 Clause (2) reads: “The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and six other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Six other members?  Therefore, they must be six –(Interruption)

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, that gives us a total of 7 people.  So, what is being proposed here in the Bill is that the Commission should have its Chairperson, the Deputy Chairpersons and four others. But the Committee is suggesting that we should not actually fix numbers because at any given time, the appointing authority can appoint a chairperson, one deputy and five other members, or another situation could be a chairperson, two deputies and four others. That is why we do not want to fix the numbers as fixed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

Ms. Beatrice KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, if the Constitution has a fixed the number of members to 7, why should the Bill be silent about the numbers? The amendment may not have to specify the deputy chairpersons, but it can reflect exactly how the Bill puts it: The chairperson and six other members, two of them might be deputy chairpersons or whatever, but let it be in conformity with the constitution so that there is no ambiguity on the number.

THE CHAIRMAN: Article 167 (3) provides that “The President shall appoint not more than two members of the Commission as deputy chairpersons of the Commission.” So, apparently there are two deputy chairpersons.  And you see, a problem in this proposed clause –(interjection)- what is the problem in the text of the Bill?

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the context here in the Bill is that it is specific because if you leave ‘a chairperson, the deputy chairperson and four other members’, it means it is limiting the appointing authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: To what?

MRS. HYUHA: To strictly appoint a chairperson plus two deputies, whereas the Committee is saying that we could go with the proposal in the Constitution because what the Committee is proposing - Mr. Chairman, if you can read sub-clauses (2) and (3), it means that at any given time, the appointing authority could decide to appoint one deputy chairperson or two.  So, we are leaving room for the appointing authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you trying to suggest that the President should have discretion either to appoint one deputy chairperson or two?  Is that what Article 167 (3) of the Constitution says?  It is limiting him to appointing two.

MRS. HYUHA: No! Article 167(3) says that the President shall appoint not more than two.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes - of the Commission as deputy chairpersons.

MRS. HYUHA: He can decide to have one or a maximum two.  Mathematically that is what it implies.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know!  It is different to say the President may appoint not more than and saying the President shall - they are two different terms. The implication is not the same.  When it says ‘may’, it is just permissive but when it says ‘shall’, then that is a command.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE:  Mr. Chairman, this Article was discussed between the Minister of Education and the Committee, and we decided to adopt what appears in Article 167 (2) of the Constitution where it says: “The Commission shall consist of a chairperson and six other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament”. And then for 167 (3), we did not find any problem there, Mr. Chairman, and so we agreed with what is being proposed by the Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you please repeat the proposed amendment?

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the proposed amendment is that we delete the words ”the four” and replace them with “all”.  So that the new sentence reads as follows:

“The chairperson, the deputy chairpersons and all other members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament in accordance with Article 167 of the Constitution”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  So, you do not want to put the number?

MRS. HYUHA: No!

THE CHAIRMAN: It is fine.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the second proposal of the Committee is that in sub-clause 4(2) of the Bill, insert these two words, “and regional” between the words, “gender” and “balance”.  

Mr. Chairman, the view of the Committee is to ensure regional balance on this Commission. This is a very important Commission.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, can you tell me what is regional as far as this proposal is concerned? Are you now creating regions?

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, we went with the guidance of the East Africa Guidelines, which we recently used of the traditional regions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you not doing more; aren’t you improving on the constitutional provision by doing that?  Are you competent by this law to improve on the constitutional provision? Because in a way you are amending the Constitution!

Mr. John Baptist KAWANGA: Mr. Chairman, this is a problem we are running into.  There is no definition of a region either in the Constitution or in any law that we know here, but it is carrying a practice. Apparently, we are developing into regionalism all over again, but in spite of that I do not think there is a way we can now include it in the law as it is, as an amendment.  It cannot be included.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

(Question put and negatived)

MRS. HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I take your ruling and the decision of the House. The Committee is proposing another amendment that is sub-clause 4(4) - Hon. Members, the Bill has three sub-clauses and the Committee is proposing a new sub-clause, which will be 4(4), which should read as follows: 

“The Chairperson, and the Deputy Chairperson(s) of the Commission shall have the following qualifications:  

(a) a post-graduate qualification in education or in a field related to education from a recognized university or equivalent institution, and;  

(b) at least 10 years working experience in education management or related field.”  

The argument of the Committee was that, due to the expanded mandate of the Commission, we need specific qualifications for these two respective positions.  I beg to move.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Chairman, the chairperson of the Committee has talked about postgraduate qualifications. Can she tell us what she means by a postgraduate qualification from a university? I know that a person who could probably have gone to a university and got a certificate, and then later on got a diploma from that university, has got a postgraduate qualification from a university. In other words, I am only asking for the chairperson to be specific on what she means by a postgraduate qualification.

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, I want us to bear in mind that the education service we are talking about today is an expanded service. We have had a number of training institutions and we have public officers in those institutions. They may even be principals, but they have a series of postgraduate diplomas acquired in their experience. Therefore, for us to say that somebody should have a Masters degree would be locking out certain fields.  So, we left it open. 

Somebody can have a series of postgraduate diplomas or a degree with a postgraduate, given the additional experience in years, or a PhD and they qualify. That is why we left it open, rather than specifying that this person must hold a Masters degree. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, doesn’t that amount to amending the Constitution? The Constitution says a person is not qualified to be a member of the Commission unless he or she is of high moral character and proven integrity, and has substantial experience in the field of education. Substantial experience is now being amended to read ‘postgraduate qualifications’. Doesn’t that amount to amending the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think she is saying that merely because you have a postgraduate qualification, this does not amount to experience. And here, the proposal is in fact ignoring this constitutional requirement of substantial experience because the two are postgraduate qualifications in education. You may have just got one degree, and maybe you get another one and then you become a chairman. Or, you get a qualification in a field related to education from a recognised or equivalent institution. It is totally silent about experience, which is in the Constitution. 

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: Mr. Chairman, we had some detailed and serious discussions with the Committee on this matter, and we made a request to the Committee, and it allowed us to consult further on this issue. 

From our consultations, the argument about the qualification was that these people are going to handle academic and non-academic staff in big institutions therefore, they should have qualifications that would put them in a better position to make the right decisions. And in our consultations, we agreed with the postgraduate qualification in education, or in a field related to education from a recognised university or equivalent institution.  On experience, we were advised that it would be appropriate if we recommended at least 10 years’ working experience in education.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is actually conjunctive because there is “and”. So, you have the postgraduate and then the rest. You have to read the two together. Maybe it is clear now.   I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 5, agreed to)

Clause 6 

MRS. HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The Committee has proposed an amendment to add a new sub-clause (2) to Clause 6 and it should read as follows:  

“All the members of the Commission shall be full time members appointed on contract for a period of four years and shall be eligible for re-appointment.”  

The justification for this new sub-clause is that, first of all, the education service is very large. When you look at the primary sector, we are talking about this Commission handling about 106. We are also talking about this Commission handling about 160,000 public officers in the secondary sector. In the tertiary institutions, it is about 4,000, and other public officers are about 1000. So, the size of the public officers to be handled by this Commission is large.  

Secondly, these members are expected to relinquish their other jobs as has been proposed in clause 6 (1).  The hon. Members were of the view that these members shall be fulltime. And if you consider other Commissions, like the health and judiciary ones, they have fulltime members and yet the number of public officers they handle is less. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: But why do you use “contract”? 
You said it is for a term of four years. Why do you use “contract”?  What is the significance of using that word?

MRS. HYUHA: Isn’t it a constitutional requirement, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not necessary because the Constitution has said there are four years.

MRS. HYUHA: Then we could amend that, Mr. Chairman, with you guidance. The new amendment then, with you guidance, could read: “All the members of the Commission shall be full time members appointed for a period of four years, and shall be eligible for re-appointment.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to) 

(Clause 6, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 7, agreed to)

Clause 8

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 8, the Committee has proposed two amendments.  The first one, Mr. Chairman, is that we delete 8(f) and re-number the existing sub-clauses.  This 8(f) is already provided for in 8(c), because it is talking about Management of the Welfare of public officers in the Education Service, which is contained in 8(c).

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee has further proposed an amendment on sub-clause 8(h) to delete and replace it so that the new sub-clause would read: “to establish and maintain a record of all public officers in the Education Service.”  

The reason is to enable the Education Service Commission keep track of all the officers in the Education Service. Secondly, Mr. Chairman, the original 8(h) was talking of establishing and maintaining a register of teachers.  This registration of teachers is a legal function that is currently performed by the Director in the Ministry of Education and Sports, according to the Education Act of 1970. Therefore, it cannot be a function of the Education Service Commission.  I beg to move Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 8 as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 9 agreed to)

(Clause 10 agreed to)

Clause 11

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee has proposed to insert in Clause 11, a new sub-clause (5), and re-number subsequent sub-clauses so that 11(5) would now read: “The Commission may invite any person to any of its meetings for advice, and such a person may deliberate on any matter before the Commission, but shall have no right to vote on any matter”.  

Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, the reasoning of the Committee was to enable the Commission co-opt any other person for technical advice. As you can see, the size of the Education Service and also the number is going to be seven.  So you would give them an opportunity to co-opt, where need be.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is really for technical advice that they invite somebody to help the Commission on certain issues. He is not a member, but simply attends to advise them on a matter and that is the end of it.  He is not part of the Commission but he attends.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman, I think the wording is a bit awkward. Commissions or Committees, it is normal for them to invite witnesses.  These may be expert witnesses; they may be people who want to give evidence or information and it is normal that they don’t vote. Once they have given their advice or evidence, that is it.  Now, that Clause goes into matters that are not necessary to go into.  I think we can approve the principle and the draftsmen will do it properly.  But, I think it is awkwardly worded.

THE CHAIRMAN: What harm do you see in this proposed amendment?  You call somebody in your meeting to advise you on any matter and at the end of the day, he goes away.  So what is the problem?  

MR. BAMWANGA:  I do not think there is any problem, since in the first place that person was invited by the Commission. And I am sure there will be concern as to why they are inviting that person, whether it is a technical advice they are seeking or medical.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 11 as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 12 agreed to)

Clause 13

MRS. HYUHA:  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, the Committee has proposed a new sub-clause of 13, which will be 13(2).  Re-number the existing Sub-clause (2) as (3) and add a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “The Commission may, with the approval of the Minister responsible for Finance, receive grants from Government or any other source for discharge of any of its functions”.  Mr. Chairman, the argument here is to provide for other sources of funding for this Commission.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this is a normal provision like many other Commissions that we have established by Law. I put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 13 as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 14 agreed to)

(Clause 15 agreed to)

(Clause 16 agreed to)

(Clause 17 agreed to)

(Clause 18 agreed to)

Clause 19

MRS. HYUHA: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman and hon. Members. The Committee proposes to delete 19(3).  Mr. Chairman, if you can read 19 (3), it reads that: 

“The Commission may reimburse any person invited to an interview in connection with his or her application for appointment to the Education Service in respect of his or her travel expenses for that purpose”.  

The Committee feels that this will create unnecessary expenses and therefore we propose to delete it.  I beg to move Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 19 as amended agreed to)

(Clause 20 agreed to)

(Clause 21 agreed to)

(Clause 22 agreed to)

(Clause 23 agreed to)

(Clause 24 agreed to)

(Clause 25 agreed to)

(Clause 26 agreed to)

Clause 27

MRS. HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The Committee proposed an amendment to Clause 27(2), to insert the following at the beginning: “Subject to the provisions of Article 168(2) of the Constitution” The new sentence would therefore read: 

“Subject to the provisions of Article 168(2) of the Constitution, the Minister may make presentations to the Commission and the Commission shall take such presentations into account.”  

The argument is that this is for independence of the Commission.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 27, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 28, agreed to)

(Clause 29, agreed to)

Clause 30

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee has proposed a new Clause 30, after 29, and the subsequent clauses should be renumbered. Clause 30 would read as follows: 

“The decisions of the Commission shall be implemented within six months.”  

The Committee’s argument is that this will ensure that decisions are acted upon. During the general debate, hon. Members will recall that the Committee gave some two examples where decisions of the Commission are taking too long. Some head teachers were appointed, but they remained teaching staff for such a long time. We were of the view that if the implementing body, whether the Ministry or Government, has not been in position to implement, they should report back. I beg to move.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, the functions of the Commission are laid out in section 8 of this Bill, and if you give a timeframe, there are some of them which, to me, seem to be long-term and may have financial implications, which may not be contained within the period of six months. And if you put it in the law that whatever they recommend should be implemented within six months, you may not be practical. 

For example, clause 8(1)(e) says: “(1) The Commission shall have the following functions – 

(e) to research, analyse, develop and formulate national standards for the Education Service in respect of – 
(f)	
 (i) training and qualifications of officers in the Education Service; 
(ii) recruitment and appointment procedures; 
(iii) instruments of appointment; 
(iv) ethics and conduct; 
(v) disciplinary control  

Instead of giving a period of six months to apply to all the Commission’s recommendations, why don’t we say that they should be implemented as soon as possible? If you give that timeframe and yet some of these are long-term and cannot be timed, especially as far as the budget of the Commission or the Ministry is concern, then they will be violating the law if they are not implemented.

THE CHAIRMAN: What will the sanction be for not implementing a decision within six months? I also want to know that.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The Ministry had some serious and detailed discussions over this same issue. The Ministry is of the view that a timeframe might be very difficult to meet as the hon. Kiraso has said. We also proposed, “as soon as possible” or “should be implemented appropriately”. 

The reason given by hon. Kiraso can apply to the implementation of these decisions. So, we were not, as a Ministry, very happy about the timeframe.  

MR. James KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am a Member of the Social Services Committee. The argument given by the Committee was that in the Ministry of Education, they may have appointed a headmaster, but he can take four years on the teaching staff, and he becomes a threat to the current headmaster. So, we gave our argument along those lines. If you do not give a timeframe, then the committee in place can take it upon themselves to appoint and keep quiet. That is why we said that we needed to get a feedback after six months. Maybe reasons like the ones they are giving could be looked into.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then maybe if you want six months, why don’t you ask for a feedback on the decision rather than saying, “implement”? If it is not implemented, what happens?  Because that is important! I want information on what the sanctions would be.

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Chairman, there is already a constitutional provision under Article 168(4) of the Constitution. It says: “The Commission shall make a report to Parliament in respect of each year, on the performance of its functions.” (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this is different. The difference is that in the provision you are reading, the Commission makes a report but here, I think it is about what has happened to the decision we have made. I think it is for another body to say what has happened to the decision we made, rather than saying “shall be”, because if it is not, is it nullified? Does it elapse? What happens?  Maybe that is why the Minister is saying you use, “as soon as possible” because, where you make a provision and it has no sanction, it is really useless!

MRS. BABA DIRI: I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am a Member of the Committee. I would like to inform you that there is another example. The Commission appointed two directors in the Ministry of Education, I think about two years ago, but up to now, they have not been given their posts, and the staff in the Ministry tend to ignore the work of these Commissioners. So, we would like to find a way of pinning them down to do their work.  

Then there is the issue of funds. I think we have thoroughly discussed that before we pass any Bill into an Act, we must ensure that there is money. And the Ministry of Finance, together with the Ministry of Education, have assured us that there will be money to implement this Act.  Therefore, the question of money is not there. We would like to help the teachers - or headmasters and directors - who are appointed, to be given their jobs as soon as possible to effect service delivery.  I beg you to support this amendment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you have said that directors are appointed, but appointment of directors is vested in the President. If the President does not make the appointment, what happens? (Mr. Bulamu rose on a point of information-)

THE CHAIRMAN: On that issue? 

Mr. Johnny Richard BULAMU: Yes, on that very issue.  Mr. Chairman, much as we have been denied by the Minister, but they were with us when we discussed this -(Laughter)- that in number one.  Two; if you simply say ‘as soon as possible’, ‘as soon as possible’ is not measurable. It does not give us enough cause, even to ask in writing what has happened because it continues to be as soon as possible – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: If this was to require a report to be made or a decision to be made, I think that would be more meaningful in that somebody will say yes, I have not implemented this decision because of this and that and the other.  If it is the appointment by the President, then the President will say I have not done this because of this and the other.  But suppose he does not, what happens?  That is my concern honourable Members. 

Capt. Francis BABU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members. Whilst the Education Service Commission will carry out its constitutional duty of interviewing and appointing somebody, there are other forces due to come in, and in this particular case the directors. The directors have to be appointed by the Head of State.  Before the Head of State appoints, he does his own investigation and if he is not satisfied, he writes back to the Commission. 

Now, in case of the resource envelope and salaries, there are certain regulations, which are agreed upon in the planning with the Ministry of Education that you cannot have beyond these numbers of teachers.  But at times the Ministry of Education and other people do overshoot these limits and, therefore, the Ministry of Public Service might not be able to accommodate these people in the resource envelope.  All these do create a problem and therefore co-ordination is very important.  

Whilst I agree with the Chairperson, I would like us also to insist that there is co-ordination between this Commission, the Public Service and the appointing authorities at any level, because others are appointed by the Ministry, others are appointed by the Head of State and so on and so forth.  Thank you very much.

Mr. Abdu KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, you have been asking a question and apparently you have not got an answer, ‘what are the sanctions?’  I think, as a point of information, the question of the Chairman is, in case the Commission makes a decision and it is not implemented in six months, what happens?  If there is nothing in the law that happens as a result of the non-implementation of the decision of the Commission, then that provision is totally redundant.  

What we are looking at is the effectiveness of the Commission or Public Service itself, and once the Commission has done its work whether you put it as ‘as soon as possible’, it is even redundant, it does not make sense.  So, the whole provision, Mr. Chairman, is redundant, whether as soon as possible, whether in six months, it is not useful.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by the Committee.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 30

MRS. HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank the Members. The Committee proposed some amendments on Clause 30 that is on ‘miscellaneous’, Mr. Chairman. We have proposed to delete 30(1) and 30(3).  Now, 30(1) reads: 

“A person aggrieved by a decision of the Ministry responsible for education or any other authority in relation to registration of teachers or grant of a license to teach, may appeal to the Commission within 30 days after the decision is communicated to that person and the Commission may confirm, vary or reserve the decision”.

Mr. Chairman, as you look at that sub-clause, it is talking of anybody aggrieved by the Ministry, and yet we are talking of somebody who is aggrieved by the decision of the Education Service Commission.  The work of registration of teachers and granting of licenses is not a function of the Education Service Commission, Mr. Chairman.  It is a function of the Director in the Ministry of Education and Sports, according to the 1970 Education Act.

Mr. Chairman, the Committee is also proposing to delete sub-clause 30(3) not (2) as indicated here on the paper. Sub-clause 30(3) reads: “The decision of the High Court under this section is final.” The justification is that power of registration, as I have indicated, and grant of a license is under the Ministry of Education and Sports, according to the Education Act 1970. Secondly, sub-clause 30(3) is implied in the amended sub-clause 30(2).  

We have gone further to amend now the remaining sub-clause 30(2) by deleting the two words, ”on appeal” appearing in the second line, and “30 days” substituting it with “60 days” so that the aggrieved persons are given more time.  Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members, I beg to move.

MR. OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee or from the Members.  I got a bit confused when she said the registration of teachers is not a function of the Education Service Commission, but a function of the Director of Education. But I think from what I understand, the registration of teachers is a function in the Education Service, and they are appointed under minute.  

Unless things have changed, but for most of the teachers, you find; ‘under minute this and that, you have been confirmed’, but on appointment, they say it is now the Director of Education.  Then of course he signs the document after they have been appointed under the minute. That is the clarification I want to seek, maybe from the Minister, whether some things have changed.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform Members that the law requires registration of teachers as per the Education Act of 1970, which requires that every qualified teacher must get on the Uganda teachers register, and that is the registration we are talking about.  But it is the Director of Education who writes the letters of appointment that are made by the Committee or the Commission, so there is that difference, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Chairman, the chairperson proposes to delete part (3) of clause 30, and he said that it is implied in sub-clause (2).  I beg to disagree and I would like to seek the following clarification because I think sub-clause (3) talks about the decision and the termination of any litigation against the decisions that have been made.  

In other words, it means that the decisions which are made by the High Court, which is implied in clause (2) as being the channel, which a person who is aggrieved applies to, the decision which is reached there is the terminal point by which that person will appeal.  But if you delete it, it would mean the case can proceed on and on and on.  I beg to be clarified.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the intention of the provision in the Bill as it is, is that the decision of the High Court is final.  There is no appeal, so that action stops there.  Now, if you repeal, then it means the appeals can proceed even to the Supreme Court.  I think that is the intention.  So, if there is a policy matter behind that provision, then you have to review the policy.  But the policy was to say stop there.  Whatever decision the High Court has made, will bind either party.  

MRS. HYUHA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  When we delete sub-clause (3), the decision of the High Court under this section is final.  In fact, the Committee anticipated that in case somebody is not satisfied with the ruling of the High Court, then according to the standing law, he is free to appeal to Supreme Court. So, once we have deleted this one, then we have given freedom to anyone who may be aggrieved, for further appealing.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are against the policy because, if you propose that one, then it goes to the policy matter.  You are against the policy that was suggesting that this delegation should stop at the High Court, and for you, you are opening it.  What is the justification?

MR. KAWANGA:  And not only that, Mr. Chairman.  If they want somebody to appeal, then they must specifically state it.  If that is what you want, then you must say, ‘it should not be appealable to the High Court and to all subsequent courts thereafter’.  So really, I do not see the benefit of removing that clause.

MRS. HYUHA:  Mr. Chairman, we had a lot of argument over this in the Committee, and what is interesting about the learned people is that when you go to them, they give you different views. We were advised by our legal counsel on this clause to be replaced. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Then, as hon. Kawanga is saying that the decision of the High Court can be appealable, if that is what you want.  I have said, why don’t you categorical say that the decision of High Court is appealable?  Say so, if that is what you want.

MRS. HYUHA:  Mr. Chairman, with your wise guidance, then, I take your advice, the legal counsel can redraft it.   

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, my clarification is on 31.  The chairperson had proposed to delete 31, but then I am not quite convinced with the reasoning because that Director they are talking about is an official of the Ministry of Education.  So, if the Ministry of Education aggrieves somebody, this 31 gives that person the opportunity to go to the Commission, but then the chairperson wants this to be deleted.  I just wanted to be clarified because I thought the Commission was an independent body, which could receive grievances from people who are harmed by the decisions of the Ministry of Education.

MRS. HYUHA:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member, hon. Kiraso, is taking us back to the question, which you asked that, ‘if there is no sanction, what happens?’  Mr. Chairman, do we expect that if a teacher is not satisfied that he has not been licensed by the Ministry of Education, which is the parent Ministry of the Education Service Commission, can he really appeal to the Commission?  What happens?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes! You are saying that the Ministry is unfair to me, you are an independent body, please, look into my grievances and you make a decision on that; why not?  You see, it is a parent Ministry but the Commission is acting independently to protect the rights of other people.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: Mr. Chairman, I must start by apologising, I do not have a copy of the Education Act 1970 here, but the Education Act gives a series of provisions about anybody aggrieved by the decision of the Director.  So, Mr. Chairman, provision or article 9 of the Education Act has got a series of provisions, where the aggrieved members of the public who want to be licensed can handle their grievances, and we are now in the process of revising that Act, and the provision will be made for those people who are aggrieved to make their appeal.  But we did not think as a Ministry that that provision should come into this because the appeal can be in any other form, not necessarily what is put into this Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: But this is your Bill, you are the one who brought this Bill with that provision.  So what do we do, because the Ministry owns this Bill?  It is the Ministry, which included this particular provision, which Members are trying to protect!

MR. KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, decisions ordinarily made by public servants are not litigated upon, except when they touch fundamental rights and freedoms, or when they vary to the constitution.  It is very difficult to start opening up litigation endlessly.  So, if there is any person aggrieved by the decision, either by the Minister or the Commission, and he has got another option of appealing to the High Court, reasonably, it should end there.  

Public officers in their daily lives always make decisions that are unfair, and once you open it up, you will end up opening up for litigation.  So I agree with the original position and the position now of the Committee, because it seems it has just changed on the Floor. Appeals should be made at the High Court level and not beyond that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the contribution from the House was that there was a good policy behind the provision of making the litigation stop at the High court. The Committee said ‘no, we want to delete it’. We asked the Committee what they wanted to achieve by deleting it and they said because somebody should be able to appeal. Then we said if that is what you want, make it clear. We are just making suggestions towards that. If it is the intention of the Committee that the appeal should be open, let her say so.

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, if you delete sub-clause (1), sub-clause (2) cannot stand because it handles the appeals in (1). Once you delete (1) then (2) and (3) will go; you delete the whole section. Once you delete (1) there are no possible appeals in (2) and, therefore, even the High Court does not arise.

MRS.HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, the intention of 30(2) is to give an opportunity to the public officers who are not satisfied with a decision taken by the Education Service Commission to appeal. The Education Service Commission has a series of functions as we saw in Clause (8). It has to appoint, to confirm, to discipline. So, the intention of 30(2) is to give room to those who may not be satisfied with the decision of the Education Service Commission to appeal.  

Clause 30(1) is just sorting out two functions - registration and licensing - among the many functions of the Ministry of Education. But the intention of this Bill is to put in place the Education Service Commission, the functions and what happens if the public officer is not satisfied. So, when you say that we leave 30(1), as the Minister has explained, the function of licensing and registering of teachers is directly under the Chief Education Officer. Currently, we have a Director, according to the 1970 Education Act, section (11).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruzindana, the explanation why she can delete sub-clause (1) and leave (2) is this. The appeal envisaged under 30(2) is against a decision of the Commission. The Commission for having done something aggrieves somebody; he goes to make an appeal, whereas Clause (1) is an appeal against a decision of the Ministry. So, the two are different –(Interjection). Yes! If you delete (1), you can competently leave (2) for appeals against decisions of the Commission.

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, sub-clause (1) is saying that when the Commission has appointed a teacher and the Ministry of Education refuses to register or license him or her, that teacher comes back to the Commission and appeals. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruzindana, there are two bodies here. When the Ministry does something wrong, Clause 30(1) was saying that you appeal to the Commission, but the Committee is saying, ‘no, do not bring that appeal to us’. But when somebody is aggrieved by some decisions made by the Commission itself, Clause 30(2) will be there to deal with the situation. So, it can stand if you agree to delete Clause 30(1) so that there are no appeals from the Ministry to the Commission. The only appeals should be against decisions of the Commission to the body, which is mentioned here –(Interruption).

MR.KAWANGA: Mr. Chairman, I think Clause 30(1) was intended to improve a bad situation. It is dealing with a situation where we now have an Education Commission to handle matters related to registration. And you have a situation where somebody in the Ministry does something where a teacher feels aggrieved. This section gives him a right to complain to the Commission and then the Commission takes a decision.  This question of saying that because the Education Act deals with registration is right, but the Education Act was enacted before the 1995 Constitution, which has improved the situation. 

So, this is a new one, and I think the Education Act will have to be amended in light of what we are trying to do now. It will be a terrible thing if we removed 30(1). Teachers will have no recourse to an arbitrary decision of the Ministry. This Clause gives them a way through the Commission and then High Court. So, surely we should keep everything that is here 30(1) and (2) and the rest.

MRS.BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. I now have a copy of the Education Act, 1970. Article 12(2) reads: “Any applicant (that is for licensing) who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Education made under this section may appeal either to the Education Service Commission, or where the teacher concerned is not employed in the Public Service, to the Appeals Tribunal within 45 days, beginning with the day of the service of the notice upon him.” 

It is ‘either/or’, but the Ministry of Education is of the view that these are probably untrained people, who can get licenses to teach. Therefore, drafting them into the Education Service Commission might bring about a lot of irregularities. 

So, since the director of Education is to license as we have already agreed, then the Act should provide for a Tribunal where the aggrieved party can appeal so that we do not mix the two. The Director licenses, therefore, any other appeals should be channelled through the proper articles as provided in the Act, and then we leave the Education Service Commission to deal with Public Servants who are teachers and who are qualified. That was the argument.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the owner of the Bill is indicating to you that she is no longer interested in this provision. If this is the case, why do I not put the question –(Interjection)- okay, now let us do this way. There are two proposed amendments, let us start with one. I put he question to delete sub-clause 30(1) 

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, I put the question to delete sub-clause 30(2).

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 30 agreed to.)

(Clause 31 agreed to)

(Clause 32 agreed to.)

(Clause 33 agreed to)

(The First Schedule agreed to)

(The Second Schedule agreed to)

(The Title agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Bitamazire): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLEHOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Bitamazire): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “The Education Service Commission Bill, 2001”, and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLEHOUSE.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, the Bill we are considering this afternoon is a matter of public importance, and the people we represent greatly value its content.  Is it prudent for us to continue or to resume voting, when we possibly lack a quorum?

THE SPEAKER: Well, count them.  He says there is no quorum.  We are 112. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Bitamazire): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The Education Service Bill, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Bitamazire): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Education Service Commission Bill, 2001” be read the Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed.  Hon. Members, I thank you very much for having dealt with this Bill and for having maintained the quorum. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.41 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 5th December 2001 at 2.00 O’clock).
