Tuesday, 2 December 2003

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all I would like to apologize for my voice. I have flu and so it is affecting my voice.  

Honourable Members of Parliament, last week Parliament asked me to provide details on the on-going divestiture process of Nile Hotel International Ltd. I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to do so.  Below are the details. 

Background.

Nile Hotel International Ltd (NHIL) is 100 percent owned by the Government of Uganda. It is in class II of the PERD Statute. Arising from that classification, Government is required to maintain majority shareholding in NHIL at divesture. The idea of selling Nile Hotel is out because Government is required to retain majority shares in the company.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in order to remain competitive NHIL requires substantial investments to refurbish and develop its assets. As we speak now, both the hotel and the conference centre are in bad shape and need capital injection. 

So, the main objective of the divestiture was to ensure investment in refurbishment and development of the hotel and the conference centre and their amenities to a five-star standard. Furthermore, the complex was to be under expert management of world-class repute. So we are looking for quality here.  

In light of the classification and the need for substantial investment, DRIC reviewed various options and approved the divesture by way of concession. This option was discussed with the Parliamentary Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry who concurred with the decision.  

In the concession, Government of Uganda through Nile Hotel International Ltd would retain all the assets, both current and future, while the concessionaire would run the assets for a given period to enable them to recoup their investment.  

The assets are therefore not being sold, and I would like to emphasise that, because some people have been comparing this divesture with Apollo Hotel, which was sold. The assets are therefore not being sold, as they remain under NHIL, which will continue being owned by Government 100 percent.

So while Government of Uganda will not invest additional funds, the concessionaire is required to refurbish, re-develop and expand the existing assets, and to provide other additional amenities and expansion of the number of hotel rooms At the end of the concession, we would have moved from the existing 85 rooms to over 200 rooms of a five-star level.   

Allow me to emphasise, Madam Speaker, that at the end of the concession all assets revert to Government of Uganda through Nile Hotel International ownership.  

Below is the structure of the bid for the concession, which was required of every bidder.  Before bidders put in their bids this is what DRIC wanted: 
1. That the concession will be of 30 years.

2. That the bidder must be able to provide a fixed lump-sum payment of US $1.2 million (this is not a purchase price but commitment fee) being 10 percent of the fixed asset valuation as at 30th April 2003. And this is not refundable. This is money that is going to remain with Government.

3. The concessionaire must have a minimum investment of US $15 million.  

4. That the performance bond of US $3 million, which is 20 percent of the minimum investment, be provided. This means in case the concessionaire falters then he/she would forfeit that money.

5. That the concessionaire is ready to pay an annual concession fee as the percentage of the gross revenues. 

This means, therefore, the successful bidder would be the one who offers the highest annual concession fees. That would be the criterion for determining the successful bidder.

The Bid Process.  

The bid process comprised two stages, the pre-qualification and the final bid submission.  Invitation of prospective bidders was made through both local and international media and six responses were received.

Divestiture Reform and Implementation Committee (DRIC) approved the pre-qualification of five bidders. The pre-qualified bidders who went to the second stage were Tata (Uganda) Ltd, which bid with Taj Mahal Hotels; Mosa Court Apartments Ltd, which was with Southern Sun Hotels; Legacy Group Holdings (Pty) Ltd, which would be the owner and operator; Kersaf Investments Ltd, which bid with Sun International; Serena Tourism Promotion Services of Switzerland, a wholly owned subsidiary of Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development (AKFED). 

Maybe I should explain here why we say “with”. We have said that our objective was to get a five-star hotel. It is possible that we could get a bidder with money but without the expertise of running a five-star hotel. If a bidder had the money to become the concessionaire and would not provide the expertise of a five-star hotel, he or she was required to show evidence that he or she has a five-star hotel operator of that standard.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with the bid terms, the pre-qualified bidders were invited to carry out their due diligence prior to submission of final bids. Two bidders undertook comprehensive due diligence while the others reacted to the submitted documents without due diligence. 

In the end, only one final bid was received from Serena Tourism Promotion Services, whom we shall refer to in this document as Serena, with Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development as financiers.  

Submission of Serena.

The bid met all the minimum requirements set out in the bid document, which we outlined on the previous page, in fact exceeding the minimum investment requirement. The DRIC’s and Government minimum investment requirement was US $15 million. 

The offer exceeded this by undertaking to invest US $19 million in Phase I, which is to be completed in 2005, and a further US $10.6 million for the second phase in the year 2006/7.  So, their offer was even far beyond our requirements.  

The bidders have also undertaken to take on all the existing employees. There should be no problem about that. However, because the employees will be working with the concessionaire and will cease being employed by Nile Hotel International Ltd, the employees’ terminal benefits will be paid by Government of Uganda. 

So, they will be kept but over and above that, they will get their terminal benefits because they are changing employers. 

The annual concession fee is computed at four percent of the gross sales revenue, payable quarterly in advance against as per the business plan. So, over and above the additional investment the concessionaire is putting in, the Government will be getting four percent of the gross sales revenue, not of the profits. 

This is projected to range from US $0.1 million during the renovation period, because business will be low, to US $0.55 million later. NHIL is projected to earn US $3.1 million in the first ten years. So, we are not only getting a bigger and better quality hotel, but Government will get money annually.  

Serena Tourism and Promotion Services is the retained professional manager while AKFED are the financiers.  

Madam Speaker, what are the benefits to Government that will arise from this bid?  
1. We shall have a refurbished and expanded hotel and conference centre up rated to five-star standard, wholly owned by Government of Uganda through Nile Hotel International Limited. 

We have attached pictures, which show the artistic impression of what we have now and how the hotel will look after the four years of refurbishment and expansion.

2. The Government will get US $1.2 million cash upfront upon concluding the concession agreement, and a guaranteed annual concession fee computed on gross revenue, as we have said at four percent. And this will be given whether or not the hotel makes a profit. That is part of the agreement.

3. Government will get taxes from increased operations, that is, VAT of 17 percent, estimated at US $13 million for the first ten-year period.

4. Government will get increased employment numbers. It is estimated that the employees will rise from 268 as of now to 429, of course with the resultant Pay As You Earn (PAYE) tax. This is in addition to a better-trained workforce.  

5. There will be indirect employment initially through construction works. As construction goes on, there will be more people employed. In addition, there will be local supplies arising from increased activity in the hotel.

6. There will be an increase in Uganda’s competitiveness in the region for tourists, international conferences and functions. As you will see, the conference centre will be transformed and will be raised to international levels. 

As we know, we may be hosting the Common Wealth Heads of Government Meeting here. So we have agreed with the concessionaire and he has accepted to accelerate the renovation of the first phase of the hotel so that by 2005, he will have completed the first phase of the renovation. We shall be having a five-star hotel capable of hosting guests of that calibre. 

7. There will corporate tax receipts.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I believe that the above explanation allays fears that the complex is being sold. To the contrary, this is a concession in which Government of Uganda shall retain all the assets, both the current assets and the developed ones, while the concessionaire invests and runs the assets for the concession period. I beg to move.

10.49
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to once again comment on the divesture of Nile Hotel. I also would like to thank the Minister of State for Privatisation for having given this elaborate explanation since I last raised this issue on the Floor of the House. 

I appreciate the intentions of Government and the explanations given by the Minister to improve on the Nile Hotel complex and upgrade it to a five-star hotel in order for us to have a service, to attract tourists and to have some way of improving our investment. However, I want to be assured further. 

This Government has on a number of occasions committed public enterprises and undertaken to get the so-called investors pay up their pledges and also re-invest more money. In most cases, we have been let down. One case in point was Lake View Hotel. 

When the Sixth Parliament made recommendations they were actually proposing that what we have gone through with sales, there should have been a way of having public floatation of some of these big enterprises. 

I remember the person who put in the highest bid for Lake View Hotel paid US $3.5 million for 51 percent shares and the government retained 49 percent shares. And at the end of the day they sold 49 percent shares at 1.75 million dollars! To me this was actually very unfair because having sold 51 percent shares at US $3.5 million, there was no point of selling 49 percent at half what they had offered. 

The second case was the Hima cement factory. Most members who were in the Sixth Parliament remember what happened at Hima. The people promised to pay up the balance but up to now it remains unpaid. 

Madam Speaker, when Government was privatising some of the hotels including Equatorial, Imperial and Sheraton - that one I agree with the Minister, who happens to be my Mukko - it was a divesture which was a sale. But 30 years! 

I am a valuer and 30 years is a long, long time. It is a long, long time and I would rather cease to call it a lease. Lawyers who are here would advise that anything beyond three years is registrable on the title; it therefore ceases to be a lease because it is too long a period.  

The other information I want to give, Madam Speaker, is that in the principles of evaluation and leasing out land, if you are to lease out land vacant, you would be able to pay what you call premium, which is a tenth of the value of that land. Then you would also be required to pay annually a twentieth of the value of this land. 

I am happy with the Minister. Actually, what I said last week was that in my view - I had not actually taken a pen and a tape measure to go and value Nile Hotel - the value of that hotel complex was about US $10 million. I also said that the value of the land alone, which is 19 acres, is about US $1 million. 

It is not possible, therefore, to pay US $1.2 million as premium of an already existing asset worth US $12 million. In my view, you are saying that US $1.2 million is the premium. But Government already owns 100 percent of Nile Hotel in its present state at US $12 million. 

I thank the Aga Khan, or the people who are coming with Serena. They are going to put in US $19 million. Thank you very much. They are going to put in another US $10 million. Thank you very much. They are going to change the face of the Nile Hotel and make it a five-star hotel. But when it comes to sharing on the profits, it should reflect the equity contribution of the Government and the taxpayers of Uganda. 

The equity contribution of the Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda is US $12 million. The equity contribution of the Serena Hotel after refurbishment is going to be about US $29 million. I would have expected the percentage of shareholding in the revenue to reflect that proportionality. 

Also, you say you are going to be getting a gross of four percent, and that you are expecting to earn about 100,000 dollars. When you put it in terms of 0.1 million dollars, 0.55 million, it sounds like a lot of money. You should only call it 100,000 dollars and 500,000 dollars so that it makes a lot of sense to people. 

I am strongly in support of Government policy of privatisation and turning this enterprise into something good to attract people. But I am saying we must get money for value, Madam Speaker. The money for value in this case should have been more of a joint venture between Government and the new investor. 

Also considering that the new investor will have put in US $29 million to refurbish the already existing property, it would not have been unfair to let them take 60 or 70 percent of the gross revenue. Then we would also be able to get about 30 percent to reflect the amount of money that we have put in. 

I also agree with you that if they will employ more people, we shall be happy. In conclusion, if they will be paying VAT, that would be very good indeed. But, Madam Speaker, I want the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances in this Seventh Parliament to take note of that. 

We have been told, we have been given assurance, we have been promised; we have seen the Kananathans, we have seen Malaysians, we have Tunisians, we have seen it all. Madam Speaker, I love this country, I love this government, I respect the decision taken by this government; let us not be taken for a ride once again. I thank you.

10.54
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to air my views on the subject matter for discussion this morning.  

Madam Speaker, I am one of those few Ugandans who believe very strongly that the principle of harvesting where you have not sown and not sowing for the future generation also to reap from is a very bad principle, which the Government of the day is adopting.  

Madam Speaker, the word “divesture” has got a lot of negative impact and brings negative feelings among the people of this country. Why do I say so? It is because ever since this policy started, Ugandans have not seen any tangible benefit from the monies and the revenues accruing to this policy being implemented.  

I remember last year I did ask the minister responsible as to whether he has ever, as expected of him, submitted to Parliament the total revenue that Government has ever earned out of all these attempts of divesture. To-date I have not seen that. 

To-date when you go through the Hansard, there is no reflection that the Minister ever came back to tell us or to tell Ugandans that ever since this policy started being implemented, this is what we have realised, this is what we have expended. 

Accountability is very important. When you account transparently, people will appreciate the importance of the programme that you are implementing.  

Madam Speaker, as a country we also need to have some pride. We have pride, if only we could have our own assets. 

In the whole of East Africa, for example, when you go outside Uganda you feel as if you are an orphan. It is not until you see Kenya Airways that you begin to say, “I think I am closer home” because that is the flag-carrier of Kenya. That is the thing that Kenyans identify with but in Uganda here, do we have anything that we can be proud of and say, “Yes, this is what we own, this is what we fought for, this is what we built”?  

Nile Hotel was built by people whom we say were ignorant, but it is there now. And it is from that very place that we keep condemning them time and again. But what have we created that we will be able to leave for the future generation also to be able to see and appreciate? 

When I look at all the reasons and benefits being given, I begin to wonder. They come in and convince you about the Commonwealth Conference here, but it was planned long ago. It had nothing to do with the divesture of Nile Hotel as a facility that would be refurbished so that it can be able to attract and host a Commonwealth delegation. We had better be serious with this country. We had better be serious with what we have. (Interruption)

BRIG. JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for allowing me to give this information. When we had a flag-carrier, Uganda Airlines, the Government of Uganda was continuously putting in US $1,000,000 per year. This was a debt enterprise, which was not giving any revenue to the country. 

The other issue is not whether we need a flag-carrier but whether we need transport for people and cargo into and outside Uganda. Whereas we do not have Uganda Airlines, we have many airlines now flocking in and out of Entebbe Airport. Thank you very much.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my senior brother, for that information but I will not allow it to go unchallenged.

Madam Speaker, when the honourable minister says we cannot have a flag-carrier because it was cumbersome to us, note that it was cumbersome because of poor management. And who is responsible for placing people to manage Uganda Airlines, Sheraton or Nile Hotel? It is the same government; so it is management. 

It is not a matter of whether the flag-carrier is going to be managed profitably, it is you who determines who should be placed where to manage these resources. If you bring in people who do not have any management entrepreneurship, they will ruin it and at the end of the day you will say, “we cannot have our own flag-carrier because it is too expensive”. 

This is the same thing with Nile Hotel. According to this report, Nile Hotel has all the equipment. Don’t you think it would have been cheaper in the short and long run for Government to part with money, have it invested there, so that at the end of the day you are able to earn more profits? It is better than talking in terms of four percent and yet when you look at the value of the assets therein, surely can you compare it to the four percent that you are expecting?  

It is even more frivolous for us to be taken for a ride by saying rehabilitation of Nile Hotel will boost the tourism industry. How many hotels do we have in this country that are being refurbished and yet the tourism industry has not flourished to our expectation? There are many factors to consider when you are talking about the tourism industry. 

First of all, you need to talk about security. No tourist is going to come to Kampala because Nile Hotel is refurbished! If Kony cannot allow them reach the North, if the ADF is disturbing them the other side, if they cannot go and see the gorillas, they will still not come. 

We need to set our priorities right. We need to look at the factors that will attract tourism more properly than just a matter of coming to window dress here that, “You see, when we refurbish this Hotel we shall get so much from the concessionaire, it will be a five-star hotel and, therefore, it will attract tourists”. 

I think there are more factors for us to consider that attract tourists, other than just refurbishing. There are many hotels, as I said earlier on. Sheraton is enough. You go to Entebbe; there are many that could accommodate tourists coming to this country to a reasonable standard.  

So, Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that I, Wadri Kassiano Ezati, representing Terego County, am not in support, at all, of this arrangement. That is because at the end of the day Ugandans will have a raw deal, as it has always been, and as has been alluded to by my brother, Stephen Bamwanga. 

I do not support the idea of divesting Nile Hotel, at all. Let that be at least one of the remaining assets that we can be proud of and say, “Yes, the first regimes built this, it is there, it is ours and the future regimes will also be able to get it”. Thank you.

11.02
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for this brief. If all the ministers were doing like this regularly, somehow we would grasp a few of these things, which tend to bring chaos when information does not flow properly. The Minister has clearly elaborated on what is supposed to be done. 

Before I go any further, I would like to say that privatisation and divesture are a new phenomenon in Uganda and internationally. It caused problems for Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom when she tried to privatise the post office. She went ahead and privatised it and now they are making twice the money they used to make, but she lost her seat. That is what usually happens when a new phenomenon is in place; it is not elaborated upon and information does not flow very fast.  

I hope the Minister will also assure us that this time government is not going to put in money like they did for Tri-Star. It came in as a foreign business, when it reached here Government ended up funding the whole project. If I knew, I would also have registered a very serious company and Government would have given me this money with a few of my colleagues. 

The Minister should assure us that they will not turn around and say that the Government has to put in money because this gentleman is finding a problem. That assurance is also required.

Two, we have seen the bids but now we need the agreements themselves. The chairperson should have this together with the committee, and satisfy themselves that at least this is not a raw deal before it takes off. Because bringing in this information when it is very late could also cause another problem. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister has told us that the Government will retain the majority shares. I hope in the agreement it will indicate how many shares these are. Is it 51, 52, 70, 80? 

Who determines the employment schedules because the moment you have the majority shares, you should be able to determine the employment schedule. This gentleman will reach here and begin sacking our people and then bring in people who are going to record mineral water by putting strokes until they are 10, but they cannot even write that 10. 

You know what is happening in these private factories of our investors. We hope that is not going to be done here and I believe it should be stipulated in the agreements. 

Madam Speaker, the assets shall remain for the Government and according to the artistic impressions there are new structures, which are going to be put up. There is even one floor - I have counted the floors of the existing building – that is going to be added. 

It should be stated categorically in the agreement that after the 30 years, everything shall remain for the Government of Uganda and it is not compulsory that the concession be extended. Because under certain conditions concessions are written in such a way that they are extendable, renewable and open-ended  (Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: Actually, what the Minister did not state and what I have gathered is that there is a clause for a further extension of 20 years by the concessionaires. There is a clause that they will have an extension of 20 years after the original 30 years.

MR KABAREEBE: That means it is not 30 years - thank you very much for the information - it is 50 years. You see! That is why we shall need the agreements. These agreements can come here before we ratify them and agree. Then, we shall leave government to do the work. 

The problem is that we do not agree properly here. If you had brought all those earlier and we looked at them, we would say, “No, we do not agree to the 50 years now. Let us begin with 20 years, extendable by 10 years”. (Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I am giving information to my colleague in line with what he has said. I wonder, do our contributions now have any relevance to the subject we are discussing? 

We have seen in the Minister’s submission that the Government has already finalized the deal and they have brought this report here as a post-mortem. I think everything has been done and agreements have been made. I wonder whether our contributions have anything to change to that effect.  

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much for that information, but I can see it is a question to the Minister. According to me, this is healthier than other deals we have had because information has reached us at a certain level. 

Parliament shall not do government business, of course, but at least let us be informed and we show you objections if there are any. Otherwise, to say that government, before it advertised, should have come to seek permission from here –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the point as advanced by hon. Latif Sebaggala is very fundamental. This is Parliament. We are not here to joke; we are deliberating on a subject of great importance. I want to state that I intend, at a later moment, to move that the concession be stayed in public interest. What does Government have to say about that?  

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much. Procedurally, I do not know what would happen if he is to move any motion. He is free to move the motion and we are free to support it or not. So, let us wait for that motion, if you are to bring it. 

Privatisation, as I said earlier, is a new phenomenon. Until we get proper education about it - by the way, a simple definition of it in economics is, when government fails to do business, and government is a poor businessman, it can opt to sell or even give away freely so long as the benefits are great. That is the definition of privatisation. 

When I was in Sheraton, by that time it was Apollo Hotel, we had just come back from the liberation war and I was surprised to find rats in a hotel like that. And you call it a national asset! You cannot waste such time on it. You had better get people who can get things moving, and I think this is one of the best steps. 

Now what we are interested in is the procedure, the steps taken and what we stand to benefit out of this. I thank you very much, Madam.

11.12
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the recent history of a flurry of litigations in court, the number of court cases we have lost and the amount of money we have lost in court awards, I am very sceptical about this arrangement. 

This is exceedingly difficult for us as representatives of the people and watchdog over government resources. How do we manage public affairs? How can we reach any conclusion on this matter until we have seen the way the agreement is framed?

It is not even with the committee. Until this agreement is before – I can see my colleague itching to stand up and answer me. I do not know, it is in your powers –(Interruption)

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have described the process we have gone through. As you know, the Government agreements are not contracts until the Attorney General has gone through them and decided that this contract or this agreement is in the interests of the people of this country. 

As we speak now, we have not concluded with the concessionaire. What I am presenting to Parliament are the terms on which we have agreed, but the contract can only become binding after the Attorney General has said, “Yes, this is a good contract.” Currently, the documents are with the Attorney General. 

I must also remind the honourable members that we have an obligation to keep Parliament informed. As I said in my paper, we had reported to the relevant committee about what we are doing and how we are doing it, and the committee had no objection. My friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, I remember very well was there –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I am the Chairman of the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Committee. I am a very good Christian; I am seeing this document for the first time. I want to inform members that the Committee of Finance has not even looked at this. I have just seen this paper for the first time. 

The first time I heard of this was when I was discussing the report, which has been postponed three times, with the Minister. It was actually when hon. Bamwanga raised it. I was seated next to him and I asked him, “Do you want to sell Nile Hotel for US $1.2?” He told me, “No, we are getting a concessionaire and we will be getting four percent.” That is all, period. 

This House should not be deceived that the committee is aware of this process. Maybe other members know, but not the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I thank you very much.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, hon. Rwamirama is right. The relevant committee is not the Committee of Finance. It is the Committee on Trade and Tourism and that is the committee I was referring to. I was not referring to the Finance Committee.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, he is not the Minister of Trade. When something gets to privatisation, it shifts to the Ministry of Finance and the mandate of the Ministry of Finance resides within the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

If you check all the records to deal with privatisation, they are presented to the House by the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I conceded the Floor to my honourable colleague for brief information but it looks like he has now become the substantive contributor to the debate. So, am I losing my time on the Floor? I would like to continue so that I do not lose an opportunity of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but there was a fundamental question raised by hon. Sebaggala. He wondered whether the debate here would enrich the deliberations and whether the question of four percent will be amended. I think he needs to address that fundamental question. Is this process going to help?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, as I said the agreement has not been signed yet. The document is with the Attorney General and there still is room for enriching it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, thank you my honourable colleague on the front bench. To repeat what I said a few minutes ago, we have a very serious concern in this august House - the way the Government writes agreements. 

I would say 70 percent of the agreements you have signed have been flawed in one way or another. As we speak now, we are talking about marrying off a daughter who is in court for divorce, and we want to marry her off before we have finalized the divorce. Why am I saying so?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Awori. Is it bad if your daughter is in court for divorce but you are lucky to have a suitor willing to marry her?

MR AWORI: Obviously, my honourable colleague, we are in court; we do not know whether we shall be given a decree or not. But we are also discussing the dowry, how much is going to be paid for this girl who is still within our home. The other man is saying, “I will not concede to the divorce, she is still mine” and you want to marry her off! 

Instead of speaking in parables, I am referring to the court case of Fourati. Fourati is suing us over Nile Hotel, and Fourati is not the first person to sue us. We have had previous agreements with various groups of people where the agreements were flawed and the operation was flawed. 

In the end, I am sure if you could total up the amount of money we have lost on attempts to privatise Nile Hotel, it could not be less than US $10 million. Are we getting into another agreement, which will cost us maybe this time the whole hotel? Somebody might defeat us in court and take the hotel for free. 

What is the status of Fourati, for instance? What are we doing about Fourati and other people who allegedly put in money? 

To make matters worse, Madam Speaker, before Fourati came into the picture, a whole Vice President objected to that particular agreement. A whole Minister of Tourism objected to that agreement until somebody was forced to sign that agreement on behalf of the Uganda Government. What happened in the end? We lost money. 

Another briefcase investor came to this country and with no money given to us, he took the hotel. He ran away with US $2 million in cash, from the hotel. Then we said, “good riddance”. The man bounced back and said, “No, you still owe me money.” A man who has taken money from your pocket, he comes back to sue you saying, “you still owe me more money”! That is the situation of Fourati. 

That is why I am saying, before we get into some kind of arrangement, as my colleague hon. Muhwezi says, another suitor has come for the daughter but we have to hold him at the gate and say, “look, hold it. We have to sort out things internally. This girl, after all, may not get the divorce.” 

Hypothetically, let us assume Fourati wins the case. He has gone to court and the court could say, “Yes, you are in breach of contract, Fourati continues to keep the hotel.” Are you going to go back to Aga Khan and say, “Sorry, there was a little problem here and there”? And then Aga Khan will also go to court –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I have looked at that claim. The claim is for liquidated damages. Of course, I do not want to say that it is frivolous because that would be commenting on a matter before court, but that is the impression I have. It is for liquidated damages and not a claim on ownership of the property. 

So, even if that company was to win in court, the remedy would not affect the ownership of the land because ownership is not being claimed. So, the owner is at liberty to proceed with disposing of the property the way he wants. Whether the case in court is resolved in favour of the plaintiff of whether it is resolved in favour of the Government, it has no relevance to what the Government intends to do with the property.

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that hon. Jim Muhwezi was talking about marriage and divorce British style. In these western countries when you want to marry, you marry well knowing that after three years you are going to divorce, because you are looking for the alimony in the first place. So, you can marry as many times as ten times. 

The Minister of Finance is saying that the claim by Fourati should not jeopardize our negotiations with the new bidder. Knowing what has been happening with the Attorney General’s Chambers, how many cases have been lost? 

We want to know on this Floor from you, Sir, because even when someone is going to divorce, we know how many cows were paid the first time and how many cows are going to be reclaimed. How much is the claim of the first people? Supposing they put in a claim of – you are a lawyer – damages worth US $10 million, what would you say as a minister when it comes to that?  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, once again I am losing time because of additional information. However, I am still expressing serious concern about this agreement. As I said, there are certain encumbrances, which have yet to be resolved on this matter of the hotel. 

If I remember correctly, I have seen Fourati’s suit, the principle aspect of the suit in court is breach of contract –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: An encumbrance on land, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is a registable instrument. It is registered on the title of that land. 

Indeed, the plaintiffs attempted to register a caveat on the land for stopping the Government from dealing in the land the way it wanted. That issue went to court and the court resolved it in favour of the Government. The caveat was dully withdrawn. 

PROF. KASENENE: If you may allow me, I think we need to clarify this issue. There were two contracts between the Government and Fourati. The first one was the joint venture agreement by which the company owned some shares jointly with Government in the hotel, and that case was finished. That is not the issue at stake. 

The second agreement was the management contract. Here Fourati was not only going to be a joint owner of the hotel but would also provide management. The issue in court now is about the management contract and not the joint venture agreement that was settled a long time ago. 

So, whether we privatise now or not, that has nothing to do with the hotel, as hon. Rukutana has said. It is a management contract. If the Government loses the case then we would have to compensate them for that, but that has nothing to do with the hotel as of now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, please wind up.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I plead for more time. You can see that 90 percent of my time has been taken up by clarifications, information, concessions and defence. So, let me get back to my concern, which is legal. 

This hotel falls under the PERD Statute. The other day you came to the Committee of Finance to seek permission to move it from section IV to section I, from PERD ownership to 100 percent ownership. You were given that one. 

The PERD Statute is a condition; it is a law we made when the World Bank put pressure on us to privatise. It has got a time limit and they are putting pressure on us that this privatisation must be completed within a specific period. And yet we are now giving away a property on a 30-year lease or concession. 

When you add this to the other clause in fine print, which we do not see, it says that they are also entitled - if negotiations allow - to 20 more years. That makes it 50 years. We cannot afford that.

Madam Speaker, 75 percent of this hotel, especially the Conference Centre, is made of prefabricated material and such buildings have got a certain lifespan. How do we know that in the year 2020, before we are even halfway through the lease, the hotel will be in good condition? Will we not be cheated by the concessionaire saying, “Look, I added so much”? So, I am expressing concern about the matter of the lease. It is just too long for a property of this kind.

Another thing, what is the current value of the property we are giving away? We have been given certain figures here and there, four percent of this, one percent of that and 10 percent of the other. We really want to have a proper valuation by a government valuer. We should know the value of the property we are giving away. 

Madam Speaker, this question of due diligence comes up again. We know that with one company, which is exploiting us now, we did the due diligence on the wrong company and not the one we signed an agreement with. Did we do due diligence with Serena or Aga Khan Economic Development blah, blah? We want to know, who did we do due diligence with? 

I am really concerned about our professionalism in the Government. Who is doing this evaluation? Some first secretary somewhere or second secretary in some embassy, or did we engage a professional group to do a due diligence on this company? 

Even in the concession itself, I have serious doubts about the Attorney General and I am glad he is here. Madam Speaker, I now doubt the capacity of our lawyers to do a good job for us. We have lost up to Shs 250 billion due to either lack of complicity on the part of the Attorney General –(Mr Ayume rose_) Yes, say something. (Laughter)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know exactly where hon. Awori gets his information. If it is from newspapers, then I can understand. And if it is from newspapers, I would like to also refer him to today’s newspaper where the Attorney General won a case in which the Ministry of Finance is going to be saved from paying Shs 1 billion to a bank. 

The point is that, in my experience of long service as a government lawyer, right from the 60s, when the DPP or the Attorney General loses a case it is all over the place, but when he or she wins a case, it is stuck somewhere. I think our problem is lack of proper information. So, we end up dwelling on issues, which are not really the rule but the exception. 

Secondly, I would like to inform hon. Awori that as lawyers, when you go to court there are always two sides to the coin. You expect to either lose or win. It does not necessarily mean that when you lose a case you have not done well. Because there is the third person whose responsibility is to arbitrate, and that is the judge. 

So, I really do not think that it is correct to say that the Attorney General is conniving with other people in order to cause loses to the Government. I think that is a very unfair statement.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I have been challenged by the Attorney General. I am glad he is not in a court of law because I am not a lawyer, but I can defend myself. Number one, could the Attorney General tell us the circumstances surrounding the interdiction of Deo Bamugisha. What happened? 

Two, how come you have suspended other parties in the Solicitor General’s office, people who are supposed to be defending us? There must be a problem in the Attorney General’s chambers. 

Madam Speaker, at one time the Attorney General bought space in the newspapers at the cost of Shs 3 million to defend himself against the Ministry of Finance, because there was a problem between the Ministry of Finance and the Attorney General’s chambers. It made this country lose Shs 6 billion. You are just busy blaming each other and yet for us reading between the lines we could see complicity. 

Given the immunity of Parliament, I can challenge you that there are cases coming up where we think the lawyers in the private sector who are defending other people have compared notes with lawyers in the Attorney General’s office. In the end, the Government has needlessly lost money and at some stage we need to decide this matter on this Floor. We are losing money all the time. 

Madam Speaker, I am emphasizing this point because I suspect this agreement again is not properly framed, even the terms of reference. I give it to the honourable minister responsible for this affair because he is a new comer to this industry, but the other people, I am suspecting them. Definitely, this agreement needs to be looked at once again. (Interruption)

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, there is a matter of grave importance which the honourable member has just said. If we simply gloss over it, people may never understand us. 

If the honourable member has knowledge of people who are colluding to steal money from Government and just stops at that, without giving details so that ministers and other people can take up matters, we shall not be doing our work. I think the honourable member should really give us the details so that action can be taken, because this is a very serious matter.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I intend to bring a substantive motion on the Floor of this august House that all the cases where the Government has lost, amounting to about Shs 250 billion in court awards, once again be investigated. There are people who are conniving with the other part, the litigants, for the Government to lose money. 

I am not going to withdraw this remark but at the appropriate time I intend to bring a motion –(Interruption).

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam chairperson, and I thank hon. Aggrey Awori –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, why are you calling me, Madam Chairperson? Everybody is calling me Chairperson today. We are not in committee.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I apologize. You are right; you have to assert power.  

Madam Speaker, what hon. Aggrey Awori has brought up is a serious issue and it should be seriously investigated. I will give you a small piece of information on this. 

There is a case of Transroad, which is a very glittering case. Government of Uganda entered into a transaction with this company to supply railway wagons. They did supply and Government paid them by promissory notes. These promissory notes were liquidated until one of about US $3 million remained. Government of Uganda refused to pay until they went to court, and we paid US $16 million instead of the US $3 million. The lawyers were paid about US $3 million.  

Now you can imagine, you know the debt exists but you want to go to court so that you exaggerate and you are paid. What hon. Aggrey Awori is bringing up is a serious issue, and this Government of ours has kept lying us until maybe we shall die.  

I want to add a last example before I sit down. There is a bank in Spain, which lent us US $1 million. When they wanted their money, we refused to pay back. Government said, “We will go to court” and yet they had evidence that we should pay them US $1 million. 

In the end, the hon. Minister of Finance paid a good amount of money, not less than US $6 million and the lawyers were paid about US $2 million. You can imagine! Who ate the lawyers’ money? Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, what hon. Awori is saying is very important. But you see, I thought we should be advising the Minister on how to improve on this agreement. Now we have gone into court cases and yet you have said you are going to bring a motion. 

So, can we really leave that line of the motion, and I hope you will bring it. Let us concentrate on improving what we have seen. I think that will help all of us. Hon. Awori, I think you had finished.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, as I said, I gave away my time for the purpose of allowing my colleagues to throw more light on the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have taken 25 minutes, hon. Awori.

MR AWORI: Out of which I used only five minutes.  Anyway, I cannot argue with my Speaker. Also, procedurally, an honourable minister cannot make a contribution on behalf of a colleague who is present. So, you wait until you are available.  

Madam Speaker, to wind up I would like to know from the hon. Minister how many rooms we are going to get in the end. Are we going to keep the same number of rooms, fewer rooms, or more?  

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, I would recommend that this matter be referred to the following committees with the substantive papers, such as the proposed agreement, before we pronounce ourselves or before we allow the Government to proceed with this concession: The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Committee on Trade.  

They have to look at this agreement line by line, word by word, and come back to this august House and recommend that we either proceed or we do not proceed with the agreement. Given the recent history and the kind of money we have lost, Madam Speaker, I am most reluctant to recommend this concession.

11.40
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I go further, I would like to seek a correction from Page 1 of this statement. The second bit of paragraph 4 says, “While Government of Uganda will not invest additional funds…”  

Synchronize that with page 2 where it says, “The bidders have also undertaken to take on all existing employees. However, because the employees will be working with the concessionaire and will cease being employed by Nile Hotel International Ltd, the employees’ terminal benefits will be paid by the Government of Uganda.”  

Terminal benefits, Madam Speaker, can be very substantial. So, that could actually turn out to be a big investment by Government. In fact they do not tell us how much will be paid in terms of terminal benefits or how much is estimated to be paid, because it could turn out that Government is not making an investment.

I see us as sitting at a board meeting in a company, because Government owns Nile Hotel International 100 percent. We could turn ourselves into a board of directors because we are now talking on behalf of our people who own this hotel. Now, if you go to a board of directors’ meeting, this statement would not be satisfactory because you would be expecting a financial statement. 

At a board meeting you would expect a financial statement, because essentially what we are going to do is to sell this company - what are we selling, how much is it worth, that kind of thing. These figures are not enough. Because of that, I am endorsing the statement that the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Tourism and that on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should look at these thoroughly.

Investment and privatisation are good things.  Unfortunately, the track record we have is not very good. It is really amazing because out of all the ministries, the Ministry of Finance is practically a law firm. Look at the bright brains, the lawyers, they have - the law firm of Rukutana, Kutesa and Musumba; the brightest brains we have! 

Now I can only hope and pray that something good will come out of this. If it does not, I would like to have somebody who is going to be held accountable if anything goes wrong. I think that should be clear. Accountability is very important and somebody should put his head on the chopping block so that if anything goes wrong, we know who to hold accountable.

Looking at the income, you say we are going to earn US $0.1 million. I think hon. Bamwanga put it right, it is actually US $100,000. That is actually a lot of money. In fact if you look at how much you are going to be paid in terminal benefits, it will be about 10 times that. What we are earning is not something to write home about but we should compare it with what we have been earning, because I suspect we have been making a loss.  

Still on our expected income, the Minister says this on page 2: “The annual concession fee is computed at four percent of gross sales revenue (payable quarterly in advance against a business plan).  This is projected to range from US $0.1 million during renovation to US $0.5 million.” 

The question I have is - maybe our committee will ask this - which is which? Suppose one is higher than the other, which one do you take?  Suppose the four percent is higher than US $0.1 million, do we take the four percent or do we take the US $0.1 million? Normally, in a contract it is spelt out in terms of whichever is higher or whichever is lower, so we want that to be clear.

Finally, what action are we expected to take as a result of this conversation? Hon. Minister, are you seeking our approval, or are you informing us as a matter of courtesy? (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the hon. Bamwanga asked specifically for Parliament to be briefed on this matter last week. That is why the Minister came.

DR NKUUHE: That is good. I am so glad because if we are the shareholders on behalf of our people, then I think we need to be given more information. 

Mr Minister, we support all the efforts of privatising our enterprises and so forth, but I can assure you the track record we have is not good. By the way, even the track record world over where the World Bank and IMF have been operating under this scheme - you can read all the documents - a lot of them have tended to be a failure. 

We have had a few successes but those successes are companies, which went to the original owners, for instance, BAT, Coca Cola. They went to the original owners and did very well. 

Mr Minister, I think to save your name in future, because you have a name to defend in future, we want to make sure that in this thing nothing goes wrong. First of all, we want to know who started all these negotiations. In Uganda there is always some sort of undercurrent. We want to know whether there were some invisible hands, which really might endanger our investment. I thank you.

11.47
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the Minister was reading the statement I was shedding tears. This country has not benefited from the sale of public enterprises. The Baganda have got a proverb which says “Sekawuka kaali kakulumye, bwolaba omusota…” It means that after a bitter experience, when you see a snake you run so fast.  

Madam Speaker, I call upon all the Members of Parliament here present to exercise their responsibilities to ensure that they check the products of taxation, with reference to the chapter on the role of Parliament. 

Before I say anything, let me revisit the words of one philosopher. One of the greatest Parliamentarians, by the name of Edmund Burke, said this at one time: “The cardinal role of a Member of Parliament is to follow up the interests of taxpayers up to a rightful conclusion”. 
 
Madam Speaker, from what we saw in the UCB saga, we do not even know whether what we are deliberating will come out with any fruits. We want assurance from the Attorney General that we are not deliberating for the sake of deliberating. If we spot a mistake, the mistake should be put right.  

Madam Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda on a number of occasions meets at the International Conference Centre. So, it is important for us to take trouble to keep and protect that establishment. You know that this Parliament is too small to accommodate many of us, especially when we have functions like the budget - (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that that property stands on the same title deed as this august House. So, our interests must be protected. We want to know whether you have now separated that title deed from the parliamentary title deed. Otherwise, you might never know the complications later.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, I wish to assure you and this Parliament that this House stands on a freehold title held by Uganda Land Commission. It used to be the same title on which the Nile Hotel Complex stood but when the transactions over which we are deliberating came, on the surface a leasehold title was created out of this freehold.  

Therefore, Nile Hotel stands on a leasehold title for 49 years, but the titleholder is the hotel on the leasehold. The parent title is held by the Uganda Land Commission and it includes Parliament and other establishments of government, but the leasehold is in respect of the hotel alone.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Madam Speaker, the lamentations of the Minister of State in charge of Lands can demonstrate how troubled we are. If the whole minister does not even know the status quo of titles, then where are we going?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, hon. Lukyamuzi, the minister has just explained that the title deed on which the Nile Hotel stands has a lease of 49 years and a separate title deed from the one of Parliament. He has explained that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: You are assisting him to explain that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The point I am articulating is very important. I have heard and listened to the Minister in charge of Privatisation. I did not get any sense of him trying successfully to explain to the taxpayer why we should dispose of the Conference Centre and Nile Hotel. 

Madam Speaker, development does not mean profit-making alone. This is an assembly, which must be valued by every Government in Uganda. 

That establishment has been making profits but for the last year or so, the President’s Office has made it an army barracks. So, it becomes difficult for the public to penetrate. It becomes difficult to make effective profits to create room for Prof. Kasenene and others to sell it. This is a serious matter. 

The people who predominantly occupy the offices in that International Conference Centre are all relatives of the President. They have deliberately made it difficult for the place to make profits so that the Kasenenes can find ways of selling it off.

At an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I shall move that the sale of this great establishment be stayed in public interest. We are about to host the Commonwealth Heads of State Summit, we should be proud of a property, which we nationally own. Any attempt to dispose of it impacts on our sovereignty as a state. 

On a number of occasions, big conferences are held at the International Conference Centre. I speak about chairpersons of LC V, RDCs and Members of Parliament. We must also own some property as a nation. 

Those countries that have been having privatisation over the years, including Britain and France, own some properties of their own too. Why not Uganda? If the Government is unable to understand the national interest of this country, let it resign so that we take over –(Interjection)- Yes this is a serious matter. (Interruption).

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, we cannot afford to allow hon. Lukyamuzi to continue making wild allegations without substantiating. As far as I know, Nile Hotel has got offices that they rent out. Nile Hotel has got shops they rent out. 

When he stands up and says, “the relatives of the President occupy Nile Hotel” without substantiating, it is a very big allegation. We want him to substantiate, because I know that most of the people who are on those premises pay rent. Can he substantiate who those relatives and friends of the President are? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, if you want some minimal substantiation, I can do so. One of the occupants of the offices mentioned is one Rwabwogo, a son-in-law of the President. Several others –(Interruption).

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like hon. Lukyamuzi to clarify whether Mr Rwabwogo is not a fully registered tenant of Nile Hotel, whether he is not paying? Is he not entitled as a Ugandan?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I would want hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to clarify whether Property Masters, who own about four offices in Nile Hotel, are also relatives of President Museveni?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Property Masters’ issue is irrelevant to the situation, so it should not loom largely in this scenario. 

However, the point I articulated as I began still remains unabated. Because of this relativity in terms of the commitment to His Excellency the President vis-à-vis the security, which is looming so large that the public gets scared, the entire area has been taken by one common scene related to the presidency. What else don’t you understand? 

I am arguing comparatively that because of this situation, for the last year or so the public has not readily accessed the place. And that was deliberately done so that the hotel is seen not to be making profits when in actual fact it has been making good profits. 

So, I put it to them that they are making it lame in order for it to be saleable, and we are rejecting this because we speak for the taxpayers in this country (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Having not been challenged at any one stage, at an appropriate time I will beg you in public interest to stay the sale of this important magnanimous centre as the committee in charge of finance investigates. Thank you very much indeed.

12.00
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for having presented to us matters concerning the sale of Nile Hotel. 

As I stated earlier while I was giving information to hon. Muzoora, I do not think that at this time we are competent enough to talk at length about the sale of Nile Hotel. This is because the information we have received from the honourable Minister of State in charge of Privatisation is very scanty. 

It is my humble request that the concerned and relevant committees, especially the Committee on Finance, do the donkeywork by scrutinising step by step all that has been done. 

We have been convinced here that the agreement has not been signed but the process is ongoing. So, I think it would be prudent enough for us to let the relevant committees, especially the Committee on Finance, scrutinise all the steps that have been taken and then come up with a report. After receiving that report, then the members will be informed about the “whys” and “hows”. We can then debate on this issue with some knowledge.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we have seen various scenarios in this House especially concerning privatisation, the most recent being the UCB saga. A position was unanimously agreed on and resolved by this House, and the Hansard can bear witness, but the Government went ahead to sell the people’s bank. 

Now the Minister has already informed us that arrangements have been advanced to do the same to Nile Hotel. It does ring a bell about all our efforts as Members of Parliament. Putting in mind what transpired with UCB sale, I think it would be better for the Government to inform us at an earlier stage that they have already finalised everything and they do not intend, at any one time, to reverse the decisions they have already taken. So that we can discuss other issues and put it on record for the next governments to see where things went wrong and put them right. 

We may take a lot of time, as we did with UCB, and at the end of the day the Government has a rigid stand that Nile Hotel should go. Let the Hansard be very clear as it is with UCB, so that the next government – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my good friend, hon. Sebaggala. He says that this House should investigate the matter to see how the property is going to be sold. Is he suggesting that this august House, which decided to move this property from Schedule IV to II whereby Government is authorised to dispose of minority shares and maintain majority shares, should revisit its decision? 

If that is the suggestion he is making, on what grounds should this House revisit its earlier decision, especially knowing that the proposed sale is not a sale but a concession where Government is maintaining 100 percent ownership?  

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for giving that clarification. What I must assure the Minister and honourable members is that we are not against privatisation per se, because it is a worldwide phenomenon. But the methodology that is being used is the one we are querying. That is why this House took a lot of time debating UCB and other related institutions that have already been sold. 

It is against that background that I am suggesting if we are doing whatever we are doing transparently, let each and every step be known by the relevant committees. Those committees will then come up with a report to this House. After presenting that report, we shall be in position to debate it after getting the required knowledge. 

I would like to request Government; if we have sold more than 100 parastatals, can’t we as the NRM Government have pride in reserving Nile Hotel? So that after 20 years in power the next government - which is our government - will be in position to thank the NRM Government for having kept the Nile Hotel as it is. I thank you.

12.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWERO (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the honourable members for expressing the concern that whatever deals are made, they should be the best deals. I think all of us here are in agreement – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is an established procedure in this august House that only one minister speaks on a particular topic. Other ministers can give information from time to time. But a substantive contribution from another minister, when the line minister is here to defend his ministry, to me looks a little bit irregular. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I am not really familiar with the procedure where ministers have to shut up and not say anything.  Maybe he has information, which will help the other minister to improve on his presentation.  

PROF. SEMAKULA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address the issue of hotel industry, and to thank the minister for having come forward with the proposition.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, if we are serious about the tourist industry in this country, there are two key elements we should look at, hotels and airlines. The two are linked. Therefore, if there is any move to improve the hotel industry, we are promoting a very vital sector in our economy, which is the tourist industry.  

Today worldwide, countries are investing. They are attracting investors to boost this vital sector.  In fact what the Minister has presented here is very good for this country. 

Governments are not in the business of owning hotels, but what is presented before us is not even a total divestiture. It is a concession, which means we are going to continue to own the property and assets in years to come. But for that asset and for us as a country to be competitive, we must have world-class hotels. 

Madam Speaker, I speak with worldwide experience.  Our Sheraton is a five-star hotel by concession to Uganda; it is not. If we are attracting an investor who can bring first-class hotel facilities here, that is the only way we are going to be in the business of attracting major international conferences, which today are major sources of income. 

Let us take the example of our brothers and sisters in South Africa. Every big city in South Africa has attracted investment in first-class hotels and first-class conference centres, because this is the order of the day. Last year at a United Nations conference, WSSD, which was attended by over 10,000 people, we were in Santon Johannesburg but we were informed that Cape Town is investing more in order to surpass that. 

Worldwide, old hotels are being transformed, being refurbished in order to cope with the new demands of conference services and modern tourists. 

So, what is happening here, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is that we are trying to move into the 21st Century. So far we cannot compete with other cities as far as hotel facilities are concerned, as far as conference services are concerned.  

Let me repeat, Madam Speaker, that the concerns expressed by honourable members are valid minus the unsubstantiated allegations. Divestiture and privatisation has been a learning process for even those countries, which were first in the field. 

I was a resident in the UK when they first embarked on privatisation. Mistakes were made along the way, which they have improved on. So we too, as Ugandans, we have made mistakes but we are learning from the process. 

My appeal to this august House is that we should not play a role, which frightens investors. This is absolutely important for us. People will go where they are welcome. They will go to other cities where they are welcome. 

I was reading in the East African yesterday that our neighbours in Kenya are launching a phase of new hotels and new conference services. So, the issue for us, as the hon. Minister has stated here, is to improve our competitive advantage within the region. Not just within the region of East Africa but in Africa and worldwide. 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, your concerns, that we make the best deals, are legitimate. But the question we also ought to ask is, do Serena Hotels have a track record? Are they bona-fide investors not just briefcase ones? 

Here we are very fortunate, just as we were with Sheraton Hotel, we have got investors who have got a track record in putting up the best hotel structures in inward standards. Therefore, we should not treat them as other briefcase investors.

On a final note, Madam Speaker, we should see the hotel industry as having a potential for the economic growth of this country. However, what I would like to see is a change of culture. I am a hotel person but sometimes I shudder when we have international conferences here and we give them free cakes, free tea, free water. 

I have not seen this treatment in any international conference I have been to. This is the only way to enrich our people, and this is where the honourable Minister mentions, in point five under benefits, the indirect employment and benefits to our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, item 4 also touches on privatisation. So, I would like us to wind up on this one and those who have not spoken will be able to chip in on the next item. I want to invite the Minister to respond.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform the hon. Minister and maybe ask for clarification. 

One time we were at Windsor Hotel, former Lake Victoria Hotel. This hotel was sold and according to the agreement it was actually given away almost free of charge, very cheaply. They agreed to expand it and build a flyover to the golf course. Up to now, nothing has been done. 

This is what is worrying members of this august House, agreements that are made and are not followed. We are just being cheated and we are not being fair to our nation. 

So, Madam Speaker, I wanted to support hon. Aggrey Awori’s proposal that this report be sent to the relevant committees for further consideration and maybe future assessment of all these agreements, so that we do not lose as we lost on Lake Victoria Hotel. Thank you.

12.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions. 

As I did at the beginning, I thank the House for giving me, on behalf of Government, an opportunity to inform the members on what we are doing, how we are doing it and the benefits that are going to accrue to this country. I would also now want to thank the members for their contributions and please, allow me to make a few clarifications.  

Hon. Bamwanga was concerned about the payment and wanted the Government to ensure that the agreed amount of money would be paid. I would like to assure him that, as I said in the report, the money will be paid upfront. The money will be paid before the signing of the agreement so we should not be worried about that. 

The second point the honourable member raised was the value of the hotel, and he estimated it at US$10 million. Actually, the current valuation, which was 30 April of this year, put the value of the hotel, indeed he is right, at US$12 million. 

But again we have to emphasise this point that Nile Hotel International is going to remain 100 percent owned by Government. It is not that the concessionaire will own part of this hotel. If I may use a Luganda word, to borrow from hon. Lukyamuzi, we are kupangisa we are not kutunda. For those who may not know Luganda - I do not whether that is Luganda - we are not selling, we are concessioning it. 

Someone will come and I will explain that this remains Ugandan property. The advantage is that it is going to be better and bigger property for this country. It is not that we are selling it so that the concessionaire will have it.  

Hon. Wadri said, “You should not harvest where you have not sown”. Unfortunately he is not here anymore, but that is exactly what we are doing by privatisation; there is need to sow if we have to keep this hotel moving, otherwise this hotel will come to a standstill. Those of you who have visited it know in what condition it is. There is need to sow more.  

Now, Government is not in position to invest more money in it. This policy of privatisation was passed by this House and we are not supposed to invest more money in any enterprises. Consequently what we are saying is that we should stop the privatisation process and kill it.

I am happy that hon. Wadri talked about Uganda Airlines. Honourable members know what happened when the privatisation process was derailed. The result is that Uganda Airlines is dead. Do you want to -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda Airlines went away but it had its routes. Can you tell us who took the routes of Uganda Airlines?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I was answering hon. Wadri’s question and commenting on what he said when comparing Uganda Airlines and Nile Hotel. And I was saying if we want to behave the way we behaved with Uganda Airlines, we shall have the same results we had with Uganda Airlines. 

That is why I would like to appeal to honourable members to help us not to go back and suffer the same way we suffered with Uganda Airlines. I think we should judge the merits of this privatisation in its own right, not looking at what happened in the past.

Honourable members know very well that whereas there were certain mistakes, which were made before, as hon. Sebaggala was pointing out, after a study that had been commissioned by this House the divesture procedure manual was instituted. Since then, we have never had a similar problem. 

I would like to appeal to honourable members that we should not take the advice of hon. Wadri who says, “let us not privatise Nile Hotel International”. It is tantamount to saying, “let us kill Nile Hotel International”.

I would like to thank hon. Muzoora for his comments. His concern was that the agreement should be looked at and we should not repeat mistakes that had been done in the past. I would like to assure him, as I had said, that the Attorney General is currently looking at this agreement and we shall not sign it until he has said that this is a good agreement that benefits the people of Uganda.  

Hon. Muzoora raised another point about the shares. He said how they are going to be distributed between Uganda Government and the concessionaire should be known; is it 51 or 49 percent? I would like to repeat that the shares in Nile Hotel International remain 100 percent government. The concessionaire is not getting even one share in Nile Hotel. 

If you may again allow me to use the same analogy, it is like when you own a house and you allow someone to stay there for two years and he pays you a certain amount. Whereas this person using the house is staying there and giving you rent, the house remains yours and in the end becomes yours. This is exactly what we are talking about by a concession. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Would you have a director on behalf of the people and the Government of Uganda represented on the board going to run the affairs, as an overseer?

MR MUTULUUZA: According to these papers we have, the Nile Hotel is going to be Kampala Serena Hotel.  Government owns Nile Hotel, now it is going to turn to Kampala Serena Hotel. May I get clarification?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the rent per year in the first 10 years is going to be US $0.1 million, which is about Shs 200 million. When you divide this by 12, it is about Shs 15.5 million per month. Is it true that the value of that premise is worth that much per month?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, hon. Awori wanted to know how Government interests would be taken care of, and that is the same issue hon. Musisi was asking about. 

I have said that Nile Hotel International is going to remain. It is the name of the hotel that is changing not the name of the company. The company called Nile Hotel International is going to remain a government company, 100 percent owned by Government. The residual company is the one that will continue to own the assets on behalf of Government like we have Uganda Property Holdings. Nile Hotel International will continue to own the assets on behalf of Government and will ensure that the agreement is honoured.

Another question that has been raised concerns the extension from 30 years to 50 years. Honourable members were concerned that if we extended the concession to 50 years, it would be too long. 

Indeed, hon. Bamwanga is right to say that in the agreement there is room for extension, but this extension is by mutual consent. If one of the parties does not want to extend, it will not extend. If Government does not want to extend after 30 years, it will not extend. So that should not be a concern. If we are advising Government that we should not extend, then Government will not extend. So that really is not -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, why don’t you provide that you leave it open? Do not talk about the 20 years. Why don’t you say that it may be reviewed? But now you are saying 30 and then 20.  Why are you specifying the 20?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that it is a good provision for the investor to know that there is a possibility of extending. But if they were to extend of course Government would come to Parliament. It would be a decision agreed upon by all of us. 

But it is a good inducement to attract an investor to invest knowing that once he does very well and there is good partnership, there is room for extension. So it is good tactic in business.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I think I am right to own this question; what the Minister has said about the four percent return or what Uganda will be getting out of the sales. I have said and will continue to say that when you talk of US $0.1 million, that is only US $100,000 per annum. So, it is between US$100,000 to US$550,000 per annum. 

I want to be convinced and to know, first, the rationale of arriving at four percent of the gross sales and two, why you have categorically stated the figures between US$100,000 and US$550,000 without actually knowing what the market will dictate at that time. In my view, provisions normally prefer to charge a percentage. It is the American style, which normally prefers to go on a negotiated flat figure. That is one question.

The second one that you have not clarified on - Members of Parliament who were in the Sixth Parliament remember when Nytil Picfare was privatised. That was a privatisation. The person who bought this hotel paid US$2.1 million and somehow by a miracle, he got access to our title and raised the balance from CDC. 

According to the Registration of Titles Act, and I am glad to see all the lawyers here, any sublease that is above three years is registable on the title. I want it to be on the record of Hansard that if this sublease of 30 years is going to be put on this title, our God-sent investor will not have access to the land title to raise the money.  

We hope that he is going to bring in physical money, not the Kananathan style. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, many members made a proposal, which I think has got the support of the House, that this matter should go to the Committee on Finance because it is the committee responsible for privatisation. 

For the Minister to have come with this document straight to the House without going via the committee! I know the circumstances, but I think it is important so that the questions that members are raising are answered. 

Hon. Steven Bamwanga is a very highly qualified valuer and he is raising an issue, which I think is very crucial indeed, on the rent and the lease. These are issues, which cannot be sorted out in a plenary. These are issues, which can be best sorted out in a committee. 

I think the Minister will be happy to carry everybody on board so that if anything goes wrong, at least he would know that the Committee of Parliament and the entire Parliament was in the know and everybody is on board. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion. 

Rather than continuing to raise questions, which should be raised in the committee, I move that this matter be committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. And that they should take the liberty to co-opt any of the members they consider would be useful in their deliberations from other committees, so that they report to us as soon as possible. They could report maybe in two weeks, rather than us raising detailed issues that cannot be sorted out in a plenary. So, I wish to move, Madam Speaker.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I thought the Minister in charge of Privatisation was still responding. So, is it competent to introduce a motion before he has finished his response?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think it is important for the Minister to finish the response because some of us will not be able to attend your committee and we would also like to understand what is going on. Just hold on to that motion.

PROF. KASENENE: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for the ruling, which gives me an opportunity -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I think this matter should not be taken for granted. Recently, in this House of Parliament, we heard that the Aga Khan Foundation was exempted from taxes, and it is going to be one of the co-financers here. The implication is that at the end of the day the money, which Nile Hotel will produce with all those people who will be there, will leave this country tax-free. 

Now you come here and get a minister talking about corporate tax, VAT; Madam Speaker, it is just cosmetic, just to come and lie to us. That is why I would support hon. Mwandha’s motion that we put this off –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, we have not rejected the motion. We have just stayed it so that we can listen to the Minister. I was in the Chair when we were stipulating which institutions are exempt from tax. There were a number of institutions; it did not include Nile Hotel or Serena.

PROF. KASENENE: On that point, Madam Speaker, there is a difference - and that is why we have put it here - between the Aga Khan Foundation and Serena Tourism Promotion Services. These are two different bodies and we cannot confuse the two.  

Madam Speaker, I will be fast and clarify the points that were raised. As to the valuation of the property, a member asked whether it was done by a competent valuer. Yes, the due diligence was done by a company called Bahemuka Johnson and Nyende Company, which is a very well known professional company in this country. 

Madam Speaker, one point I would like the members to bear in mind is that we are talking about a timeframe. We are saying US $1.2 million will be paid upfront. Within two years from the time we sign the agreement, the company will have invested US $19 million. So, the question of saying, “what if they do not pay in future” does not arise. 

Also, within these two years the concessionaire is giving Government US $3 million bond, as you saw in our report. Should the concessionaire falter in any way, they lose the US $3 million. So, between now and two years, the assets of Government will have moved form US $12 million, the current value, to US $31 million. This is a deal, honourable members, which we should not lose.  

Hon. Awori wanted to know the number of rooms The renovation and expansion will take two phases.  Currently the number of rooms in Nile Hotel is 85. In the first phase, which means two years from now, we will have 146 rooms Then in phase two, an additional 58 rooms will be constructed. So, we are talking about this arrangement moving from 85 rooms to over 200 rooms within four years. And so, really, I believe that this is a deal that we should approve without hesitation. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: That is accommodation – beds. What about conference facilities? 

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, maybe I will summarise what we said about the new additions that are going to happen. One, in the first phase there is a re-configuration of the rooms of the existing hotel, and that means moving from 85 to 146 rooms 

This will be achieved through construction of an additional floor on the existing hotel and a short wing on the right hand side, if you are facing the hotel. This will be expected within two years from now, and there is a bid bond of US $3 million, which they will forfeit if they fail to do that. 

The new structure will have 122 standard rooms, 12 deluxe standard rooms, four superior suites, one senior suite and the VIP suite. That is in the first phase. 

If you look at page 2 of the artistic impression, which I gave you, there would be a new structure on the left hand side. That is phase two. It will be made up of 58 rooms So, at the end of the two phases we will have 128 standard rooms, 37 deluxe standard rooms, 16 executive suites and two Presidential suites. Honourable members, I think this is a good deal for this country. 

Conferencing: Hon. Awori was asking, “What about the Conference Centre?” Let us look at No.5 of the artistic impressions we gave you. The concessionaire has undertaken to re-configurate the main hall. Let us look at No.5 together with No.6, the last page. Page 5 gives you the existing conference centre functions and page 6 is what it is going to look like. 

Honourable members, those of you who have been travelling and have been to international conference centres both in South Africa or Europe have seen this type of phenomenon. There is going to be a reconfiguration of the main hall into a flexible multipurpose hall for large conferences as per current layout. That will be one option. 

Then there will be sporting activities such as basketball, if the country wants to host an international boxing tournament, as you can see on the top right hand side. The hall will be automated in such a way that you can change it from one facility to another. So, if there is need, the same hall could be made into large banquet halls or made possible for large music concerts and similar social events. 

This is a modern facility that we are going to have, which we could not manage to establish with our own funds. In addition, the concessionaire has undertaken to add recreational and health facilities. There will be a swimming pool, a health club, tennis courts and other water features as you can see in No.3 (Interruption)  

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, with all these brilliant plans why can’t this concessionaire be given alternative land to put up a new structure of this type? (Applause)

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, we are talking about implementing Government policy of privatisation of Nile Hotel, which we don’t want to kill. It is in such a terrible state that we are trying to rescue it. 

So, instead of inviting a green field investor, now that we are getting one to rehabilitate and ensure the continuity of the existing facilities, which are dilapidated, we should be happy. The next stage would be to invite other investors to put up other hotels if need be. (Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, just to help the members to understand, Nile Hotel and the International Conference Centre are sitting on 17 acres of land. This is very prime land in the city centre. Therefore, it is only fair that we should utilise that land rather than having to send somebody out there. 

At the moment the buildings are on very large acreage, that is why we should be able to utilise that land. This time I will support you on that.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Given that this a big investment, it is very good. I know privatisation is a good process, which we have started and which was brought up by World Bank. That is why they lent us US $48 million to privatise. 

Now you are saying Nile Hotel is in a bad state. You go there right now, you are not allowed to park. You go there and you want to enjoy life, but they tell you “go and park out” when there are other hotels! Who has caused it? Have you caused it so that we can say Nile Hotel is non profitable in a sense because of security reasons, so that we can be able to sell? Is that the reasoning? 

I want to quote something from a well-read professor. Prof. Joseph Stiglitz is a widely known economist and he wrote, “But in contrast to what it is supposed to do, privatisation has made matters so much worse that in many countries today privatisation is jokingly referred to as ‘bribalisation’.”  Thank you.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, hon. Mafabi is quoting one professor and there is another professor now on the Floor -(Laughter)- saying that privatisation is a pro-people activity, which we should support.  

Madam Speaker, I was trying to finish explaining the benefits as far as the expansion of this hotel is concerned. I would like to appeal to honourable members not to wait to give the Attorney General opportunity to look through this agreement and if he is satisfied to sign, because this is an opportunity we may not get.  

In addition, the concessionaire is going to put up new guest and service lifts. The concessionaire has also undertaken to construct new flexible multi-use spaces of functional rooms of up to 300 people. Madam Speaker, all this is to be done within four years. Phase I is two years; the second phase four years.  

Hon. Nkuuhe was refuting my statement where I said that Government is not going to invest any money in this and he referred to statement that we are paying terminal benefits. Madam Speaker, it is the policy of Government that no worker who is affected by privatisation should suffer. We pay terminal benefits to all the workers. 

In addition, I am sure hon. Nkuuhe knows that terminal benefits are not an investment. So, there is no investment. When we are paying terminal benefits that is not investment.

Hon. Nkuuhe also wanted me to assure the House, to put my head on the guillotine and ensure that the process is successful. I would like to assure the honourable members that I have studied the documents concerning this privatisation of Nile Hotel. To the best of my knowledge, I want to assure you that this process will be successful.

Hon. Sebaggala raised one point of methodology and said that the House is not opposed to privatisation but to the methodology. He wanted Parliament to go through all the various stages of the bid process.

Honourable members, I think Parliament has more serious issues and decisions to make, and this should be left to technocrats so that Parliament receives a report of what was done. In addition, we have many institutions in place, which would check this process. We have the Auditor General, we have the Attorney General; we have technocrats.  

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to appeal to this House to allow us to go ahead with this process. One, as of now the Government is not making any money in Nile Hotel International. On the contrary, it is losing money. 

I have heard some member at the back asking why. It has been said again and again, even today, that Government is not a good businessperson. When Government is involved in doing business, it is inevitable that things will not work. 

So, the hotel is not making money; on the contrary, it is losing money. Two, according to the Government policy, which was passed by this House, we do not even have money to put into that. And failure or even delay to privatise may mean a case like Uganda Airlines, which was referred to.  

Secondly, the current value of Nile Hotel International is US $12 million. At the end of four years the assets owned by the Government of Uganda will be US $42 million. That includes the US $12 million we have, and the concessionaire has undertaken within four years to invest another US $30 million. What more do we need, honourable members? Can we have a better deal than this one?

MR AWORI: Do you have a provision in that draft agreement for an exit clause whereby in event of difficulties we can say, “go home and we keep our property”?

MR BAMWANGA: This is my last request on the same question. Madam Speaker, I want Prof. Kasenene to stand on his feet and it is put on the record of the Hansard - because he has been dodging it all the time - that this time round our God-sent investor will not access the title deed for the Conference Centre and Nile Hotel to raise money locally or internationally. Please, I want you to be on record so that the future generations will judge us posthumously.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think hon. Bamwanga is asking too much. Do you want a concessionaire to come and put US $30 million and yet he does not have a title where he is putting his money? 

What we are saying is that we are concessioning the assets, he is getting a lease. We shall lease the land to the concessionaire to be sure that he is investing his money in land that he has control of.  

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague is very clear in his concern, and it is our concern. Will this new investor have access to the title deed for any purpose? 

We are expressing concern; we do not want a concessionaire investor to use our own asset to raise capital. Let him come with his own money, we shall guarantee him as a Government that this property will always be there. But for him to access, no!

MR BAMWANGA: I am not saying that the concessionaire should not be given a lease or a sub-lease. I am emphasising that the same thing happened in Nytil Picfare and we had the then Minister of Privatisation, hon. Manzi Tumubweinee, saying “I did not know how the title got out of our hands”. 

You have a lease of 30 years, you have said you have not sold; you are concessionairing. How can you, therefore, allow him to use this leasehold document to raise the US $30 million to invest in the so-called new enterprise?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to supplement my honourable colleague’s calling with another example. Again the same Privatisation Unit gave a title deed belonging to us for Masese Fish Processing Factory to somebody who wanted to privatise it. He was given the title deed before he even put any money down. 

He went to East African Development Bank and borrowed US $1.1 million. He never paid the money to the bank and he never paid us the money. He got US $1.1 million. Up to now we have never resolved that case.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, we are not living in a world devoid of all the international norms and procedures of doing business. You cannot have your cake and eat it. We are giving a sub-lease of 30 years to the investor. 

When you give a sub-lease, your rights in that piece of land for that period are transferred onto the leaser. He can do anything that he wants only that you can, in the lease, tie him to say, “Do not do a, b, c, d without my prior consent”. 

I would appreciate maybe if hon. Bamwanga were proposing that Serena should not lease the property without consent of Government. But to say that we should tie their hands when this is a commercial transaction, really, no law, whether it is common law or other laws, will imply such an intention on the part of a person who is leasing out his land, provided of course that the mortgaging -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think it is paramount that the Minister helps us by presenting the lease terms so that we really understand what commercial lease terms you are talking of. We can then talk and contribute from a more informed point of view. So, what is the lease term that you are proposing, which will not at the end of the day deny us of our property, like it has happened in the past?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the lease term is 30 years and even if that land was mortgaged, even if there was to be a default, whoever takes that lease will take it subject to the conditions stipulated in the lease. So that at the expiry of 30 years –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not a lawyer but I have seen a lease. When you lease land, you pay a premium; you pay ground rent. For us we are leasing land, we are leasing buildings, we do not know the premium and you are telling us 30 years! Why do you come here; that the lease is for these buildings, the lease is for the land, this is the rent for the land and this is the rent for the building?

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Can I first finish?

MR BAMWANGA: I just want to finish also. I am not really convinced this time. Madam Speaker, I am the one who is asking this question and I want to be satisfied, otherwise I will not be happy in my heart. 

Hon. Rukutana has now changed my heart. I thought all along that when we agreed that they are going to be given a lease. Obviously I raised this because I knew leases are registrable on a title. We have got an equity contribution of US $12 million in the brick and mortar and land in the Conference Centre and Nile Hotel. 

This gentleman, the God-sent investor, is coming here and you are saying we should not tie his hands? He can now go out and raise the US $30 million using our US $12 million equity, our buildings and our land! 

He will go with his briefcase and get money yet what he has staked out is only the land title for Nile Hotel. I am not happy about that statement. We need a committee to go through the whole document and observe what is happening. (Applause).

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, it is not feasible that immediately after signing the lease the investor can take the title and pledge it for US $30 million, because that land is not worth that money and no –(Interruptions)

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. The more the Minister explains the more questions come from Members of Parliament, which cannot be explained right now. That is why I think that the questions that come from the members justify hon. Mwandha’s motion, that we send this matter to the Committee of Finance. They will investigate all these arguments and finally, Parliament will competently debate the report. (Applause). I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, what the members are really questioning is the principle of the investor using our own property to raise funds, thus putting the property at risk. That is what the members are really worried about.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I did not say that the investor intends to use our title, because I do not have that knowledge. All I said was that it would not be commercially prudent to tie his hands. 

He has not said so, but it would be imprudent to tie an investor’s hands when he has earned a lease to utilize the lease title the way he wants to. You see, whatever interest he has can only be interest as is stipulated in the lease. 

His dealings, whether by way of mortgage or whatever, can only be restricted to the interest that is contained in the lease and for the specific period. What do we lose as government? Our aim will be to ensure that our reversion is there after the 30 years. 

I think, Madam Speaker, all we need is to understand the technical implication of the lease.  The technical implication of a lease is that the sub-leaser has just that interest, and the owner of the land retains the reversion after the expiry of the specified period. 

No matter what has been done with that land, the reversion goes back to the owner of the land. Whether the land was mortgaged or what, whoever takes it on mortgage takes it subject to the conditions stipulated in the lease. As I said, I am not in any way suggesting that Serena intends to mortgage the lease.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there any harm in the committee looking at the terms of that lease?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, as long as the committee, in looking at all these things, is not going to frustrate the process.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I beg that you exercise your powers under Rule 59. For avoidance of doubt, what I meant by requesting that you invoke Rule 59 - I will read the rule. It says:
  
“If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be heard no more.” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, looking at this lease is to me the usual oversight role of the Parliament in the normal course of their duties. So, I would not want to see a situation where obstruction is imputed. This is just the usual oversight role, but you are worried that they are going to obstruct you. They are not going to obstruct anything.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of the honourable members, but I would like to appeal to them to also appreciate our concerns. 

I would concede taking the matter to the Committee on Finance, but I would like to appeal to you to you give us a timeframe so that we do it as soon as possible and come back to the House.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I, too, appreciate the concern of everybody to make sure that the people of Uganda do not get a raw deal in this investor taking over Nile Hotel on leasehold. 

However, my appeal - and this is the information I am giving the Minister - is that we should all be conscious that we have had experiences where delays have made the country lose big quantities of money and even national pride, like in the case of Uganda Airlines. 

We should also recall that in this hotel we are talking about, during some other governments members at that time happened to sit in this House, but it was a killing chamber. They were throwing dead bodies there. You know, it is an issue, yet we are talking about politics. So, we cannot be derailed by the same people who were using it as a torture house - (Interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, are you exchanging words with the Minister of Health? 

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, could hon. Aggrey Awori substantiate what he is saying, that I killed people? He has said it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think hon. Awori was on record.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am not on record as having made such an allegation. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us move on. I think we are in agreement that the Committee on Finance should work with the Minister, examine the documents in their usual oversight role and report back to this House. Can we do that in one week? I want to include the time factor.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, at most we can do it in two weeks. The questions raised here, especially when you are dealing with business, you are looking at the assets, the profitability, the legal framework, and you do a cost-benefit analysis. You are also putting in place safeguards. 

I will give an example. The investor is promising to bring here something like US $30 million. Who is there to oversee that actually what has come in is US $30 million? We need to take some time, get together with the Minister and come out with something that has no big leakages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion as moved by hon. Mwandha be approved by this House and that the Committee of Finance do report back at the end of two weeks.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
1.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand to correct an erroneous impression that was created in the New Vision newspaper. It was alleged that the Minister of Finance has defied the directive of this House to release Shs 233 million to pay living-out allowances to the striking students of Makerere University Business School. 

Contrary to that allegation I have proof here that on the 27th of November, when I left this House with the promise that I was going to work on the issue, we made the release. I have seen it on record that my colleague, hon. Musumba, the following day read to you the letter of release of the Shs 233 million to Makerere University Business School. 

When I saw this article this morning, I fished for all the relevant documents and I am happy to lay on the Table a cash release dated 28 November 2003. 

I am also happy to lay on the Table a letter written to the Bank of Uganda, forwarding the cheque. This letter is dated 28 November 2003 and it is entitled, “Transfer of Funds to Makerere University Business School”. It says:

“Enclosed herewith please find cheque No. Bank of Uganda/U058274 for Uganda Shillings 233,800,000 being transfer of funds from Uganda Consolidated Fund, Standard Chartered Bank Limited account. This payment is to cover living-out allowances for the students. We have attached showing the breakdown of the payment for Makerere University Business School. 

We should be grateful if you pass the entries crediting Standard Chartered Bank Limited account, which is Makerere University Business School’s account, and Bank of Uganda is hereby requested to quote the reference: Living-out Allowances for Students.” 

This was on the 28th. So, anybody addressing such an important institution and telling a lie that the Ministry of Finance has not up to today released the money, I think should be -(Interjections)- those are the words of the honourable members, and I wish they could be implemented.  

Madam Speaker, not only did we promptly respond to the directive of this House, we also ensured that whatever we were doing, the Principal and the Bursar of the Business School were kept in the know. I fail to understand their motive in coming to tell a lie to a committee of this august House, when they know that funds have already been released. 

I fail to understand why they purport to be diverting money for paying teachers to pay allowances when they know that the money is already on the account. That shows the mala fides that these people, or the administration of Makerere University Business School have been acting with, and I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you formally lay them on the Table, Mr Minister?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I lay the documents on the Table for anybody to refer to. I have explained and let me explain again, this is a cash release dated the 28th of November 2003. It is No. 005128 of Shs 233,800,000 million. That is document No. 1. 

Document No. 2 is dated 27 November 2003. It is a letter of special release of Shs 233,800,000 on Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School. It is addressed to the Accountant General, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, authorizing the release of Shs 233,800,000. 

Madam Speaker, No. 3 is a budget funds’ movement form. It is form No. 027 for the 11th month of the year 2003 and it is releases, verifications and supplementaries. It is dated 27 November 2003, Vote 138, transaction 01, item 01, code 59, programme 01, item 262103, amount Shs 233,800,000. 

I lay the documents on the Table for you to discern who, between Makerere University Business School and the Ministry of Finance, are liars.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall last week we asked the Committee of Social Services to look at this matter and report back today. So, we shall defer any debate on this to a later day when they bring their report so that we move together. But they are late.

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give information to hon. Rukutana because I attended the meeting yesterday. Unfortunately, the Social Services Committee is not here. 

I have not read what is reported in the papers today but I remember in the meeting the Principal was asked whether he had paid the money. He said that the process had started and that pending the maturity of the cheque, he was going to divert money to pay living-out allowances. 

The impression, which is being created here is as if the Principal told a lie. But according to what I heard yesterday and what hon. Rukutana is saying today, I do not think the Principal told a lie. Maybe the reporting was what makes the two accounts different. I just wanted to make that clarification.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO. 26 OF 2002 ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE PERD STATUTE 1993

1.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, at long last this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Statutory Instrument No. 26 of 2002 on the amendment of the First Schedule of the PERD Statute.

Introduction. 

Madam Speaker, the Statutory Instrument on PERD was laid on the Table in accordance with section 31 of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture (PERD) (Amendment) Act, 1998. 

The instrument was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee has accordingly considered the instrument and wishes to report to the House the findings and recommendations.

Methodology.

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance and his technical team. The committee also met with officials from the following affected enterprises: 

    1. National Medical Stores,
    2. Uganda Seeds Limited, and 
    3. Mandela National Stadium.

The following documents were also considered:

    1. PERD Statute, 1993.
    2. PERD (Amendment) Act, 1998.
    3. The management accounts for the year ended 2002 of Uganda Seeds Ltd.
    4. The report of the Committee on Social Services on the site visit to the National Medical Stores. 
    5. The loan agreement between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and African Development Fund (ADF).

The committee also held a joint meeting with the Committee on Social Services.

Statutory Instrument No. 26 of 2002:

Madam Speaker, the Statutory Instrument was issued by the Minister in accordance with section 31(1) of the PERD Statute, 1993. 

The instrument seeks to amend the First Schedule to the PERD Statute by inserting in Class II the National Medical Stores, Uganda Seeds Ltd and Mandela National Stadium. It should be noted that these enterprises were initially not classified under the PERD Statute.

National Medical Stores.

National Medical Stores (NMS) was established by Statutory Instrument No. 12 of 1993 to efficiently procure in bulk, to store and distribute drugs and medicine supplies to the health sector, both private and public. 

The National Medical Stores has done tremendous work in providing good quality drugs to the population especially to Mulago National Referral Hospital. The organization has enabled Ugandans to have drugs of long shelf life especially those that are rare and not profitable.

Observations.

The committee made the following observations, which the management and the Board of National Medical Stores agreed with, in relation to the proposed privatisation of the enterprise:

1. NMS is the heart of the health service delivery system, as it supplies essential drugs at relatively cheap prices due to the fact that they purchase in bulk.

2. NMS ensures easy availability and affordability of drugs by the entire population nation-wide. 

3. Districts buy good quality drugs from NMS and NMS delivers the drugs at district headquarters with a transport cost saving by the districts.

4. NMS extends credit facilities to the districts and other bodies under agreement to pay in a particular period of time. 

5. NMS ensures steady supply of essential but very rare drugs that look unprofitable to the private pharmacies, for example for TB and cancer treatment, to mention but a few. 

6. The privatisation of NMS would lower the quality of drugs supplied on the market, since it was reported that some drugs are sold cheaply because they are brought when their shelf life is about to expire.

7. The committee observed that the shelf life of some drugs on the market is so short and that is why they are sold very cheaply. NMS assured the committee that the shelf life of their drugs is three years and above. NMS, in line with internationally accepted standards, imports long life drugs. They informed the committee that they also import from reputable drug manufacturers.

8. NMS, being a government department, would remain a better channel through which the Government could be able to supply medicine to all, as promised by the Government.

9. NMS supplies about 80 percent of drugs procured by Mulago Referral Hospital. It also provides credit arrangements to cover delays in fund releases from Government. This goes for all areas, including local governments.

10. Being a bulk purchaser and due to economies of scale, NMS easily meets its statutory and commercial obligations. This also enables it to charge uniform prices to all districts regardless of distance from the centre.

Recommendations.
1. NMS should be put in Class I of the First Schedule of the PERD Statute where Government owns the enterprises 100 percent.  

2. The National Drug Authority (NDA) should intervene to ensure that the shelf life of drugs imported by the pharmacists (drug dealers) is long enough to avoid dumping and poisoning of our population.

3. The move to establish distribution centres at regional and district levels should be expedited to alleviate the problems encountered by local distributors in terms of timely delivery of drugs at lower levels.

4. Government should encourage local authorities/ governments to purchase drugs from National Medical Stores because of the long shelf life and quality of the products.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that the committee is very disappointed. I have travelled under several arrangements, and there is no way the British Government could sponsor you to go to the UK or India and they do not put you on British Airways. 

There is no way the US could sponsor you to do any course or any business and they do not put you on their airline. I do not know why, when it comes to Uganda, we do not support our own. 

We have discovered, through interaction and various group committees, that our population is subjected to poor drugs from local pharmacies because they are cheap. We believe that is why even malaria could not be wiped out in some areas, because they are using drugs that are expired. 

It is against this background that the committee strongly believes that this is a lifeline for our population. It should remain in the confines of Government.  

Uganda Seeds Ltd. (USL)
Madam Speaker, Uganda Seeds Ltd was incorporated by the Privatisation Unit on 11 May 1999 as a limited liability company wholly owned by the Government of Uganda. It had 99 percent of the shares owned by the Ministry of Finance and a one percent share owned by the Ministry of Agriculture. 

It started as a project among various other projects dealing in the seed sector. These various projects were rationalized to make one body that later became Uganda Seeds Ltd, whose main roles are to regulate, produce and market seeds in Uganda.

Observations.  

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the company owns 450 hectares of land in Kasese and 1,000 hectares in Masindi. This land belongs to Uganda Land Commission as provided for in the law. 

The company has been surviving on its own without government subsidy in the current stiff competition in the seed industry. The committee was informed that the company’s prices for seeds are low compared to other players in the sector. 

It was also reported that this company does not handle Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO). The National Council of Science and Technology will take care of this matter. 

There is need for improved quality seeds, for the farmers to increase their productivity while retaining soil fertility. 

The committee was informed that, in order to compete favourably in the liberalized movement, Uganda Seeds Ltd needs to be privatised. They would attract more capital in order to invest in the operations and research for improved seeds.  

It was observed that the longer the company stays in the current state where Government is not capitalizing it and it is not fully operational, the more it will become a liability to Government.

Recommendations.  

Madam Speaker, Uganda Seeds Ltd should be classified in Class II of the First Schedule of the PERD Statute as suggested in the Statutory Instrument. This will enable the sale of 49 percent shareholding to the public to raise capital and operate competitively. 

The issue of GMOs should be handled with caution by relevant authorities because of the possible adverse effect it may have on our soil, local seeds and the people.

Government should ensure that the sale of the shares is transparent. The committee actually recommended that they should be sold through the stock exchange, to avoid opportunists using the facilities of the company to import and sell seeds.  

Mandela National Stadium.

The Mandela National Stadium is wholly owned by Government and managed by a committee of 11 people, which was formed in 1997. The team was given one year to organize the management of the stadium and recommend to Government the way forward.  

Observations.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the stadium has good sports facilities but it is poorly managed and lacks capital for maintenance. 

There is an urgent need to raise funds for maintenance of this facility and improvement of the management of the stadium in order to keep it functional. 

The proposal to raise capital by making it a company was approved by the Cabinet. The Committee on Social Services under whose mandate it falls also recommended the sale of 49 percent shares of the same concern. This august House adopted the recommendation.  

The management of the stadium also agrees with the sale of the shares to raise capital for maintenance. 

Members observed that the need to sell the shares is because Government is not willing to inject in more money as required to keep the standard of the stadium. This is compounded by the lack of a policy on sports in the country. 

The committee, however, noted that sometimes Government comes in to provide funds where there is a crisis, like in the payment of social security funds for workers where Government intervened and paid Shs 68 million. 

The management committee has put in place some developments like street lighting at the stadium. 

The opening of the Kinawataka access road was also a good development, since the jams to and from the stadium have now reduced. The committee was informed that the collection from shows like music and Church organizations subsidize the gate collections. 

It was reported that the idea of giving out concessions was forwarded to Government by the management committee but was not bought. Members also noted that this would be ideal for such a big investment. Honourable members, you know a few minutes ago we were told how marvellous giving concessions could be, but it is very interesting that this time round they did not buy it.   

The committee was informed that due to proximity to town, Nakivubo Stadium is preferred by most sports leagues. This leads to the under-utilization of Mandela Stadium. Even international matches are held in Nakivubo Stadium instead of the Mandela National Stadium. 

We also observed that in spite of good facilities that are found at that complex, even when Government has seminars, it does not use them. If they were, the stadium would be generating more money to run its complex.

Recommendations.  

Madam Speaker, in order to raise capital for maintenance and improvement of the management of the stadium, the committee agrees with the Ministry’s proposal to classify the stadium under Class II of the PERD Statute. 

However, the Government should urgently put in place a sports policy and recognize the need for strong sports administration by funding this sector adequately and streamlining management of the stadium. 

Government should promote the use of Mandela Stadium by deliberately fixing some activities like football leagues, seminars, workshops and conferences by various ministries, in the stadium. 

The Government must really make a deliberate effort to support investments that are development-oriented and especially where Government has spent money. It defeats somebody’s understanding for one to spend where one does not even get one shilling. 

The privatisation should be phased by offering 49 percent of the shares on the stock exchange to the public. And Government should gradually divest itself from the stadium by later selling the remaining 51 percent through the stock exchange.

Conclusion. 

Madam Speaker, the committee would like to thank all the witnesses who appeared before the committee, the Minister and his officials. The committee begs the House to adopt the report and the proposed amendments. I thank you, and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, it is 1.30 p.m. I think we should differ debate on this matter to 2.45 p.m. I would like to suspend the House to 2.45 p.m. when we shall continue with this business and the other items on the Order Paper.  

(The Proceedings were suspended at 1.30 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.07 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome to Parliament the pupils of Namayumba Primary School in Wakiso District. You are welcome to Parliament.

We received the Finance Committee report just before lunch. You can now respond to it. The report was presented earlier. No debate on it? If there is no debate let me ask the Minister to – Yes, princess.

3.08
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make two comments on this report. 

The first one is about the privatisation of Uganda Seeds Ltd. As you can see in the report, Uganda Seeds Ltd owns about 1,000 hectares of land in Masindi and previously it used to produce the best seeds in Uganda. 

My concern is about the way Government is carrying on business. The talk of the privatisation of Uganda Seeds Ltd has been going on for a long time, and because of that there has been some kind of neglect of the company. 

I know that people no longer buy seeds from Uganda Seeds Ltd. Others complain about the quality and of course, the private sector has come in vigorously to compete in that market. So, I would like to agree with the committee about the need to privatise Uganda Seeds. The earlier it is done the better; otherwise we will not get a good deal. 

My second point is about the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) or seeds. I never used to have an interest in GMOs until there was a workshop to sensitise us about them. Madam Speaker, I will tell you that GMOs are not good for this country, whatever the position of Government is. 

At one time Government itself was opposed to GMOs but after the visit of President Bush, there was a U-turn in the position of Government. I do not know what miracle took place. 

In the earlier days we would grow some of these crops and they were not the worst, yet they were not GMOs. I remember my mother used to preserve her seeds above the fire and the next season she would be able to grow these seeds and she would get a good yield. But according to the –(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. I remember very well that about three months ago I brought that issue to the Floor and I asked the Minister about these seeds. 

When you grow certain maize seeds, they will yield a very big harvest but then you find that these seeds cannot be planted again. Secondly, for five years after that, the soil does not yield anything even if you plant something. 

The Minister promised to go and do some investigation on that and come back and report to us. Up to today she has never reported back. Thank you very much.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. That is exactly what I was going to say. You cannot re-plant GMO seeds. You need to have money to do that.

About the soil, that is obvious. As you have heard, you need a lot of money to buy fertilizers, which money our peasants do not have. I do not know! 

It is good that there was a promise to this House that the Minister will come back to us to explain the position of Government and what they intend to do about GMOs. But as a peoples’ representative, unless otherwise convinced with facts, I would not support this idea of GMOs. I hope Government will think twice before it adopts something, which is detrimental to our nation.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment about recommendation 3.3.2, about Government’s failure to come up with a sports policy. In the Sixth Parliament we advocated for the sports policy. The Minister of State for Sports then, and I believe he is the same now, informed us that he did not have any policy, any sports support staff or any budget. 

Now, how are we supposed to proceed? No wonder we built an asset like Namboole and at the end of the day it turns out to be a liability. That is not the way Uganda should proceed. We should have a systematic way of doing things and not wait for people to emerge, especially in the sports sector. 

There is very big potential in sports and it is not tapped at all. Somehow when some people show up with skills, then Government comes up to encourage them. But why don’t you identify them and deliberately put in place a policy to identify these sportsmen and ladies in various disciplines? That way, we can also make a name, other than just going to fill places that Uganda is participating and we hardly get what we are supposed to get. 

With those few comments, Madam Speaker, I would like to support the report by the committee. Before I sit down, I hope soon the Minister will come up with a statement to tell us and explain how far he has gone with the process of privatising Kinyara Sugar Works. 

I raised this issue on this Floor, a resolution was made and the Minister promised to come up with a statement to this House. Up to now nothing has been done. I am informed that there was a Cabinet sub-committee, which was formed for that. When I try to ask they tell me, informally, that the Cabinet sub-committee has never made any report. 

It is over a year now and if the Minister does not come up - I hope I will not be branded anti-Movement when I come up because of the pressure from my constituency to put Government to task to tell us the fate of Kinyara Sugar Works. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the GMOs, I have a vague recollection that a statement was made. I do not know whether it was from CAF or the Minister. I think she made a statement. 

Minister of State for Animal Husbandry, did you make a statement on GMOs? Yes, a statement was made in this House. Did you indicate that it was unsatisfactory? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question on GMOs came up two months ago in this House and I did make a statement from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on GMOs, and we promised a workshop on the same. That is still pending. I thank you.

3.18
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members I stand to support the motion. When you look at these enterprises, National Medical Stores and Mandela National Stadium, they fall under the mandate of the Social Services Committee, according to our Rules of Procedure.  

As you look at the report, under methodology of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, among the documents they discussed was a report of the Committee of Social Services on the visit to the National Medical Stores. 

I wish to submit here, Madam Speaker, that our committee analysed these two enterprises, given what was being proposed, and met with the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to put our position to them.  

I want to state here that I am satisfied with the outcome of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the way they have put it. 

Without diluting what the Committee of Finance has stated, particularly on page 2 on National Medical Stores, we entirely agree with the observations they have made. As the Social Services Committee, other than the visits we usually interact with these enterprises during the discussion of policy statements and also during the time of the budget.  

On the National Medical Stores, I wish to confirm what has been submitted. We feel that the National Medical Stores should be put in Class I so that the Government owns the enterprise 100 percent. This is clearly also the view of the Social Services Committee and we want to say that we agree with the observations given here by the committee. 

The National Medical Stores ensures easy availability and affordability of drugs. But among other factors, we strongly supported this because if you sold it you would not get a private enterprise giving facilities on credit. 

Also, given the bureaucracy we take to release money to district authorities, regional hospitals and the National Medical Stores, it would not be proper to privatise it. At times when we have a shortfall we have found this enterprise very useful in time of need, because some authorities can access credit facilities. 

We believe that if the National Medical Stores were sold off 100 percent, most of these districts would not have the opportunity to access credit facilities.  

Madam Speaker, we were also convinced that if the National Medical Stores were sold or moved to Class II or IV, we would have problems Some rare drugs like the ones for treating mental health diseases, which do not actually accrue much profit, would not be availed by the private enterprises. So, we were convinced that this is a facility that is very useful to Ugandans. 

You also find that they help us store drugs for immunization in bulk. This would become very costly if it were put in the hands of a private enterprise. So, without diluting what the committee has put forward, I want on behalf of the committee that I chair, to agree with the facts, observations and recommendations put forward by the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this matter.

Equally, as reported on the Mandela National Stadium, we want to agree with the observations put forward. I want to clearly state that this was our view, as stated here. Madam Speaker, I want to confirm what our colleagues have put forward and repeat that the National Medical Stores be left in Class I and Mandela National Stadium goes to Class II so that we own those shares. 

However, as indicated on page 6, we only want to encourage the Minister of Education and Sports to bring forward the sports policy so that most of these issues, which have been indicated here, can be ironed out. Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the members and I support this.

3.24
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and the good work done. 

On the National Medical Stores, I also entirely agree that this should be put in Class I and it remains government-owned 100 percent. This is due to the fact that in serving the people, profit should not be the driving force or motive. We could risk the lives of our people at the expense of profits. If we were to be driven by profits, for example, how much profit do we get in running an army and yet it offers such a vital service?

Could I also add that what is being done to the people should be done in the livestock sector. As we learnt last week from the report on the Foot and Mouth Disease, our national herd is threatened with epidemics like that simply because we do not have any provision whereby drugs can be procured to maintain this herd. I wish what is done here is replicated in the livestock sector.

On Uganda Seeds Ltd, Madam Speaker, I happened to have worked in the seed programme and I know that the seed business is capital intensive, it requires a lot of money. So, we should not leave it at the whims or at the hands of Government, who may not run the business. 

At the same time, in a country like Uganda where we are talking of modernising agriculture, it is useless to talk of modernisation of agriculture when you do not have a sound and steady seed base. Where will you base that modernisation of agriculture? So, it is vital, Madam Speaker, that the seed sector be given the importance it deserves. 

However, I totally agree with the recommendation of this committee. If we leave it at that, the private companies from outside will even take advantage and come into this country. And their coming in is no guarantee that they will multiply our local varieties or our local crops. They might disband ours and start importing from outside.
  
Madam Speaker, one of the problems we are having in the seed sector is also strengthening the certification service. 

The Government has got an intervention, for example, of supplying planting materials ranging from cocoa seedlings, coffee seedlings and tea seedlings. But I want to say that the regulatory section of the Ministry does not properly certify these seedlings. This is not strengthened. 

That section lacks personnel, it lacks enough equipment and that is dangerous. When we start using uncertified material, this means once you plant sub-standard materials –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: I thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, while I appreciate the point being raised by the Vice Chairman of the Agriculture Committee, I want to state that we do have regulatory services in the Ministry of Agriculture. Seeds, particularly newly produced seeds, before they are put out –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me. Can the Sergeant ask the members there to come back or stop making noise from outside.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, before the seeds are put out to the farmers, they are tested and they are regulated. It is true that we have a staffing shortage, we are under staffed, but still that service is being provided. I do not think that this country has had a calamity from putting out seeds that are not well regulated and tested. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, hon. Minister for the information. I have not actually denied that we have that regulatory body. It is in place, but the fact is that it is ineffective because of the factors I have raised - inadequate manpower, inadequate resources at its disposal. 

If, for example, we were to go by the required standards, any planting material put out for planting should be certified with a certificate. But if you look at these coffee seedlings, tea seedlings, cocoa seedlings and most of the potato seedlings, they are not certified. Actually, we are lucky that we have not had a calamity and I do not think we should wait for the calamity. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda has got a very good climate. Once you have got a strong seed industry, it can also serve as a source of foreign exchange. As I talk now, we have a foreign company like MONSATO; it is taking advantage of our irrigation facilities at Mubuku to multiply some high breed materials, which are sold outside Uganda. Actually, I think they are sold in Tanzania and Zambia. 

That shows you how much potential we have at our disposal, which we do not exploit. We are leaving it for others to come and harvest. So, there is need to be serious on that.

Madam Speaker, as indicated there are 450 hectares of land in Kasese. I happen to have served there as a manager before I came here. That land is good but for it to be useful, you need to have irrigation facilities extended to that place. This needs a lot of capital to be put in place. So, if Uganda Seeds Limited is put in this class and eventually privatised, I am sure it will take advantage of the land and produce to make profits.  

Madam Speaker, on Mandela Stadium, I do not have much to say. But the fact is, in this present era there is no enterprise that is as paying as the entertainment enterprise. So, the issue of Mandela Stadium is a management problem. I think that needs to be looked at by the authorities. 

We are talking of selling the shares, but the issue is strengthening the management of that enterprise and then services are marketed by competent people, then you reap money. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

3.32
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief on two points, starting with Mandela. Mandela Stadium right from the beginning has been misused. It has not been properly handled by the state to the extent that it has deteriorated as a facility, and there is an attitude towards misuse. 

Why I am I saying so? Number one, when this stadium was done by the Chinese contractors, our part of the agreement was not honoured. As an example, the stadium was ready for two years and we had not even provided the sewerage facilities, which was our part of the bargain. 

Madam Speaker, we did not even pursue the Chinese to make sure that the facilities are up to international standards. As it is now, nobody can set the world record or any record of international recognition at Mandela Stadium. The equipment was not in store and it is now getting to six years and the equipment is not in place.  

Madam Speaker, when you talk about the facilities, a facility like Mandela must have what we call support services. This is where the athletics or the sports people who are going to perform can warm up or practice. If you allow people use it as it is for training or for warming up, it will deteriorate overnight.  

Again, Madam Speaker, from time to time for lack of resources or to make money, we allow religious festivals and other forms of entertainment to take place in the stadium. When you allow more than 100 people on the turf, as they call it, it deteriorates overnight. 

It is very expensive and yet we allow these festivals of more than 10,000 people to take place on the grass. I have witnessed this on two occasions and at the end of the day you have such damage to the facility that would cost you maybe 10 times more to realise. 

This is why I am saying, Madam Speaker, the attitude; sometimes people say maybe we do not seem to be ready for the next world at all. When you put up a facility like that, you must have a team to manage it. We signed an agreement with the Chinese but we never sent a team to China to be trained on how to manage the stadium. 

That is why you take on somebody who can manage a football team to go and manage a stadium of over US $10 million. Why do I give a vegetable seller my Rolls Royce of 10,000 dollars to drive? It shows I have no respect for the Rolls Royce. That is our problem with Mandela National Stadium; this has been mentioned by the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services.  

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has no policy on sports. All these years we do not know what we want to do in sports. You have got a 26-million dollar facility as a jewel on your crown and you do not know how to put it on your head!   No wonder the honourable Minister comes to us and says, “I want to give away this facility”. The attitude is not correct. 

In terms of marketing, it is mentioned in this report that a lot of international tournaments in football and other forms of sports take place at Nakivubo Stadium because of its proximity or easy transport. It is true. Most of the people who enjoy sports in this country do not earn more than Shs 1,000 a day, so they go to the nearest spot.  

Madam Speaker, Mandela Stadium is right on a railway track. To organize transport from the railway station here, four wagons, to transport people to Mandela Stadium would be a great incentive for people to go to Mandela Stadium to watch a sports event. 

I have seen on many occasions, whenever people go to Mandela Stadium the traffic situation is horrendous. Anybody going to Jinja would give up going that day. Anywhere after 12 O’clock, do not try to go to Jinja. The congestion is just maddening. From 6.00 O’clock at Kireka, you cannot move an inch unless you go through Mbuya. 

But there is a railway track right beside the stadium. It is not in use at all and yet we have got wagons lying idle, we have got train engines lying idle, shunting up and down just to keep in form.  

Madam Speaker, I am only spending time on this issue of our attitude towards public facilities. We seem to get certain things as if we are not even ready for them at all. A stadium has been with us for six years, we have no sports policy. We have no policy or methodology on how to facilitate people. It will cost somebody from the other end of town beyond Katwe Shs 2,000 to go and see a football game at Mandela National Stadium. 

This kind of situation is not tolerable. Even if you give away this stadium on concession, or give it to somebody else to run it, he is not going to make a penny until you have worked out certain basic things like transport. In any case, when you put it on the market, he is going to ask you if it is an internationally approved facility for international competition, and you will come up with a blank. This is serious, Madam Speaker.

We have talked about GMOs. Madam Speaker, we have never drawn a distinction between the scientific pursuits in terms of GMOs. Whenever we talk about GMOs, we seem to think that this can only be done in Kansas, in Wisconsin and other distant places. They can be produced right here in our own place. (Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As this House knows, we have a GMO laboratory in Kawanda.  So, it is not right to assume that we think that GMOs can only be produced out there in Kansas City and so on. We are actually testing here, not putting them out to the farmers. But we have a laboratory that was opened this year that is testing and producing GMOs. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, maybe it was a matter of language so I did not put it correctly.  I said, “We seem to think”. In other words, we ignore our own here.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way on a point of contention related to the science of the GMOs, which I am well conversant with in terms of the environment. Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. 

The minister has said that they have a laboratory at Kawanda dealing with GMOs. She also recently accepted or admitted that some GMO foods may be coming here without the knowledge of Government. How do we ensure in a situation of this kind, in a situation of so much doubt, that the GMO seeds are not distributed? 

Government does not even know what is happening in the country. It is just talking in terms of speculation. And internationally and globally in terms of the environment, people are getting worried about the development of the GMOs. 

I am rising here in protection of the interests of the people we represent. They are in trouble, they are threatened and they are in danger. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I will allow my honourable colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Provided you are not going to continue on the GMOs after she has made that statement.

MR AWORI: Correct.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture did make a statement on GMOs. We did say, and hon. Lukyamuzi knows this, that we do not accept GMO seeds in this country. We only accept crushed flour for maize that is GMO –(Interjection)- produced. Yes! 

We are not receiving GMO seeds in this country. This is in the statement that the ministry made and I personally presented it here. It is on paper. And today I think is not the day to debate GMOs again; it is privatisation. I thank you. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do wish to protest against my honourable colleague’s statement that today is not a day to discuss GMOs. First and foremost, it is a privilege we reserve for the Speaker to decide what we are going to talk about. 

Number two, GMOs relate to seeds; we are talking about a company that deals in seeds and GMOs are important and germane to seeds. That is why, my honourable colleague, we are very much on course when we talk about GMOs this afternoon.

I would like to add, among other things, that GMOs have got their own legal complications, the patents. I know that in this country, and yet Uganda Seed Company is not dealing with this, my honourable colleague who normally sits here is a GMO expert. He came up with a new seed for sorghum, which we have never recognised. 

It is an excellent idea, done in Uganda, modified, multiplying at a terrific speed and excellent for beer brewing. But Uganda Seed Company has never gone to these people and said, “Look, can you increase production so that we distribute this sorghum all over Uganda”. 

The first thing that comes to our minds when we talk about GMOs is wheat and maize, and yet we have got other products or produce that can be GMOs.  

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with my honourable colleague in charge of Agriculture that please, Kawanda should now look into distribution and marketing of locally produced GMOs. 

The main complaint against GMOs is the question of monopoly on the seeds; that you will never produce your own, you will always go to the original producer for seeds - the exterminators they call them. That is why I am saying we have got to go for our own GMOs instead of looking to his consent.

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, the issue of GMOs is a very serious issue. In fact, the Minister should take it very seriously. In Kapeguria – it is in western Kenya - they brought not only those seeds but also fertilisers and they used them. The soil got completely destroyed in that area, now they have tried whatever they can and they cannot grow anything on that soil. So, it is a very serious issue.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think you are talking about Dr Esele, the one who sits there. But I have been made to understand from the Hansard that his contribution has been recognised and the seed is called actually Pese, from Peter Esele.

MR AWORI: Absolutely true, Madam Speaker. Our honourable colleague, Dr Esele, is an expert on that one. But we have got another colleague also who has come up with something on sorghum called Epuripur in Ateso. There are two different ones, there is Eseresere, which is white, and then Dr Esele’s is a little bit different, but they work together. 

What I am saying is that, this august House has recognised his intellectual competence but nationally, we have never given it due respect and the resources it deserves in terms of marketing and distribution. I am expressing concern, Madam Speaker, related to this issue of Uganda Seed Company that we should not let go. It is important that a situation like this be handled by this particular company. 

Last but not least, my favourite topic – sports. Mandela Stadium, please handle it with care. Let us have an internationally recognised company to market it instead of just throwing it away like that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to my colleagues in thanking the committee for a report well presented. 

I would like to start by commenting on the National Medical Stores. If this body were 100 percent divested, then Government would be contradicting itself regarding its constitutional mandate of providing services in the health sector. 

As you know, most of these government hospitals normally provide subsidised treatment compared to the private clinics and private hospitals. I, therefore, agree that without a profit-motive, the National Medical Stores is doing a much better job than would be done if this sector were being handled by a private company. 

Since they also carry drugs to upcountry hospitals at a very low cost, it would be difficult for a private company to take on this kind of responsibility. 

Once they are buying bulk, it means, therefore, they are taking advantage of economies of scale compared to if there were many other people. So, I want to agree with the committee that the National Medical Stores should remain under Class I in order to continue exercising the mandate that the Constitution gives it.

On the Uganda Seeds Limited, I am very perturbed that while the seeds are for agriculture, when we look at the ownership the Ministry of Finance has 99 percent and the Ministry of Agriculture has got one percent. No wonder sometimes even in the budgetary provisions the Ministry of Agriculture is always given a very minute share. 

But I will look at the biggest asset, because in fact this is my field, the land we have looked at. You see that this Uganda Seed Limited owns 40 hectares of land in Kasese and 1,000 hectares of land in Masindi. Anybody who could have thought of 100 percent divesting must have been eyeing the land, not the provision of seeds, and we must be very conscious. 

Sometimes it is very good to always be suspicious of people. You will not be sure whether somebody who will have taken this land 100 percent would continue with the seed multiplication. So, I agree with the committee that we should sell off about 39 percent shareholding on the stock exchange so that we can raise money to characterise the activities of the seed company.  

On the Mandela National Stadium, Madam Speaker, it is a very big shame. And I agree with hon. Aggrey Awori, not because we share many things in common but at least I know hon. Aggrey Awori is a sportsman. 

It is a big shame that this facility was put up at the cost of US $26 million from a Chinese grant and we still continue to beg money from the Chinese for other facilities when this very important facility is lying idle. We tend to treat the symptoms rather than treating the causes. 

Why is this stadium so under utilised? This morning we were talking about privatising Nile Hotel because we want to attract tourists, but we could attract many tourists in different ways. You can attract international football competitions, you could attract athletes and all these people would bring in money. But what has been the problem? 

The reason why people always want to go and have international competitions in Nakivubo Stadium is because, as hon. Awori says, it is more accessible and nearer. This is causing us a lot of traffic jams in the city centre. The sooner the Government takes a decision, the better. 

What I would advise, if I were in charge of the sector, is to remove the Nakivubo National Stadium and make sure we go and utilize the Namboole stadium fully, both for local and international sports activities.

Secondly, I am worried about the Kampala transport massive plan. Until we find a way of stopping so many commuter taxis from coming and clogging the city centre, we shall never be able to utilise that stadium fully. If it was possible for some buses or commuters coming from Jinja to stop somewhere beyond Namboole, and others from Masaka Road to stop somewhere beyond Natete –(Interruption)

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Madam Speaker, I am perturbed by the speaker holding the Floor. I would like to ask him, if one is pregnant do you kill the first child so that you can –(Interruption)- because he said we should kill Nakivubo and maintain Namboole.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, what I was trying to say is that, the reason why many people want to hold sports activities in Nakivubo Stadium is because it is in the city centre and it is reasonably accessible. 

But because of the distance and because of the traffic jams to Namboole, it becomes very difficult for many people to go there. It has happened when there are music festivals and other activities like weddings; traffic jams are very high. 

So, the transport plan, in my view, would solve the problem by stopping some of these commuters very far away and then we get the buses that can bring in bulk transport. Or as the hon. Awori said, we could have the railway to solve this problem. So, we must be very serious about this situation.

Madam Speaker, if I can give you another example, there is a facility that was put up by the Chinese Government called Uganda Industrial Research Institution, at Nakawa. I do not know whether the minister in charge is here, but if the President ever visited that place the minister in charge would be sacked. 

This place was put up by the Chinese Government and it has got a lot of facilities. It has got a turnkey incubator for processing plants including a milk processing plant, an ice cream plant, a powder milk plant, fruit juice processing plant, but they are all idle! It also has a bakery and a meat processing plant, which are partially being used. This thing is lying idle! 

I was with the Chinese in that place, I visited it, and they were crying tears. How can you continue to go and look for money from China when they gave you money to put up Namboole and it is a white elephant, when they give you money to put up Uganda Industrial Research Institute and it is a dead place. 

You talk about going to penetrate AGOA, you want to go and export Uganda products; if you cannot utilise the facility to do research on the products that you want to penetrate those markets –(Interruption).

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, Madam Speaker, that one time the Italian Government gave us a facility for fish processing at Masese, worth US $6.0 million, it went to waste.  

Eventually we gave it to somebody for free, who took the title deed to East African Development Bank, got Shs 900 million and disappeared. The minister is still alive, the one who cheated us is still alive and the plant is still there.

MR BAMWANGA: Finally, Madam Speaker, I am concerned both as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Ndorwa County West and I also have my selfish interests as a farmer. We have been pouring our milk. I am glad hon. Mugyenyi is here. Our milk is being sold at Shs 100 per litre, and sometimes it is being poured. 

There is a facility here that could have turned milk into powder. Some people in other parts of the country are starving. They are dying, they are being advised to eat monkeys, and yet we have got these facilities available, which could add value in order to feed our own people. 

I am, therefore, very concerned that sooner rather than later, the minister in charge of this sector may as well put this under Class II so that we can be able to look for capital to operationalise this wonderful industry.  I thank you.

3.57
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, you said that those of us who never talked on the previous issue could talk now. However, I am a member of the Committee on Finance, so I am just going to look at the general policy of privatisation and make a few comments, which I would have made during the debate on Nile Hotel.  

Madam Speaker, privatisation is a good thing if it is handled well, but if it is handled badly it is a very dangerous thing. In Uganda we have privatised basing on colour. If I compete with a white man in Uganda for something, the white man will take it irrespective of what standard of education he has. At the end of it, when that man takes it he will take all the benefits he will get from Uganda to wherever he came from. 

None of us here in the Privatisation Unit has taken an interest in Ugandans. You will hear them give us numbers that Ugandans have taken the biggest assets. When you look at them, they give Ugandans 10 assets of 10,000, and the ones worth millions they give to others, even if they are two.  Is that rational? 

If the problem is management in Uganda, we should have developed management. Ugandans are managers who all go to the same schools like all those others go to. And the best management you would put in place is by giving them performance indicators.  

If a sector in the ministry is failing, then the minister is the one to fail first. They should fire the minister before you go to privatise the institution under that ministry, because the minister has failed to give guidance to the institution they are privatising. 

Given those factors, the day these so-called foreign investors match out, they will rob us and leave us blank. Now you are saying, “No, do not frustrate investors.” These are people who come and live on our blood! These are venture capitalists who can squeeze blood from a stone whether you want it or not. You get them saying they are doing well; what have they done?

Recently, Uganda Investment Authority indicated that investors have brought 200,000 jobs. We asked the boss, “How many Ugandans are in those jobs?” She could not explain. It is because when these investors come, the top management is theirs, the middle management is theirs even the gateman is theirs. Now, what employment have you created for Ugandans yet you have sold Ugandan entities? (Interruption) 

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: I would like to give my colleague information. As I speak now, even visas in Uganda have been privatised. A new company called Visa Handling Services, which is owned 100 percent by a European who was once the Manager of British Airways, has taken over from all other agencies in Kampala. It means all other top agencies have been thrown in the mud.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much. You can see what happens. This is a job where they could have given Ugandans to vet fellow Ugandans for visas, but there we go. And I am told they pay a fee. In privatisation if you are going to sell your house, you borrow money to sell it. You are selling a shirt but you borrow money to sell it. 

This Privatisation Unit you see here has done a very good job by borrowing US $48 million to come and sell our property. But whenever they are making an assessment, the benefits, the income and the expenditures, the loan has never appeared. I do not know why. They always bring the revenues and expenditures but they have never talked –(Interruption)

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, we are required to produce six-monthly statutory reports and part of the information in those reports has to show the proceeds from privatisation. If any enterprise has been privatised during that period, it is indicated, and we have faithfully produced those reports. 

I would like the honourable member to be informed that if he reads those statutory reports, he will find the information he would like to have. 

MR AWORI: Mr Minister, when you talk about statutory reports every six months, do you include the military industries? If so, can you tell us about the pharmaceutical company under the Ministry of Defence? We have never seen a report about that particular company.  Tell us about the military industries.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, hon. Mafabi was talking about privatisation, and Defence is outside our portfolio.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I find out from the committee where these reports are. What has been happening to the reports, which are laid here?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is true the reports have been received and it is true that we have to report to the House about them. But what hon. Mafabi is raising was the time when the committee demanded a cost-benefit analysis from Privatisation Unit and what they presented was sort of an income statement. 

In the income statement - off record - I remember there was 78 billion that was received as income in their books from Government. But as the Committee on Finance, we are looking at Government as a whole. So, that one is not income, it is expenditure. I think hon. Mafabi was referring to that kind of scenario. 

When you receive money from Government to sell UCB, when you get the net effect you must deduct the money you got from Government so that you get a realistic figure. In our report here, we did discover that actually there was no gain, there was a net loss of 17 billion.

MR BAMWANGA: I want to supplement by way of information, hon. Mafabi. 

From the past experience, when you look at the post privatisation impact assessment, you analyse what the Government has put in and what Government has got out. I happen to have been involved in the evaluation of some of the assets. The Government has been pumping in more resources and selling at less than half of the cost it has been putting in. 

The example I have here is Nile Hotel, which was refurbished at US $11 million in 1987, and Lake Victoria Hotel was refurbished at about US $6 million. The Minister can check and get all that information. 

What is worrying me, and which these members should take seriously, is that when it comes to Government buying, it pays very heavily, handsomely and laughingly too. When it is selling, it is lamenting and being cheated.
  
The other day when Government was selling Udyam House, there was a report showing that the property was worth Shs 6.0 billion. When the Government was told that the Chief Government Valuer had valued it at Shs 9.8 billion, the Government rushed and paid quickly. Some of those people who were involved were even promoted in their jobs. 

How come that there has been an inconsistent syndrome of Government paying higher when it is buying and receiving less and less when it is selling? That is the information I wanted to give my brother. I have seen it going on and I do not think we should keep quiet about it.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the member who just been on the Floor has raised some very serious issue of Nile Hotel having been renovated at US $11 million. Now we are told in the report that it is worth US $12 million. This raises concern because at first I was actually wondering who valued that asset, because I think it was undervalued. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues for the information they have given. It clearly shows that Privatisation Unit was fronted by World Bank to make Ugandans poor so that they can rule them well.  

In China, for example, if you go to invest there you will bring two top managers but below you there will be a Chinese to study you. In Uganda if anybody brought up that policy, you will hear this front bench saying, “You are frustrating an investor”.  

In China, from the FDI research we have carried, they are getting US $50 billion per year in form of FDIs. In Uganda they tell us some figures but if you ask them to verify them, you will not see them. Mr Minister, I want to put your – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. The point he is articulating is very important and must not be left hanging. The information I want to give is as follows: 

As if that was not enough, even the people purportedly buying these parastatals are not realistic. Some of them are ghost buyers. A case in point – and I have done my research – is Uganda Telecom.  

Uganda Telecom, we were told, was bought by Germans but that company was never a property of Germans! There are black people surrounding the purchase, and some of them are relatives of big people in this Government – (Interjection) - I will elaborate at a later date. 

MR NANDALA: Thank you hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. We looked at UCBL but if you go further to look at UTL, you can cry. First of all, they did asset stripping. What they did was to make the value of the Kololo houses zero, so that was not appearing on the balance sheet. But that will be another debate.  

Now, what do we get as Ugandans? If anybody came and said Ugandans have been provided with employment, we would be happy. But for many Ugandans, as soon as they privatise the first people to be shown the exit are Ugandans. I see Nile Hotel saying they are going from 278 to 468; who would they be? 

In Kenya, Serena is being run by Aga Khan, if you are not aware. This is going to be transfer pricing of tomorrow, of which we exempted taxes yesterday. 

You hear they have paid taxes, what are taxes? There are two types of taxes, indirect taxes and direct taxes. Indirect taxes are paid by me, the last consumer. When a person collects VAT, he says he has paid. No, it is the last consumer who has paid. You are a collector; you are a conduit. The so-called investors should not lie to us. 

They are claiming they are making losses so they are not paying corporation tax, which should have been a direct tax and would have been their contribution to this economy. For them they are here to reap from us and leave us blank. 

I would request, as the committee has put it, that the issue of the other shares they are talking about be put on the stock exchange so that the poor Ugandan can this time have a say in it. 

All of you know UEB was one company, when we sold it there are now many. There is UEDCL, there is ERA, there is the transmission company, the generation company and there is UEB. Each of them has a board, top management and others. Now what is that? That is a cost. 

You said we are privatising to create efficiency. Now you are privatising to transfer efficiency to the last consumer by over-charging. You are saying, “We are privatising in the name of Ugandans”. Why are you bringing problems to the Ugandans, and who runs it? 

The man who came to UEB first as the Managing Director was from South Africa. He came here with the intention to be fronted so that they privatise, and that is where they are. At the dam they have put a meter - just a meter! It generates and the Government of Uganda pays. For them they are at the receiving end, we are at the losing end.  

Madam Speaker, Nile Breweries is the last one.  Nile Breweries was paid 500 million but if you knew what the Government of Uganda had put in, you could cry. But we were paid 500 million. 

One Mugisu who put money in a very good bank was sacked, and he was compensated with one shilling - the late Wakweya. They paid us 500 million, he had it put in the bank where it was earning more interest, but the man was thrown off the board. But what is this? It is because he was a black. If he was a white man, he would have survived.

Lastly, I will comment on the transaction cost in the privatisation process. For every privatisation, they bring a transaction manager, and this manager is from outside the country. What is the purpose of the Privatisation Unit? 

I think it is high time the PU was disbanded. They should become a small office, maybe sitting somewhere in the Ministry of Finance with one or two offices to handle the transaction. But they are running several offices. If you go to Communications House, they have floors. Those are costs and nobody knows about it, and for everything they bring a transaction manager. 

On UEB, I think the transaction manager was paid US $2million. On National Water and Sewerage Corporation, I am told his deal is about US $1.9 million. So, why do you bring a transaction manager –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Mafabi for giving way because I think the information I am giving is so crucial that every serious legislator requires it.  

Apart from the transactions, which he has articulated well, there are details related to gambling in transactions. I do not know of any parastatal, which has been disposed of without warranting the buyer to meet His Excellency the President, even if it is Uganda Blankets. 

You must meet the biggest man in Uganda before you buy. That is the information I wanted to give you. And what does that symbolize, if we go by caution? I hope you understand.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, thank you very much. I remember when we came from the bush, we said Binaisa was issuing pro-forma invoices and invoices are at his state house. Well, I cannot comment on what you have mentioned. Maybe there are more invoices coming out. 

But what I would ask PU now is that you must put the interest of Ugandans at the forefront. If you want us to support this process of yours, Uganda should be put at the forefront. 

There is no need for you to bring foreigners to Nile Hotel. You should tell us that this thing is going to the stock exchange. We want to run it; we want management. What is management? We did the same courses in management all over the world. Even some of those you are bringing were with us in class. They were the last always but they come here and they are the bosses! So let us – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am one of the people who look at the globe as one village now, instead of talking of foreigners. If one has capital, he should be free to invest in any part of the world. 

While I was in the United States, I met officials from the African Corporate Business Council who told me that they are facing a lot of heat from Capitol Hill. Capital Hill is the Congress. I was also lobbying for IT work here in Uganda and they said they should not have arranged for me a meeting because there is a lot of heat from Capitol Hill that there is unemployment in the United States. 

Currently most of the companies are moving out of United States to invest abroad and, therefore, it is causing unemployment. For example, they do work in Africa because of cheap labour. Therefore, they are planning to block this so that all investments remain in the United States and they avoid creating unemployment. 

Therefore, when we talk about our country, we should also know that others are concerned about their welfare and what affects them. Government should therefore take the issues that the Members of Parliament are presenting here seriously. It is not just hating people from outside, but being patriotic and nationalistic in thinking about the future of our country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please wind up.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague. That is why in most countries when you are going to invest, they will give you a law. They will say, “Bring your investment but such a number of people will be employed, this is what you will do, this is what you will not do.” But in Uganda the investor is the one who draws the agreement for us and our job is to sign, which is wrong. 

If you are talking about Ugandans now moving to Capitol Hill, AGOA is here. The man came in and picked US$5.2 million without a land title. If he is an investor, he is supposed to bring in money. But he came and picked it in Uganda, the local resources we have. 

Why don’t you give it to the local Ugandans and see if they could not do it? African Textiles Mills Ltd (ATM) in Mbale needs only US $4 million and it would be the most powerful industry. But nobody is willing to listen to him because he is a Ugandan. Of course he is now a Ugandan of Indian origin.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we agree all of us are for the private sector to invest, but the private sector will only be the best if the Government is the first to be in the line. There are many people in Uganda who have very brilliant plans but they cannot be given a chance because they have no access to capital. But others who come with different ways will always have access. 

For Privatisation Unit, I plead with you; the remaining industries should be privatised well by giving Ugandans a chance. Ugandans are good managers. It is you people who have been on the top who have been despising Ugandans. When they leave this country and go out, they are the best managers because they have been given the best tools to apply. Give them the tools and they will perform. Give them the performance indicators and they will get them. Thank you.

4.18
DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  On the question of National Medical Stores, I think I have some experience. As somebody who worked his way from LC I, to district, to Parliament I know what it means if the National Medical Stores are left wholly in the hands of the Government, because of that facility of credit.  

I have one institution in my constituency, the Entebbe Grade B Hospital, and it has been benefiting from this. They are neighbours there and so I really know what it means to have credit facilities from the National Medical Stores.  So, I wholly support the idea of leaving this institution in the hands of Government.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the question of seeds; seeds are such a commodity. If we are talking about modernisation of agriculture we definitely have to think about research, and this is an area where we can do a lot of research. 

Research money is so difficult to come by. The Government would actually find it very difficult to find this kind of money. I am sure if we privatised this area of seeds, it would be quite beneficial. 

I think there is one company right now in Uganda - I have forgotten the name - which is researching on seeds. In fact, I think they are down to cellular level; they are working on cells. I know one schoolmate of mine, Dr Magambo, who is working in this particular firm. They are working on seeds. They can get just a cell from somewhere and get a banana plant from that kind of thing. This is what we are talking about. This is a private firm. 

So, I am sure if this was privatised, at least 49 or 51 percent, and they were given the opportunity of putting their own money into research and produce it so that we can use local species under local environment, this would be a very good thing.  If such a company, as I have just talked about, were given a chance to take shares in this seed company, definitely Uganda would benefit quite a lot.

Thirdly, on Mandela Stadium, I remember some time back we talked about this stadium and an idea was floated of hiring out management. I do not know where and why that idea died, but it could be considered as a third option. 

If we can get somebody to buy the 49 or 51 percent, at least we could find somebody of international repute who could run the management of that stadium and we get something useful and very beneficial to Ugandans. So I think the idea of putting it in that category would also be very useful. 

I think that third alternative can also be considered. I do not know whether it is too late or whether it is useful, but it is something I would like to ask the ministry or the chairman of the committee to consider. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is mainly on Namboole Stadium. 

Madam Speaker, according to this report, the committee has observed that they need to sell the shares because Government is not willing to inject in more funds to keep the standards of the stadium. This is compounded by lack of a policy on sports in the country. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask, why was Mandela Stadium built? Was it built because of profit, was it built because of leisure, or was it built because the Government wanted some people to take it over in the end? The way I look at it, it is due to lack of understanding the philosophy of sports and the importance of sports. 

What is the importance of sports? Madam Speaker, sports is very important in bringing about international and local co-operation. It is important in building character. It is also important to see to it that sports people co-operate because it brings about nationalism. There are many other important points, which are brought by sports. 

Therefore, I feel that privatising Namboole entirely will not be good at all. It will show that Government has failed to acknowledge the importance of sports, and that would stop the Government from building other stadiums in other parts of the country. 

I feel that the Government should have a say in Namboole Stadium, although it can privatise it partially. Government should also take the task of putting up other stadiums in other parts of the country like in Fort Portal, for instance. 

If one was put there, people would enjoy sports and it would bring about a national understanding. It would also help people not to be redundant. It would save them also from diseases like AIDS. When people participate in such activities, they forget about funny leisure activities. They concentrate on sports, get tired and go and sleep. 

So, besides sports, it builds the psyche of the people. So, I am saying that the government-(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Number one, the stadium was a gift from the Chinese Government to the Government of Uganda.  Two, physical fitness does not reduce your appetite for sex.

MR BASALIZA: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for that information. But physical fitness plus participation in sports makes people busy and they spend most of their time doing sports not on other irrelevant issues and activities. 

I know my honourable colleague might be talking from a position of knowledge, because he was a sportsman. But I am talking from the position of research. I carried out research in sports; I did part of my Masters on co-curricular activities in schools. So, I know that sports is very important. It is not connected with such issues as hon. Awori has mentioned.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage the Government once again to see to it that Namboole is not entirely privatised, because there is another issue. Someone could start training people there and raise a private army in Namboole and you have no hand in controlling such an individual. I say this because in sports there are a lot of tactics and that would be a problem. 

Once the Government has a hand, it can control the people who are participating in those leisure activities in such a stadium.

Lastly, I also appeal to the Government to see to it that there is a sports and games policy so that various stadiums can be set up in various parts of the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to allay the fears of colleagues about genetically modified organisms As a member of the Parliamentary Committee of Science and Technology, I have been involved in an exercise along with other stakeholders, namely, the National Council of Science and Technology. 

We have worked out a draft policy together with the academicians and researchers, which will regulate the importation and utilisation of GMOs both under restricted release, that is in lamps and green houses, and the eventual development and release on the market. So, concerns like those of hon. Lukyamuzi about the environment are very well taken care of in that policy document. 

Madam Speaker, let me address myself -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. It seems we are getting confused with these GMOs. I think members are worried about what they call genetically engineered seeds, which are different from genetically modified seeds. 

I request the member holding the Floor, since he is an expert in this, to throw light on what genetically engineered seeds mean. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I think all people who have officially addressed the phenomenon of GMOs have been joking. There are several side effects associated with these foods. One is directly related to the menace the foods or the seeds cause to our soils. The second one is associated to life.  There are side effects, which a GM food-eater can sustain. That is why environmentally we are concerned about these foods. 

All over the world, including countries like Zimbabwe that is poor in foodstuffs, they have encouraged governments to reject these foods because of their environmental side effects.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all recognise hon. Lukyamuzi is an expert on the environment, but he has just made an allegation that there are certain deleterious effects that GM foods can impact on the body. Would this House not benefit from some specific examples of these deleterious effects that GMOs have on human beings?  

Two, can he advise us as to whether whenever we travel to the United States, we should take the food we eat in that country? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The problem now facing the world is poverty. These foods, environmentally, have effects on the consumers in regard to their lifestyles. I will not elaborate on the abdominal dangers, which a genetically modified food-eater could have. 

As if that was not enough –(Interjection)- Yes, all over the world. First of all, people know that it is MONSATO, which is particularly behind the generation of these foods. It is the same company behind the generation of toxic chemicals, which many people had one day wanted to apply to the innocent waters, like diquot, diquant, glyphosate and 24D. 

All in all, the environmental hazards associated to these foods in terms of generations of soils are enormous. At one time, given an opportunity I will elucidate beyond these dimensions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just a minute. Could I ask the Minister of Agriculture, when will this workshop to discuss this subject materialise?  

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I thought the issue is with the Office of the Speaker or the Clerk, to give us a date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really?

MRS MUGYENYI: We did request Parliament to give us a date for this workshop.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have requested us?

MRS MUGYENYI: I thought this is what was decided here when I presented on the issue of GMOs. It was resolved that we should have a workshop on GMOs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you must write a formal request to say, “give me a day”, so that we can put aside other business and attend to that workshop.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, is it the Ministry of Agriculture to decide on the date?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You propose.

MRS MUGYENYI: I will do that tomorrow, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Speaker, all these concerns that my colleagues are referring to are covered in the policy document. People should not alarm the country that GMO foods cause problems to those who eat them. They are being eaten in many parts of the country. 

The fact is that once food is processed and cooked, the active genes are demobilised and they become harmless. If the body was to accumulate all the genes of all the foodstuffs we eat, we would be modified beyond what we are. So, that does not happen and I think Ndugu Lukyamuzi should revise the literature where he might have probably missed the point.

Madam Speaker, let me address myself to the question of the National Medical Stores. I have no problem with the recommendation of the committee to have National Medical Stores fully owned by Government. But I think it should be looked at in a wider context, addressing the funding policy in the health sector. 

When the National Medical Stores was set up, it was set up with the assistance from DANIDA. Among other things, DANIDA offered to supply drug kits to this country for more than five years. When the project ended, the Government of Uganda was unable to find money to continue with the programme of supplying drug kits of essential drugs to the rural units. 

Besides, the policy previously was that Uganda Government should seek a technical partner with whom to run National Medical Stores. The problem was that National Medical Stores needed, and I am sure it still does, re-capitalisation. I think the Uganda Government was not able to find money to re-capitalise National Medical Stores.  

You heard hon. Matovu talking about taking credit from National Medical Stores. Indeed this has been one of the problems of National Medical Stores. Many districts take drugs on credit and they do not liquidate those debts therefore worsening the financial position of National Medical Stores. If this is allowed to continue, then it will be crippled just like any other parastatal that we have been trying to sell off. 

I think the minister responsible for privatisation should really look at this in a wider context, given that districts are not getting sufficient funds to pay for drugs in cash, given that cost-sharing was abolished in district hospitals and health centres. The funding gap for the districts has increased and if districts have to continue taking drugs on credit, then that will definitely cripple the operations of National Medical Stores. 

Madam Speaker, we need clarity on this. We need to know whether Government has now been able to find money to re-capitalise National Medical Stores, rather than just taking a populist recommendation that we retain it as a government showcase.  

Can I also briefly comment about National Drug Authority? I have seen that the committee was concerned with the quality of drugs being imported into this country, including their shelf life. Yes, this is a very big concern and it is a very big threat to the lives of Ugandans. 

I wish to inform colleagues that actually there is a modern lab at Mulago, which is being used for monitoring the quality of all drugs being imported into this country. I think the problem has been the manpower at the National Drug Authority. 

Madam Speaker, I think you are aware that we have had about three sets of staff of the National Drug Authority being interdicted. Some have been prosecuted for conniving with importing companies to bring in sub-standard drugs even after there have been quality audits of the factories that are manufacturing those drugs. 

I think the solution has to be to get credible people to do the drug inspection, drug sampling and testing, to ensure efficacious drugs are being imported in this country. Otherwise, all the facilities are in place. 

Madam Speaker, finally, let me just say that the concern about seed companies - Madam Speaker, you do not seem to be happy when talking about seed companies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: The companies, like the one hon. Matovu referred to, are actually involved in multiplication. Those companies are not yet participating in genetic engineering or genetic modification.  However, -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister will have to clarify this in his statement. I was in the village yesterday and we are one of the lucky districts having NAADS. The farmers stopped me and said they appreciate NAADS despite its shortcomings. 

However, all the soya bean seeds that were distributed to them failed to germinate despite the farmers injecting a lot of money in ploughing, and so forth. Some that germinated just dried up. The same problem has been there with other seedlings being given and sometimes also cassava cuttings. 

Therefore, when we talk of genetically engineered seeds, we do that in terms of the general poverty of our people, the climate of our people, our peoples’ investment, soil fertility and our weather. If the poor people in Tororo County invest money in seeds, these seeds, like groundnuts, are supposed to multiply. If a community is given a sack, you share it and plant it and it has to be multiplied. 

Some of the seeds we get are terminator seeds. When you plant it today, the next time you try to plant it the yield is very low. So, we are not generally being ignorant of global developments but we are looking at our local environment.  

People are getting frustrated. They are saying, “Where is Government taking us? We spend our time in seminars and cultivating our land, but at the end of the day we get these seeds and then we have nothing.” 

What is government policy on privatising the seed company and addressing this to make sure that the companies that supply these seeds function, such that our people are compensated for their time and resource? I think the Minister needs to state this categorically before some of us really give support. And honourable member, can you really classify in your Committee of Science and Technology what policy you have in place? Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In my presentation today I alluded to the problem of the regulatory services of the Ministry of Agriculture. I said that this sector is not performing to its expectations. I am actually perturbed to learn that farmers were given soya beans and groundnut seeds that could not germinate! 

Ideally, the services of the ministry would be to test such seeds, even if they are in the hands of the private sector, before the beginning of the season and before they are sold to the farmers. Otherwise, that is too frustrating. 

I know very well that a seed like soya bean has got a short viability period, actually, six months are enough. So, it is wasteful, and this shall not modernise agriculture. I still insist that this section of the ministry must be strengthened. I thank you.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Speaker, the questions being raised here; you know, for a seed to fail, it means that it is not a viable seed; it is not live at the time it was planted. Also, the time when it is planted matters. We should not confuse farming practices with the technology that is being applied. 

In the case of NAADS, every district has been given authority to engage service providers, that is, people who give advice to the farmers. Farmers actually select the enterprise that they want to participate in and can also freely identify the source of their planting materials. So, this should not be blamed on NAADS, it should not be blamed on seed modification or genetic modifications. 

Madam Speaker, I think it was timely for you to have asked the Minister to organise a workshop. There are unfounded fears and smears against genetic engineering and yet people do not understand the process. So, I think it will be timely for Ugandans to understand the technology as opposed to the commercialisation practice of some of the seed companies. 

With this commercialisation, they intend to include elements in the genetic engineering that make those seeds unusable twice, and which leads to a domination of the market. So, we should distinguish the trading practice as far as those seeds are concerned as opposed to the technology that can be applied without the strings of monopoly. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by clarifying one point, which I think hon. Mafabi picked from the morning discussion, regarding which company has been negotiating with Government about Nile Hotel. 

The company is Serena Tourism Promotion Services not Aga Khan Fund for the Economic Development. The reason I want to clarify this is because there has been confusion whether the company is going to have tax-free activities in this country and so on. 

These are two separate companies with two distinct personalities. And no agreement has been signed. There have been negotiations and the agreement would have been signed after the Attorney General had given his consent. But now as the ruling was given, we have to go to the Committee on Finance.  

Madam Speaker, a number of issues were raised about privatisation in general, and I would like to thank the honourable members for raising those concerns. We always want to do better and the more information we get, the more we know how the honourable members feel, or their concerns. The contributions they make also help us to do better. So, we are really happy about that.  

However, I would like to clarify a few things. As to the benefits of privatisation, Madam Speaker, four weeks back we organised a privatisation weekend here in Kampala. More than 45 companies, which were privatised, were there to tell their own story. 

They had stalls and the representatives were there to compare how they performed before privatisation and how they are performing now. This was to show how efficient they have become, how many more services they have and how production has increased. But all this information we can continue give to honourable members.

Another question was, “How much do we spend to privatise a particular enterprise; do we spend more and get less? Madam Speaker, I promise to include this information in our next report. But it is not as bad as members believe. This information and data will be provided.  

Another issue was, “Why do you not give Ugandans a chance in the privatisation process; that companies are being taken over by foreigners”. Madam Speaker, I would like to report here that we have figures. More than 60 percent of all the divestitures went to Ugandans, and –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Minister. Yes, 60 percent in numbers, what about in value? It would be illegal for us to say 10 Ugandans times 10,000, that is 100,000, and two foreign ones of one million each, that is two million. That is a big difference! Can we have that?  

Secondly, as you privatise, do you take into account social costs, social benefits? Which method of evaluation do you use? Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we are talking in terms of specifics, especially in view of the fact that the hon. Minister of State in charge of Privatisation is expected to know the dynamics of what he has divested. Noting that this is so, would he now tell us the shareholders in Uganda Telecom?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I have already promised that I will give all this concrete information in my next report. 

On the issue hon. Mafabi was raising, as I said this morning, when we have an enterprise for privatisation and we call for show of interest, we advertise in local and international papers and everybody is given equal opportunity. There is no policy to favour foreigners over Ugandans. 

In addition, in enterprises where we find that perhaps the money needed is too much for some Ugandan company, in most cases we have left a number of shares to be floated on the stock exchange. As we speak, we have floated shares in BAT, Kajjansi, Bank of Baroda, and we are having more shares in Stanbic and in various companies. 

So, we let people know about these. And Ugandans who cannot buy one particular enterprise because they may not have the money are at least given the opportunity to buy some shares on the stock exchange.

Another issue that was raised was about Kinyara.  Madam Speaker, the last time I was here I promised that we had to do thorough consultations before we came to Parliament. As we speak now, we have finished consulting the Omukama of Bunyoro Kingdom and his council. We have consulted the out-growers of Kinyara, the workers and the Members of Parliament from Bunyoro Kingdom. 

We are remaining with meeting the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Economy, the Committee on Trade and Industry and that on Public Enterprises. Then we shall come back to the House.

Madam Speaker, regarding the report, I would like to thank the chairperson and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the comments they have raised and the observations and recommendations they made. In particular, I would like to say that we accept the recommendations fully on Uganda Seeds and Mandela National Stadium. We also accept the recommendation on National Medical Stores. 

We accept their recommendations but some of the issues and concerns they have raised were already brought to the attention of the Ministry, and we would like to undertake a study. If the study comes up with any new information or revelations that we may not have at the moment, we shall come back to the House for the classification. But as of now, we accept the committee’s recommendation.

One other issue is the method of privatisation. The committee was recommending that we have to sell these shares through the stock exchange. I would like to inform the House that the method that we use in the divestiture process is arrived at after technical considerations. But I promise that we shall continue to keep in touch with the Committee on Finance, especially when the divestiture process has started.  

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry I would like to accept the report of the committee.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Hon. Lukyamuzi alleged that whenever companies are being sold people must meet His Excellency the President, and his insinuation was most serious. So, I call upon the Minister of State to clarify that point.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, my understanding was that hon. Lukyamuzi was not referring to privatisation. But if he was referring to privatisation, that before a company is privatised we have to go to see the President, this is totally wrong and false. 

As the Minister of State in charge of Privatisation, I have never, not on a single day, been to see the President with an intending investor. The choice of the bidder who wins is done transparently. 

We have the Divestiture Procedure Manual, which we have to follow. We have DRIC, which makes sure that the PERD Statute and the Divestiture Procedure Manual are followed. At no single time has there been need to go with any prospective investor to see the President. 

Nobody has a way of influencing the choice of who is going to be a successful bidder. The methods are clear and are followed. And as far as I know, no single prospective buyer has been to see the President with me. 

4.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to some of the issues raised by members. 

I will start with hon. Kabakumba; the neglect of government parastatals as exhibited in many areas pointed out. Honourable members, this has been a concern of the committee, and I would like to amplify that we do not normally make long reports, but these issues were tackled. 

We observed that UPPC, Uganda Seeds and Namboole were really neglected. If you take an example of UPPC, Government injected a lot of money in this company, it has even printed currency for some countries, but Government does not use it. Why Government does not support its own departments or parastatals defeats my understanding. I think this can only be answered by the Executive here.  

Madam Speaker, we looked at Namboole, which was given free. We have held a number of seminars and the famous partnership in a tent that was hired from South Africa. If we had injected that money in a conference hall, Shs 2.3 billion would have been enough. 

To give a few examples, really, can a rational man sell his house, get money in his hands, and then go to hire a house? Does it make sense? Look at our ministries, after selling their homes they are renting. We have recently renovated Crested Towers and I am told they have put a casino there. Honourable members, are we really serious? 

I have been to India, I have been to New Zealand and they have a beehive; all government ministries are there. The hotel we slept in with the Speaker in India belonged to the state. Look at ESCOM; is it not a South African parastatal? Are we going to privatise our homes?  

The other day we imported grain from South Africa and yet grain is abundant in this country. Just a few months later, we had an expatriate in Uganda Revenue Authority. Honourable members, you are now going to see here expatriate ministers! Yes, absolutely! That is where we are going. 

Are we going to sell sub-county headquarters to allow them to go and rent? Privatisation must have a limit. Really, there must be a limit! (Prof Kasenene rose_)- Please, Madam Speaker, let me finish then he can – but let me take it.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Government has already taken care of the point the honourable member was raising. The Government owns properties both here in the country and outside the country, which it has not privatised. 

We have gone ahead and formed a company known as Uganda Property Holding Company. This company manages government property on behalf of Government. 

I can give a number of examples. We have a building like Amber House, it is not up for privatisation and it is under Uganda Property Holdings Company. We have a number of properties not only here but also abroad. 

The Government is aware that strategic buildings and properties have to remain under government control but managed by a private company, because Government would not go to collect rent and so on. That is why Uganda Property Holdings Company has been formed.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is Crested Towers, which is on sale, a strategic building for this Government? What about NIC building, is it strategic? Madam Speaker, this Customs House, somehow, somewhere we have lost it. So, can we get assurance that property A, B, C, D will not be sold, it will remain in the hands of Government so that we can utilise it?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to give a quotation that refers somewhere to UK. It says, “privatisation has always promised to bring benefits, but it has created apathy and the people are dying at the highest rate.” This is again Prof. Stiglitz, an economist. I am going to lay this on the Table later on.  

Madam Speaker, we agree privatisation is good as we have said, but we cannot privatise everything.  There are some strategic enterprises, which have no financial returns but have a social return. When we are computing these things, we must always take in the social benefits. The Executive is looking at only financial returns forgetting the social benefits. At the end of the day, we are going to be in danger. 

I want to give an example, which I want to help us understand. We have the DPP’s office, a very strategic office, in Crane Chambers. And you know what happened with the owner of Crane Bank. The Registrar of Companies is also there. Customs House was here, it was ours and we sold it. 

Can the Minister clarify to us what method he is using? Is he going to privatise even the President and the ministers? Thank you.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, let me inform this House that Crested Towers is not privatised.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It was a tussle for me to go through. But I am seeking clarification over a very important matter.  

If the Government of Uganda cannot see sense in investing in a building like the International Conference Centre where Parliament regularly meets because of necessity, what is the Minister talking about?  

Secondly, is the Minister aware that over-privatisation can be a source of chaos? Recently in New York City, the blackout they suffered according to the experts report was due to over-privatisation, each one endeavouring to cause excellence in electronics. That is the information I wanted to give. 

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I will be brief.  I have heard allegations that everything will be privatised, including Lake Victoria and so on. Really, who said that Crested Towers, for example, had been privatised? Who has said that NIC has been privatised? 

We are still studying the situation and if we find that it is strategic, we shall maintain it as we have maintained other buildings. We have maintained other buildings like Amber House and so on. 

Hon. Mafabi is saying, “Are we going to privatise everything?” Madam Speaker, according to the PERD Statute, enterprises in Class I are not for privatisation. Those are enterprises, which Government has earmarked to be wholly owned by Government. Secondly, with enterprises in Class II, Government must remain with majority shares and must remain in control. 

That shows that there are enterprises that Government feels are strategic for this country. So, they must either remain wholly under government control or if privatised for other reasons, the Government must maintain control. So, this privatising of everything is not correct. Government has taken care of that.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that we must have some pride. I want to tell members that you may rent your house but not sell it. You may rent your house to somebody in Kololo and you go to live in Nakivubo, but there is a very big cost. The utility you derived out of your house in Kololo is lost. The security situation changes, the transport changes and there may be hazards to your own life. 

When we are privatising, Madam Speaker, we must consider all this. When it comes to national issues that concern Government, we must also consider our pride.

I am an African; I have heard about people giving their daughters away in hotels and they claim it is their home! It causes a lot of embarrassment if a head of state comes and finds you in a rented house in Kikuubo - a ministry! 

You have introduced something in this country that must be fought, and that is nomadism. You cannot have ministries carrying their luggage; today they are chasing them from here, tomorrow they are chasing them there.

Madam Speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori was concerned about public assets, specifically Namboole. We have covered it. 

Hon. Bamwanga said we need value for the money. He says when we are selling it is low and when we are buying it is high, where is the difference. 

Somebody brought up an example of Lake Victoria Hotel. When they were buying televisions, they were costing those televisions at a price of maybe a television plus all those gargets, but they brought one piece. When you are selling out, the man is looking at a television at market price. So, you see some of the problems 

I understand a bulb holder was imported for a value of almost ten times its price! So, honourable members, we must look at ourselves. If we can run our homes, why can’t we run our government smoothly?  Why do we always want Government to lose and when it comes to our business we do not lose?

Again, the Nile Hotel issue has been forwarded to the committee and I will not make my remarks. I will have to do it after studying.  

Hon. Basaliza asked, “Why don’t they take the stadium to Fort Portal?” I do not know. You know, when something fails here at headquarters I do not think it can go down. Absolutely, not! Really, if we are pulling away from this, can we start going down? 

We only need to change our minds. If we change our minds, that is when we can really go to Fort Portal. It is like asking, “If you cannot behave in Parliament, why don’t you go out and behave?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Chairperson, what the member said was that we would like to see Government generate money from Mandela Stadium and use it to build stadiums in other parts of the country.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. Against that background, I will inform the members that we can only generate funds from Namboole if we take interest in it. 

We have had seminars at Speke Resort Munyonyo and yet you know those people have facilities. We have got conferences and those people have conference facilities. Where do we take money? Speke Resort Munyonyo, Jinja Resort Hotel; if you cannot support your other arm, how can you survive? 

We must have a spirit to support this so that others can also get attracted. Because when you organize a workshop, you invite other people and the other people get to know. Also when they are covering that function, they are actually marketing it. So, with those few remarks - (Interruption).

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, before I get clarification I just want to inform him that before Government abandons its property, there are some visitors who are going to come to this country in six planes, but they are going to land in Eldoret. If Tororo Airfield was okay, they would have landed there and we would have got the money, but Government abandoned it.

Now I would like to seek clarification. As a committee, you are giving the go ahead to Government to privatise the seed company. In case that company that will buy Uganda Seed Company supplies seeds that do not germinate, that do not measure to the local standards, what safeguard have you put in place to make sure that our people will be compensated? 

If you do not satisfy me, I will be tempted to petition the Committee on National Economy and your committee to make sure that Parliament looks at the final agreement before Government finally signs it. We have had companies taking over places and then tomorrow they rob us and there is no safeguard in these agreements. Thank you.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: The seed sector has been liberalised and I think there is a regulating body under Ministry of Agriculture. So, we have taken care of that concern. And since they are already competing, the only way we can make it survive is to allow it to generate capital so that it can compete and maybe offer better services, so that the farmers can now come and buy seeds from the Uganda Seed Company.

Lastly, to put your fears to rest, we hope this time round Government will be transparent in the process. We hope they sell these shares on the stock exchange so that people get their shares and compete favourably in the business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Statutory Instrument No.26 of 2002 on the amendment of the PERD Statute be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do not underestimate the role of this august House in the governance of this country. But a few days ago, we expressed concern about the way the Government was organising International World AIDS Day. We made certain remarks and conditions. Contrary to our expectations and recommendations, other things happened. 

One, our invitations never came on time, including yours and the Speaker’s. So, we could not even go to such an important occasion. There was a place reserved for us and it was empty simply because they did not conform to the recommendations of this august House. 

Two, we had made certain observations regarding certain persons taking prominence in this particular function. Again the Government totally disregarded them. We put the Minister in charge of the Presidency under pressure to come out with a disclaimer that certain people could not play a prominent role, but that was totally disregarded.

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, yesterday a statement came out pertaining to the national security regarding the reshuffle in the upper echelons of Ministry of Defence. There was one little disturbing statement that certain officers may face court martial on account of treasonable offences. 

As somebody who is experienced in matters of Government and who has seen the history of this country go wrong, I think this august House deserves two statements: One, on the World AIDS Day and what happened to our recommendations, especially for you, Madam Speaker, who guided us very well on that matter. 

Two, when the Government comes up with a statement pertaining to security and certain aspects are mentioned pertaining to treasonable offences this august House deserves information from the Rt Hon Prime Minister or the Leader of Government Business. We need to know what is happening in the Ministry of Defence. We need to be told other than just hear about it through the media.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted us to finish with the statutory instrument first before we go into those things. You know there is an instrument we are actually considering.

MR AWORI: My apologies, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But I am sure the Government has heard.

COMMITTEE STAGE

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO. 26 OF 2002 ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE PERD STATUTE 1993

5.19
Clause 1:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 do remain part of the instrument.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 2:

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, delete “National Medical Stores” in paragraph 2. Justification: it is a very important enterprise playing an important role that should not be left entirely in the hands of a private sector.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3:

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, paragraph 3 should read: “The 1st Schedule to the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Statute, 1993 is amended by inserting Medical Stores in class I.”  Justification: it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new Clause 3 be inserted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Statutory Report on the PERD Statute and made the necessary amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the instrument has been passed. I do not know whether you would like to touch on the matters raised by hon. Awori?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to the recommendations regarding the World AIDS Day, I have no hesitation in asking the Minister in charge of Health to give a reply to this House a week from today. 

With regard to the issues, which have been raised on Defence, as you know this is a very important matter and it requires a lot of consideration. Again I ask the Minister of Defence to answer it within seven days. 

May I take this opportunity to point out that when Parliament makes a recommendation, we consider it very seriously but sometimes we disagree with it. When we disagree with it, please do not misunderstand us. 

There are of course mandatory issues, for example, under Article 159 of the Constitution we cannot borrow without express consent. In such matters we have no choice but to abide by your authority. 

But with regard to resolutions, we consider them and we explain if we are unable to accept your recommendation. Let it be known that it is not mandatory for Government to implement all resolutions. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, these are not routine matters; these are not routine recommendations. An expression of concern by this august House is almost tantamount to law, if it can be put in form of a bill. 

When we say we do not want a, b, c, d to happen and we would like to see 1,2,3 happen, it is not purely advisory. It goes beyond that. It shows lack of respect on the part of the Government for this august House, and I take it very seriously.  

Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business in this august House, a matter pertaining to security is not a matter to be put off. We are concerned. People have been ringing us all day long asking, “Who are these people that are going to be charged with treason?” Treason is no light matter. 

To tell us, Rt hon. Prime Minister, that the line minister will come to this august House with a reply in the near future, is not adequate. It is very unsatisfactory and I take it very seriously, as almost an insult to this august House.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I got terrified when the Rt hon. Prime Minister responded in the way he did. He quoted Article 159 and gave an impression that Government will only respond when the matter is constitutional. 

I put it to him that this is a wrong precedent. The law-making mechanism is detailed. A number of laws, before they become laws, are presented with the resolutions of Parliament. 

So, the question I am putting before the Rt hon. Prime Minister is, when does it become mandatory for Government to implement a specific motion by resolution and when does it not become mandatory?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister may need to reconsider the response regarding security. 

Most of these officers and Generals have been commanding the war in the North and Eastern Uganda and people are concerned that the war is instead spreading. Aware that some of these people are now going to face court, I think the Government needs to move very fast to allay peoples’ fear and the gossip that may be in the public about what exactly is happening. 

Everyday we are losing life and some of these people have been in charge of supply, commanding the war, buying of equipment that has not enabled Government succeed in this war. I think you need to take this request seriously and timely, such that the country exactly knows who is supposed to be charged for what and why. 

How is his or her conduct or the action Government is taking related to the way the war is being handled and to other similar matters?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, as usual, hon. Lukyamuzi has a tendency not to listen carefully. He has not grasped what I said and I can only reiterate it. 

You have been guided several times, even by the Speaker himself, that when a resolution is made here it is advisory. I suggest that you read what is in our records that was said by no other than the Speaker. 

I did inform you that we consider your recommendations most carefully but we may not always agree with them and we explain this. We do clarify the reasons why we did not accept a resolution. 

Of course when I quoted Article 159, I gave an example where we need your approval before we can proceed. It was just an example, and that is what I said. I stick to what I said and any consequences. With regard to hon. Aggrey Awori –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted an explanation from the Prime Minister. He said that when this Parliament passes a resolution, it is advisory and the advice is optional. But I think members of the Cabinet are Members of Parliament and while here, before we come up with a resolution we have gone through serious debate. 

Now, if they fail to convince the backbenchers and we pass a resolution, why should they turn around and say after all this is advisory and then they act otherwise? Then the argument of the people who have been saying that members of the front bench should not be Members of Parliament becomes relevant. Why should they be here? We pass a resolution and then they say, “We are not part of it” when we have all participated.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Rt hon. Prime Minister responded to me directly and I thought I would say something in form of clarification. 

The statement he articulated is very important and it should not be left hanging. If the resolution of Parliament is advisory, when do you become, as Government, bound to implement the given advice? 

Secondly, the impression we are getting out of your articulation is that you only become bound to implement something when it directly impacts on the Constitution. You have quoted Article 159. 

Finally, I want to put it to you that the reluctance you are articulating now is as a result of your failure to respect the integrity of Parliament. 

At one time I moved a motion by resolution requesting Government, and it was passed unanimously, to consider talking to the rebels fighting Uganda. Did you ignore it because it was presented by John Ken Lukyamuzi, the man? What do you have to say? What were your criteria for rejecting it, because you have never implemented it?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Madam Speaker, I am willing to give hon. Lukyamuzi several lecturers but I do not have enough time to enable him grasp what I am saying, alas!

With regard to hon. Aggrey Awori, when a matter concerns a minister who is not here it is fair that I give him adequate notice. For example, we are dealing with a matter concerning defence. His Excellency the President is not in the country, he may wish to consult him and he is not here. 

I thought that it is prudent on my part to give adequate time to the minister so that he may give a well-researched answer, hence my recommendation of seven days. The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs is here she is going to remind the minister. 

When I give seven days, of course they are free to answer even tomorrow. The matter is contextual, their capacity to answer is contextual and it depends upon having readily available information. 

With regard to the other issues raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, if I answer them I will be answering on behalf of the ministries. I do not believe in half answering a question. I suggest that the relevant ministers do come here and answer. I am a manager and I do not intend to run ministries on behalf of the Government. They must do their work, and they have the capacity. I have always been very proud- (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Parliament last week unanimously agreed on a motion, which was seconded and passed. It was to the effect that the core of activities of World AIDS Day should not include the likes of the Big Brother housemates. The matter was carried unreservedly. 

Noting that the Rt hon. Prime Minister as far as I know is the Leader of Government Business, and noting that the matter that was being discussed greatly impacted on the Office of the President, is it in order for the Rt honourable Prime Minister to deny responsibility for having not implemented what was unanimously passed by this august assembly? Is he serious, and should we take him seriously? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If I recollect hon. Kagimu’s motion, it was disassociating Parliament from the activities of the Big Brother House - I think that was what it was - during the World AIDS Day. That was the substance of his motion. So, there is no problem.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to you, the point I was articulating was that the Rt hon. Prime Minister is the Leader of the Government Business and this matter impacted on the Office of the President. They were being advised to disassociate the Big Brother House from celebrations marking the World AIDS Day.  

I now found it queer for him not to take the responsibility to answer and chose to refer the matter to the substantive ministers. It was a question of total irresponsibility, because he is the Leader of Government Business. Is it in order for him to dodge the challenge as put by the Members of Parliament here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, the Prime Minister was not here during that debate. But I also think it is within in his rights to assign somebody to answer on his behalf. Tomorrow we are going to have debate on HIV/AIDS, please bring along your copies of the first report of the standing committee and you take the minister to task. If it does not satisfy you, the Prime Minister will have also to answer.  

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, some clarification from you. The Prime Minister has made a very serious statement, which I felt is very hurting. He said that the resolutions we take here, Government is free to adopt some or not to adopt. Now, when we come here and deliberate on these issues, this is very demoralising. That means we are wasting time on some of these issues.  

Madam Speaker, it is up to the Chair to rule. Is that statement correct? If it is correct, when are these resolutions taken serious, when are they binding to Government and when are they not binding? So that we know that when they are classified, we do not waste time. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are very many kinds of resolutions which we make. For instance, when we are debating the budget we make recommendations here like in the Budget Act and so on. Those are not for borrowing money but they are binding. So, there are many resolutions, which do not touch money but which are binding. 

But I would like to appeal to the Government, really, to respect the resolutions of this House. They are made by people who are sane and in their proper senses, and unless it is completely fraud I think they should be treated with respect.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI:  I seek guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, honourable members, let us adjourn the proceedings for today to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon. As I said, review your report of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS. That will be the substantive matter for tomorrow afternoon. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 December 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)

