Tuesday 8th December, 1998

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Frances Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last time when we adjourned, we were about to conclude consideration of the Sessional Committee Report on Social Services.  Today we shall continue to its conclusion and I will suspend the proceedings for a few minutes to allow new business to start, and for my Colleague the Deputy Speaker to preside.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR, 1998/99.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Dr. Philemon Mateke): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, before the House adjourned on Thursday, I was concluding my remarks about the issues raised when the Committee Report was being discussed.  So, in summary hon. Members, Government is not insensitive to the challenge of the youth and women of this Country.  Steps are being taken by my Ministry to increase funding of the youth and women councils.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs. Bitamazire):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for pointing out the grey areas in the Ministry of Education and that of Health, and that of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

Mr. Speaker, in my conclusion and winding up, I would like to state that the process of decentralisation and that of restructuring of ministries have affected the policy statements of the ministries under the care of the social services.  We are going through that process and quite a lot of policy and programmes still have to be stream-lined.  From what the Members made as commentaries and questions and clarifications, there is need for sensitization of the population.  The stake-holders and key prayers, capacity building in order ministries under the Committee, resource mobilisation and resource management, and there is quite a lot to be done before the services can be improved.  

Mr. Speaker, on the Ministry of Health, one comment which attracted a lot of comments is the quota system at the tertiary institutions.  I would like to assure the Members that the Committee will continue dialogue on that recommendation and report to Parliament from time to time.  

In the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, the decentralisation process is still at its first phase. But we would like to assure the Members that the health sub-district approach, that is, sub-district based on constituencies, is an approach which needs a lot of monitoring and input by the Members.

Finally, on the Gender, Labour and Social Development Ministry, we are all concerned about the status of the Youth and Women Councils, and the low funding of that Ministry. The Committee will continue interacting with that Ministry, especially to study and monitor restructuring of 
that Ministry and the organisation of programmes under that Ministry.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you very much, and I would like to move for the adoption of this Report.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services for the Fiscal Year, 1998/99, be adopted subject to the comments made by hon. Members.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I will suspend the proceedings for a few minutes. 

(The proceedings were suspended for ten minutes)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have got an apology from the Minister of Education, Prof. Nsibambi, he had promised to answer certain question related to sponsorship of Makerere students, but because of his present commitment with a consultative group, he has the answer, but he is unable to give that answer today.  But when he is free, he will give it.  

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT Committee ON THE PRIVATIZATION PROCESS

MISS. BABIHUGA: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  For us, it is understandable that this Report is scheduled to be given at this time.  The majority of this House does not have the physical report.  Could we know how we would proceed in this matter with regard to the unavailability of copies of this Report which is very important for our understanding and assimilation?

MR. ONGOM: Point of information.  I am just informing the Speaker and the House that I have just come from the counter, there is no more copy left.  Other people have got the report, but there are many who have not, and they are not even ready.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Women Member from Rukungiri and hon. Members, I did not know that you did not have copies, but I have seen the Report itself and the size of this Report.  I think what we can do, if there is this problem that you do not have copies and you want to have your personal ones - and you are entitled to them - what will happen is that the Chairperson will present his Report.  He will read it and if necessary, after he has completed reading it and I feel you need to read it yourself before you contribute, I will take necessary action and maybe adjourn to enable you to study the Report and respond tomorrow.  

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PRIVATISATION (Mr. Aisu Omongole): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members who have not got the Report, I beg your indulgence, the Report is just on its way.  Just as the Speaker has explained, we have not been able to make enough copies because of the bulkiness of the report, and also our facilities at Parliament here have broken down. So, we had to reproduce the Report from outside. You will bear with me, hon. Members.

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the Select Committee on Privatization was set up on August 18th, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, Section 144 and 145.  15 Members of the Committee were elected by the Speaker and approved by the House and commenced work on September, 9th 1998.  The terms of reference for the Select Committee were spelt out as follows:

1.  To reveal the objectives of privatization whether or not they are being achieved, in particular:

(a) Examine whether the process as laid down by the law has been  followed;
(b) Examine the cost of the process, that is, loans taken, consultants hired, et cetera;
(c) Examine the role of line ministries/institutions and  Parliament in the process;
(d) Establish whether there has been undue political interference, speculation and other forms of manipulation in the process as suggested by the report of the Joint Standing Committee of National Economy and Commissions, Statutory Bodies and Public Enterprises;
(e) Examine the management and administration of the privatization process, that is, timing, tendering, DRIC, et cetera.

2. To examine the management and administration of the proceeds of privatization.

3. To identify specific public enterprises whose divestiture has caused public outcry and make specific recommendations.

(a) Public Enterprises which have already been divested, for example, ENHAS, UCB, Uganda Grain Millers and Hima Cement.
(b) Public Enterprises which are still in the process of being privatized, for example, Nile Hotel, Apollo Hotel Corporation, Uganda Air Cargo and Steel Corporation of East Africa.

4. To study and make recommendations about any other aspect of the divestiture process as the Committee may deem fit.

I want to point out here that our Committee has not really achieved all these stated objectives or terms of reference as you will notice in the Report.

Mr. Speaker, in its work, the Committee examined the PERD  Statute of 1993 and the subsequent statutory instruments, interviewed PU on the process in general and sought information on particular enterprises.  The Committee also interviewed Key Players in the privatization process, including line Ministers in some of the enterprises, the Consultants who handled particular enterprises, Board Members, Management, Core Investors, other Investors in some enterprises, line institutions and members of the public.  

On a sad note, however, the Committee wishes to report to this Parliament that the objectives of privatization as put down in Section 3(2) of the PERD Statute of 1993, have not been achieved.  
1.  The main objective of this Statute is to give effect to the Government policy for Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture  published in gazette No.48 of 1st November, 1991, and also the Action Plan for Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture.

2.  Without prejudice to the general effect of Sub-section 1 of this Section, the following objectives shall be deemed to fall under the objectives specified in that Sub-section:

(a) The reduction of Government equity holding in the Public Enterprises and thereby inter-alia, relieving Government of the financial drain on its resources and the burden of the administration and raising revenue by means of divestiture, including where necessary, liquidation or dissolution of Public Enterprises and by the promotion, development and strengthening of the private sector.

(b) The promotion of institutional arrangements, policies and procedures for:
(i)   Ensuring the efficiency, successful management, financial accounting and budgetary discipline of Public Enterprises;
(ii)  Ensuring the separation of ownership and management functions;
(iii) Enabling Government to play its proper role more effectively as the owner of Public Enterprises; and,
(iv)  Enforcing accountability.

(c) The rehabilitation and restructuring where appropriate of Public Enterprises.

(d) The promotion of local entrepreneurship.

Those are the objectives of the PERD Statute.

On a sad note, Mr. Speaker, the Committee noted that most of those objectives have not been achieved.  

Statutory Instrument No.12 of 1995, clearly gives the Divestiture Guidelines and we wish to particularly draw your attention to Section I(1) and (z).

I(1) reads: "In all Divestiture and Privatization plans, due regard shall be given to implementing the Government Policy on broadening the basis of ownership among Ugandans.  Accordingly the Minister responsible for Privatization in consultation with the Committee will continuously explore practical ways in which the Government can assist Ugandans to participate meaningfully in the acquisition of interest in enterprises being divested or privatized or both."

Section 4(1) and (4) reads: "The Privatization Unit shall be responsible for the day to day implementation of the Divestiture Programme"; and (4) reads: "To enable it carry out the divestiture of Public Enterprises, the Privatization Unit shall, (a) cause a detailed financial, legal and operational analysis of the Public Enterprise to be carried out by independent auditors, lawyers and other necessary advisors.

(b) Determine the means by which the divestiture of the Public Enterprise may be implemented."

The law also requires that P.U. under Section 9 (4)(b)(c) and (f) of the same Statutory Instrument hold down payments for sales of public enterprises in interest bearing accounts, pending conclusion of the sale agreements, and that to the date of down payment, the deals should be completed within a maximum of three months, and that the successful purchasers shall be required to pay not less than 50 per cent of the purchase price on settlement with the balance payable over a period not exceeding 12 months.

Mr. Speaker, the Committee selected a few enterprises which were exhaustively looked into and found that the law was not followed.  
The process was not transparent, the Privatisation Unit has had no independence in the process i.e. there has been a lot of influence peddling, especially from politicians and some line Ministers.  The issue of nationalism was completely ignored to the extent that no share of enterprises have been floated for sale to the employees or members of the public on the stock exchange.  

The Committee established cases where PU encouraged assets stripping in some enterprises for the benefit of some individuals, created monopolies for the benefit of individuals and ignored the Boards of Directors and Management of some enterprises for the benefit of the purchasers.  

The management and administration of the Privatisation process leaves a lot to be desired and the administration of the proceeds was not impressive either. The process as laid down in the law has a lot of loopholes which have been exploited to manipulate the process. In some instances, the law has not been followed.  

The law provides that liabilities of privatised enterprises will deducted from the divestiture account, but it is so general that unscrupulous people have taken advantage and made outrageous and false claims to PU.  

To prepare enterprises for divestiture, PU appoints a merchant bank or consultants to carry out advertisements, financial and legal, valuations and ascertain the legal status of the enterprise. The appointment and the determination of professional fees is done arbitrarily and is one of the biggest drains on the divestiture account. Some of the services are repeated, many times for the same company, contracts and services are not transparently awarded i.e. no advertising, and for the same kind of job different companies are paid widely different amounts of money.  

The Committee observed that there are instances when sale agreements are not followed up to conclusion. As a result, workers' terminal benefits remain unpaid and many have resorted to suing Government.  

Boards and management of enterprises that have been identified for privatisation have deliberately run down Government enterprises into bankruptcy. This is done through making bad deals, false claims and sometimes outright stealing.  After running down the enterprise, the same officials are paid millions of shillings in terminal benefits.  

The Committee established that political interference has some times slowed down the process of privatisation causing further drain on the divestiture account. The following enterprises are glaring examples of such interferences: Uganda Airlines, Coffee Marketing Board, Uganda Air Cargo, Ugil and many others. The Government has lost a lot of money as a result of bad contracts and inaccurate legal advice. This is in spite of the existence of a fully fledged legal department at the PU assisted by a World Bank legal adviser. All these contracts are also scrutinised by the Attorney General, but in some cases, the Government is not advised appropriately.  In such cases, money is lost in settlement of liabilities.  

Political interference has been sighted in the tendering process and final awards for the enterprises and the settlement of contentious claims.  A few examples are Uganda Grain Milling, Entebbe Handling Services, Uganda Commercial Bank, Uganda Air Cargo and others. The investigative organs i.e. the IGG, have not played their part to ensure smooth implementation of the privatisation process.  

As examples to the above facts, the Committee is examining the following enterprises: Uganda Airlines, Uganda Commercial Bank, Transocean Uganda Limited, East African Steel Corporation, Uganda Telecommunications Limited and Uganda Air Cargo.   While the Committee is still continuing with its work, it can report on the following enterprises:- Transocean (U) Limited, Uganda Airlines Corporation and Uganda Commercial Bank.

TRANSOCEAN (U) LIMITED:
Transocean (U) Limited is classified under category 4 of the PERD Statute for 100 per cent divestiture. It was incorporated in April 1969 with a total of 7,500 shares owned by Transocean Mercantile Vaduz of Switzerland, owning 49 percent shares, NTC Transocean Forwarding and Clearing Company Limited, that is a Government company owning 51 per cent shares. In 1972, the Government of Uganda nationalised the Transocean Mercantile Vaduz share holding in Transocean (U) Limited and compensated them in 1979 a total of US $480,000 for its 49 per cent share holding. Transocean, therefore, enjoyed monopoly of clearing,forwarding and transporting for the Government of Uganda until the market was liberalised.

Divestiture Action Plan:
At its 161st meeting held on 11th of December, 1997, DRIC approved divestiture of Transocean and decided to divest a rationalised Transocean (U) Limited. This meant that divesting Transocean without its core assets like the Mombasa properties which includes two Go-Downs and an office block, the Nakawa Inland Port, liabilities, office equipment and machinery.

The Committee saw this as the beginning of the doom of Transocean (U) Limited, because this meeting agreed with assets stripping proposed by Government through the Minister in charge of privatisation.  This specifically excluded the NIP, the Mombasa properties and all liabilities from the sale of Transocean (U) Limited.  All these properties were valued at Shs.5.3 billion and were to be retained by the Government of Uganda. The above therefore meant that the properties to be sold were:-Transocean (U) Limited head office, the Kansanga house and the trade name 'Transocean'.  A new company known as M/S Transocean Uganda (1998) Limited was incorporated to take over the TUL head office, the Kansanga house and the trade name. 

Valuation:
The value of Transocean as fixed by the valuer Lawrie Prophet and Company stood at Shs. 6,072,801,000/=. This includes land, building, furniture and equipment, motor vehicles and plant and machinery.
The Committee noted that though Transocean has the above stated value, the method employed by the privatisation unit for the sale of Transocean has reduced its value to only Shs. 250,000,000/=. This method to the Committee was very bad. Motor vehicles, machinery, furniture and equipment were sold separately, leaving Transocean with the head office, the Kansanga house and the trade name as earlier mentioned.  The Committee also noted that some of the items sold have not ben paid for and amongst those who have not completed their payments is a member of this House, who was on the Board of Transocean (U) Limited.

The Mombasa properties and Nakawa Inland port were taken over by Government through a Cabinet resolution and will be run by a company to be established known as 'Ugadev Properties'. The Committee sees the removal of these properties from Transocean as having been done through a mini divestiture. The NIP is to be given to URA.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, as much as I appreciate the speed at which the hon. Chairman is reading the report, there are certain sweeping statements which are not clear.  Shall we seek clarification now or leave it up to the end?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think let the chairman read the report, note where you want to be clarified, I will give you an opportunity to seek such clarification.

MR. AWORI:  Of course, I became nervous, Mr. Speaker, when he said 'a member of this House', I was wondering if I was the one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, you give him time. Proceed.

MR. AISU OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Committee notes that if Transocean (U) Limited was sold as a going concern, it would have attracted more money.  The stripping employed by PU made this enterprise almost worthless.  

THE NAKAWA INLAND PORT:
The Committee recommends that the Nakawa Inland Port should not be given to URA, because, URA has nothing to do with it. URA is a tax collector, it can still collect its taxes from the Nakawa Inland Port even if someone else is using it. The person therefore buying Transocean (U) Limited should be allowed to hire the Nakawa inland Port from Government.  

Taking over of Transocean (U) Limited by the Privatisation Unit:
The method employed by the Privatisation Unit to move into an enterprise is a very crude one. In most cases, when PU is taking over an enterprise, it moves in with police and order everybody out of the enterprise and it is locked up, as if everybody there was a thief.  In the case of Transocean (U) Limited, this is exactly what happened without any notice whatsoever. No formal handover procedure was followed, and in the process, records relating to particular transactions could not be traced. The exercise of ascertaining the value of Transocean (U) Limited, therefore, became speculative.  The staff were later called to hand over one by one. The Committee finds this method very irregular.  

This method of taking over the management of an enterprise has made the privatisation exercise very unpopular among the people of Uganda, especially the affected categories of staff. It has made the affected categories lose credibility because of the way they are bundled out of an enterprise. Everybody now looks at them as thieves and they have thus found it difficult to find alternative employment elsewhere. PU has treated the affected staff like they are not Ugandans and stakeholders as such.

The Caretaker Management of Transocean (U) Limited:
The Committee observed that M/S Dmer Associates who had been appointed to manage Transocean on behalf of PU were at one time employed by Transocean (U) Limited to ascertain the ownership claim by one Mr. Hans Blasberg on Transocean (U) Limited.  Mr. Blasberg claimed that he was still a share holder in Transocean (U) Limited. Dmer Associates investigated the claim and established that Mr. Blasberg had long been compensated and therefore, had no claim.

Dmer Associates therefore claimed Shs. 56 million for their work but the management of Transocean (U) Limited saw this as a very high figure and instead valued their work at Shs. 12 million only. This meant that Transocean thought that Dmer had inflated their bill. Surprising to the Committee, PU accepted to pay Dmer the full amount because according to them, they had done a good job to save the country US $480,000 claimed by Mr. Blasberg. In the report of Lawrie Prophet and company, the valuer who carried out the pre-divestiture audit of Transocean (U) Limited, a figure of 12,498,762/= had been recorded as outstanding for the work done by Mr. Dmer.  The Committee believes that the payment by PU of 56/= million to Dmer was the beginning of the relationship between PU and Dmer leading to the management contract that exists between them.

The Committee noted that Dmer Associates are not doing their job as required. They have concentrated only on the Nakawa Inland Port, neglecting the other aspects of Transocean.  For example, when members of the Committee visited the Transocean Head office, they found it in a dilapidated state and so was the house at Kansanga.  We also found out that all other branches of Transocean (U) Limited had closed except Malaba and Dar es salaam branches which are also operating far below expectation. The revenue from Nakawa Inland Port have also declined as compared to when Transocean (U) Limited was operating it.

The Visit to Nairobi, Mombasa and Dar es Salaam by three members of the Committee:
Three members of the Committee, Mr. Speaker, travelled to the above places to ascertain the following:-
1.  Payment to M/S Almeta Impex (K) Ltd of US $546,845;
2.  The management of Transocean (U) Limited, CMB and LMB properties at Mombasa and;
3.  The claim of US $113,191.25 by Tanzania Cotton Lint and Seed Board which was not recorded in Transocean books in the possession of PU; and
4.  To ascertain the status of Transocean (U) Limited in the three places.

The findings of the Committee were as follows:
1.  Payment to M/S Almeta Impex. The Committee wanted to ascertain the nature of the transaction that led to the payment of US $546,845 to M/S Almeta by PU.  This payment, the Committee noted, was made in a hurry through Mr. Sam Engola, then Chairman of the Board of Transocean.  The payment was hurried on the pretext that M/S Almeta Impex had attached the properties at Mombasa for non payment of his money by Transocean and was going to sell the property.  Members of the Committee had also been informed that the money was personally delivered by the Chairman.  We found this irregular.

Although the management of Transocean had agreed with M/S Almeta a payment of US $ 335,935, payment of US $546,845 was effected by PU.  We could not find the rationale for this amount.

M/S Almeta was very uncooperative and was not willing to discuss the matter with the members of the Committee. We could not obtain any documentation regarding the transaction. It was only after the help of our High Commissioner in Nairobi that we later got just only a confirmation from M/S Almeta that they actually received the money.
M/S Almeta Impex supplied, stored and transported salt for the former Foods and Beverages, which used the services of Transocean Uganda Limited as a clearing and Forwarding agent.

Records for the above transaction were not available, except the agreement for clearing and forwarding the salt and the ruling of the High Court of Kenya of 20th May 1995 sitting at Nairobi, requiring Transocean to pay. The Committee noted that the court ruling did not bear any stamp of the Kenya High Court and the Committee was not able to obtain the attachment warrant which purportedly was issued for the properties of Mombasa.


2. Management of TUL, CMB and LMB properties of Mombasa:        

The Committee was informed by the PU and the Minister in-  charge of privatisation, that Government was to establish a company called 'Ugadev Properties', to manage its properties abroad. The Committee was interested in the current management of the properties. The team that travelled to these places established that all the above properties are managed by Mr. Asiimwe Evans under the supervision of PU.

The properties of LMB and TUL were in a state of disrepair.  The team also found out that the Ministry of Agriculture equipment stored in the Trans-Ocean stores for many years have rendered the store unusable for the same period.  The CMB stores were most well kept.  Money collected from the rent of these stores is banked in the PU account.

The CMB has a total of 5 Go-downs all valued at US Dollars 10,070,295. LMB has 4 min Go-downs valued at US dollars 3,598,369 and one empty plot of 5 acres, and it also has a residential house. The LMB properties had been under a liquidator who collected all the rent money and managed all the properties on behalf of PU until he handed them over to Mr. Asiimwe on 18/9/98.  TUL has 2 Go-downs and an office block at the Prime Division Centre of Mombasa all valued at US Dollars 66.386.66

3. The Claim of US Dollars 113,191.25 by the Tanzania Cotton           Lint and Seed Board. 

The Committee was informed that due to the hurried take over of TUL, so many creditors had not been listed, and others were listed when they did not owe Transocean  anything.  The Committee was informed that the Tanzania Cotton Lint and Seed Board was going to sue Transocean Dar-es-Salaam branch for non payment of the said amount and yet these figures were not reflected in the books of Transocean.

On visiting the Dar-es-Salaam branch, the Committee found that there exists a debt of US Dollars 113.191.25 owed to Tanzania Cotton Lint and Seed Board by Transocean for renting their stores for storing 3000 M/Tones of sugar. There was evidence of correspondence to this effect between Tanzania cotton Lint and Seed Board and Transocean Dar-es-Salaam branch.  The sugar was to be transported to Uganda from Cuba on a barter trade arrangement in 1988.  The team also found out that contrary to the claim by PU that the Dar-es-Salaam branch had other liabilities, the Committee did not establish any liabilities.

The branch did not have any properties except two vehicles which are grounded at the Uganda Embassy in Dar-es-Salaam.

On the question of the status of Transocean in Mombasa, Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam, the team established that in Mombasa and Nairobi, the Transocean branches were closed, but in Dar-es-Salaam the Committee found out that the branch was actually operating contrary to the information PU had given to the Committee. The branch  had three staff carrying out day-to-day operations of the branch making about 4,000 US dollars per month; and the branch is headed by one Mrs. Lydia Majula (a Tanzanian) who was formally employed as a tea-girl and quickly rose to the level of declaration clerk/Typist.

Divestiture of Transocean Uganda Limited:
In April 1998 Transocean was advertised for sale and bids were received as follows:
M/s Combined Services Ltd       180 Million
Coin Ltd.                       361 Million
Hardline International Ltd      220 Million
John Stones Ltd                 185 Million

The Committee noted that DRIC at its 196th meeting of 16th June 1998 note No 195/1 made the following observations about Coin Ltd, the one who bid highest. 

a)"M/s Coin Ltd should not win the bid because: M/s Coin Investment Proposal is too good to be true.  There was  need to establish that Investment of Shs. 1.1 billion proposed by them will be implemented.	

Mr. R. Ddungu the owner of Coin Ltd. bid for Hima Cement at US Dollars 43 million through (LACOR) a sister company of Coin Ltd. and did not take up the offer when offered. 

Through his associated companies he has taken a deposit or contracted Government of Uganda work and failed to complete the work and neither refunds the money.   

Mr. Ddungu has other obligations in CMBL which he has not made good of.
b) "That Mr. R. Ddungu owns 90 percent of Coin Ltd and has majority shares in RIO Holdings Ltd, the other shareholder of Coin Ltd, thus its difficult to separate Mr. Ddungu from Coin Ltd. as suggested by other members."

I think here other members in DRIC had suggested that there is need to separate Mr. Ddungu from Coin Ltd. because it was argued that Ddungu and Coin Ltd. cannot be separated.

c) 'Parliament wants DRIC to conduct its own due diligence before sale. This mainly covers credibility of the bidders.'	

d)"Analysis of the bids was according to advert.It gave price 90 percent score and this rendered business plan score inconsequential. The advert further ignored the position that DRIC is not obliged to sell to the highest bidder." But Members of the Committee argued that no, there should be due diligence done to establish the credibility, that is why they said the offer of 90  percent was a record for a price.  

The Committee also noted that, DRIC at the same meeting deiced to form a sub Committee comprising of hon. J. Mwandha, Mr. Onagi Obel and staff of PU to review the following about the bid of Coin Ltd.
1. Mr. Ddungu's bid for Hima and why he had not taken the offer.
2. Allegation that he has defrauded Government of Uganda on contracts not executed.
3. Ownership of Rio and LACKOR Companies;
4. Ddungu's uncompleted obligations with Coffee Marketing Board Ltd.

The Sub-Committee of hon. Mwandha met on 23rd June 1998 and found out - I am quoting this also from the minutes of the meetings of the Committee -  
1. Coin Ltd and Mr. Rogers Ddungu have an outstanding obligation of Uganda shillings 423 million with Coffee Marketing Board Limited as under.
a) Coin East Africa Lt. outstanding balance  128 million;
b) Mr. Roger  Ddungu outstanding balance 295 million; totalling to 423 million.
The above obligation are a result of purchase of non-core assets of CMBL in Kenya.
2. M/s Rio Holdings was awarded a contract to supply cement to Ministry of Education and was advanced US Dollars 43,000 in 1993.  He deposited an Insurance bond of US Dollars 20,000 from RIO Insurance, a sister Company.The Company neither supplied the cement nor cashed the bond.
The Sub-Committee recommended that DRIC can only award Transocean to Mr. Ddungu after he has settled his obligation with CMBL immediately.
At its 198th Meeting held on June 26th 1998, DRIC note No. 198/2 DRIC was informed of the above findings and scenarios.  DRIC made the following observations -  I am again quoting from DRIC minutes -
a) "Mr. Ddungu is not a clean man. He is always involved in dubious business.
b) Mr. R. Ddungu has many companies all with the name 'COIN'.  It is difficult to know which 'COIN' one is dealing with.
c) COIN Ltd. offer price is far higher than the next bidder.  It is difficult to compare the Investment proposals with others.  It is further observed that this proposal may not be attainable.
d) Mr. Rogers Ddungu may not afford to pay for TUL as he is heavily indebted.  Selling TUL to him increases his obligations to over Uganda Shillings 700 million which he is unlikely to afford."

DRIC therefore decided to terminate the tender and inform all the bidders accordingly and immediately prepare and advertise Transocean.  Once again, but this was not done. On July 1st 1998, Ddungu's lawyer, Mr. Shonubi Musoke, wrote to the Director PU to  the effect that "The sub-committee meeting with Ddungu was informal as in his individual capacity and that much of what was stated at the meeting was informal and off record." It should not be used to Mr. Ddungu's detriment or that of COIN Ltd. The letter is attached and I would like to inform Members that there many other attachments to this document which are still being photocopied. I think by the end of my presentation they will have been circulated to Members. The Committee could deduce from this that an insider in PU must have tipped Mr. Ddungu of DRIC's decision to cancel the offer of TUL.

On 3rd July 1998, after DRIC had decided on the matter the sub-Committee met to review the matter. The Committee found this unacceptable since DRIC had already taken a decision on the matter. The sub-committee of DRIC amended their recommendations as follows:

i) "DRIC decision of 198th meeting be revisited with a view of  following the bidding procedure," - all these are minutes of DRIC.  The view of the select Committee is that the bidding procedures were followed but COIN was disqualified on the grounds of the due diligence done.  

 ii) DRIC requests Mr. Ddungu to settle his obligations with CMBL immediately, in any case not later than 14 days from date of offer."  The Committee noted that Ddungu was offered TUL on 22nd July 1998 and later CMBL properties were withdrawn from Mr. Ddungu for none payment.  It is also worthy noting that the letter of offer was awarding TUL to Mr. Ddungu, not M/s COIN Ltd.

iii) DRIC again recommended that TUL be offered to M/s COIN Ltd, on condition that he clears all his obligation to CMBL and makes a full payment of Transocean bid price up front." This meant that Mr. Roger Ddungu had to pay the full amount of TUL without any conditions, but this has not been done. The select Committee strongly holds that a decision by DRIC cannot be revised by sub-committee of DRIC unless there is undue influence peddling or manipulation in the matter. The Committee was shocked to learn later that DRIC at its 199th meeting of 6th July 1998 attended by the Minister in-charge of privatisation reversed its earlier decision to cancel the bids and offered TUL to M/s COIN Ltd on the following condition: Payment of deposit 50 percent within seven days from date of offer and balance as per bid terms.
Demand settlement of liabilities to CMBL by COIN and Mr. Ddungu in 14 days.
Failure of which properties will be withdrawn.

The Committee noted the following: 
1.  DRIC reversed its decision to cancel the bids when Members of Parliament who represent DRIC were absent from the meeting. The Committee was informed that Members of Parliament who sit in DRIC were instrumental in rejecting the bid for Mr. Ddungu, but in their absence, the decision was quickly reversed.
2. DRIC was intimidated by the letter written by Mr. Ddungu's lawyers on July 1st 1998 to the Director PU and I want to read this letter to the Members.  The letter reads:

" PRIVATISATION OF TRANSOCEAN 1998 LIMITED

Our letter Ref: 139
Dated: August to which we have not been favoured with a response refers.
As we informed you in the said letter, our client obtained at considerable expense the required bank guarantee, a copy which is attached and he is now paying interest on it, yet he has not finalised the transactions with you.  Are we to understand that you will indemnify him for the cost you have made him incur?  We also request your permission for our client to enter property at 6th street and in Kansanga to ensure that the premises are not vandalized, since the finalisation of this transaction does not seem to be anywhere near completion.

A prompt response will be appreciated.

The earlier letter referred to was complaining that - it is unfortunate I did not get it, but we have it in our records. It was indicating that the lawyers of Mr. Ddungu were unhappy with the way DRIC treated Mr. Ddungu and threatened court action if they cancelled the offer to Mr. Ddungu.
4. DRIC reversed its decision to cancel the bids and later offered TUL to M/s COIN Ltd. because they wanted to exploit the opportunity to collect money for the divestiture account at the expense of a good sale.
5. The earlier decision by DRIC to question the integrity of Mr. Ddungu as the majority share holder of M/S COIN Ltd. was correct as a procedure of due diligence to establish the capabilities of the company.

Hon. Members, those were the observations of the Committee as regards the decision of DRIC.
 
I would now like to give the recommendations of the Committee on the question of Transocean Uganda Limited.
 1.  The Committee recommends that the Privatisation Unit cancels the offer of Transocean Uganda Limited to M/S COIN Limited on the grounds that:-
 (a)  Mr. Ddungu keeps changing his company name fraudulently.
 (b)  Mr. Ddungu's business track record is dubious as evidenced by the failed contracts between him, Government and the Privatisation Unit.
 (c)  Mr. Ddungu is a fraudulent man as seen by his failure to supply cement to the Ministry of Education to the tune of US $43,000.
 
 2.  The new offer of Transocean Uganda Limited should include a management contract with Nakawa Inland Port.
 
This was referred to earlier, and in the meantime, as the offer is cancelled, the current caretaker of Transocean and Nakawa Inland Port may continue up to when Transocean Uganda Limited has been fully divested.
 
I now go to the privatisation of Uganda Airlines Corporation (UAC).  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, Uganda Airlines Corporation was established by a 1976 Presidential Decree following the collapse of the East African Community.  Its mandate was to establish and operate safe and efficient air transport services.  
 
At the beginning of 1993, its activities included: flight operations, in-flight catering services and ground handling which includes passenger, cargo and aircraft handling.  In the same year, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) embarked on an exercise to 'liberalise' services at Entebbe airport. The Committee took an interest in this exercise and interviewed CAA and other officials about it because, it is through this process that parts of Uganda Airlines were privatised piecemeal.
                                       
The initial objective of CAA  was to remove Uganda Airlines Corporation monopoly, introduce competition, attract more capital and achieve efficiency and cost-effectiveness in delivery of airport services.  The Committee observed that the term "liberalisation" which was used heavily in the initial stages gave way to a term "restructuring" and the objective of introducing competition was quickly abandoned. Concessions were awarded to various companies belonging to politically powerful individuals or their cronies without a proper process of tendering, and Uganda Airlines Corporation was stripped of its assets which went to the new concession holders.
 
The Committee noted with concern that although the PERD Statute came into force in September 1993, CAA's parallel process of privatising key parts of Uganda Airlines went on until 1996, therefore, in violation of the PERD Statute. The Privatisation Unit eventually took over the management of Uganda Airlines in 1997. The Committee finds that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications then, acted in contravention of Section 3, 6, and 28 (2) of the PERD Statute by assuming the power of restructuring a public enterprise, Uganda Airlines, and reducing Government equity holding in it which power is legally vested in DRIC Committee alone. Section 28 (2) of the Statute states clearly that: "where any provision of any enactment conflicts with any provision of this Statute, the latter shall prevail over the former".

In-flight Catering Services:
CAA published a public notice, Members, it is attached to those documents which I referred earlier on, it is just a public notice, not an advert about the question of opportunities existing at Entebbe International Airport; flight catering was listed under these. The public notice attached to this report does not meet the requirements of an invitation to tender for services.  For example,
 (i)  It does not spell out any requirements, such as company details, capital layout, expertise, et cetera and;
 (ii)  It does not give any deadline for submissions of bids/requests.  This will be elaborated later.
 
 The Committee requested to see the responses to the public notice which was submitted, the criteria for selection and the subsequent grading.  CAA failed to provide this information.  The Committee, therefore, concluded that the concession to provide in-flight catering services was given out without fair competition to a consortium of the following equal share holders.
 1. Uganda Airlines
 2. FEDIX, a South African Company with experience in the business.
 3. Efforte Corporation owned by Maj. General Caleb Akandwanaho, also known as Salim Saleh, and Mr. Hezi Bezalel, an Israel national;
 4.  Kenbe Investments Limited initially owned by Mr & Mrs. William Byaruhanga; and a one Mr. Charles Mbire. The Committee noted that Mr. Charles Mbire is almost in all the major privatised enterprises, including UCB, UTL, MTN, many others.  The Committee noted this as absurd.
 
 Some aspects of Uganda Airlines were valued and brought into a new company called Uganda In-flight Services Limited as part payment for Uganda Airlines Corporation 20 per cent shares.  Mr. Charles Mbire became the first chairman of the company and management was provided by FEDIX.  A concession agreement was signed with Uganda Airlines Corporation on this.  All these documents were availed to the Committee.  If any member would like to inspect them, they are available, the Committee will table them soon thereafter.
 
 On 23rd January, 1997, the owners of Kenbe Investments sold 999 shares of their company to the owners of Efforte and the remaining one share to a company called MUSTWIN Corporation. Two of the directors of MUSTWIN are Mr. Hezi Bezalel and Maj. General Caleb Akandwanaho. The effect of this sale was to secretly transfer 20 per cent shares of Uganda In flight Services to the owners of Efforte. The Committee saw this as a deliberate move by the owners of Efforte to circumvent Clause 12 of the shareholders agreement which prohibits any shareholder from selling or transferring his or her shares without first offering them to other share holders, including Uganda Airlines.
 
The Committee noted that through this transaction, effective control of in-flight catering services at Entebbe was handed over to foreigners. Members should note that the issue of foreign control of Entebbe Airport has always been considered harmful to the national interest and another agreement has a provision which safeguards against this, that is the ENHAS Agreement, which is also with us.
 
Privatisation of Uganda Airlines Ground Handling Equipment:
The Committee noted that contrary to the PERD Statute, the then Minister of Works, Transport and Communications and CAA went ahead to privatise Uganda Airlines ground handling assets.  The then Minister was hon. Kirunda Kivejinja.  This was a deliberate breach of the law for which the Minister of Works, Housing, Transport and Communications should be answerable.  The Minister in charge of privatisation was fully aware of this illegality but made no attempt to halt it. The Committee found this an abdication of responsibility.
 
The process of privatising the assets was most ad-hoc, unprofessional, unethical and unfair.  It begun with CAA inviting inquiries in The New Vision, Public Notice of 23rd November 1993 mentioned earlier.  Services listed included, among others, aircraft, cargo and passenger handling which were being provided by Uganda Airlines Corporation at that time.  The Public Notice was open to manipulation because it had no specifications of time limit. The Committee once again requested to see all the responses to the notice;
 (i)   the selection criteria
 (ii)  The details of the grading, but CAA failed to avail them.
 
This is evidence that there was no systematic professional approach to privatising Uganda Airlines Corporation Ground handling assets.  It is also clear that there was no intention of selecting a service provider on a competitive basis.
 
Correspondence dating from 1994 December show that CAA, Uganda Airlines and Sabena, with the blessing of the then Minister of Works, Transport and Communication held a series of meetings to establish a handling company together. This directly contradicts the intention of the Public Notice.  The Committee formed an opinion that the Notice was only intended to bluff the public since by 1994, the new partners had been identified as Uganda Airlines, Sabena, and CAA itself.
 
Almost two years after - this is what I want Members to note - the public Notice, the Managing Director of Global Link, wrote to CAA on 23rd January 1995, expressing an interest in ground handling.  The MD of CAA wrote back promptly in a letter referenced CAA/DAT/HS dated 31st January 1995 as follows:
"Under CAA Airport operation programme, ground handling at Entebbe is due for privatisation.  To enable us evaluate your potential to participate in this vital operation, you are requested to prepare and submit to us, as soon as possible your company's profile for our study and action".
While the CAA was able to wait for two years to receive an application from Global Airlinks, it was quick to close the door to other applicants.  An example is the Uganda Clearing and Forwarding Agents Association who applied for the concession two months later on 30th March 1995, letter referenced UCIFA/MIN/0395 is also here attached. In his reply, reference CAA/DAT/HS/221 April 1995, the MD of CAA says;
"It is worth noting that the interest shown by UCIFA at this stage in time to be granted a concession to carry out ground handling services is too late.  CAA advertised these airport business opportunities as far back as April 1993!" 
 But in 1995, Global Airlinks was given the opportunity and somebody who applied two months later, was too late.  

Even before Global Airlinks submitted its profile, MD of CAA invited the company to participate in a meeting on the formation of a ground handling consortium.  The meeting which took place on 23rd February 1995 was attended by hon. Sam Kutesa on behalf of Global Airlinks, Maj. General Akandwanaho on behalf of Caleb's International.  There is no record of a letter of inquiry or invitation to Caleb's International.  The Committee concluded that this company applied and was invited verbally to join the consortium.  It therefore, found the method of selection of Global Airlinks and Caleb's International unfair and not transparent.

Further, the minutes of the meeting of 23rd February 1995 indicate that there was an agreement that the two companies become partners in the consortium even before the company profiles were submitted.  This is contrary to the second schedule of the PERD Statute which states that:
"Every effort shall be made by the Committee, that is the DRIC Committee to satisfy itself as to the standing and credentials of all interested parties before any negotiations are entered into.  For this reason, all interested parties shall be requested to provide details as to their business history, affiliations and future business plans."
 
The Committee concluded that in assembling the consortium to take over Uganda Airlines Corporation's ground handling assets, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications and CAA acted illegally and unfairly. 

After protracted negotiations in which CAA was involved, both as an arbitrator and as a partner, the shares in the new company, later to be called Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS) were allotted as follows: Uganda Airlines, 50 per cent - well, Members can see from the Table if you have the report.
 
In his guidance on the establishment of ENHAS, the Minister of Works had required that the consortium has a fully paid up share capital of not less that US $3,000,0000. However, an initial amount of US $1,500,000 was finally agreed upon. Uganda Airlines was to contribute its ground handling equipment as part payment for its shares.
 
Article 5.2 of the shareholders' agreement requires all shares to be first offered to consortium members before they are sold. Also Article 5.1 states that at all material times, the majority of shares in ENHAS are held by citizens of Uganda. Each member of the consortium is entitled to at least one Director. Although workers of Uganda Airlines and CAA were entitled to one director as a group, to date, they have never appointed their Board member. However, the MD of CAA was appointed to the Board. It is not clear who he represents. Certainly, it is not the workers, since their group, that is Uganda Airlines and CAA workers, have never met to choose its representative.  The workers right to a board seat was put in the agreement but it was ignored right from the beginning.  

The first board meeting took place on 26th of October 1995, Uganda Airlines was assigned two seats on the Board, Global Airlinks, Efforte and Sabena one each. Despite owning half the company, Uganda Airlines was given two out of six directorships and the chair went to the Managing Director of Global Airlinks, Hon. Sam Kutesa.  The Committee noted with concern that, Uganda Airlines Corporation's marginalisation in the decision making of ENHAS and its domination by the small share holders which is obvious in this set-up continued until Uganda Airline shares were sold.
 
Valuation of Uganda Airlines Corporation Ground Handling Equipment.

Bageine and Company was contracted to value the assets and issued a certificate of value in the amount of 637,171,000/- shillings.  However, an ENHAS Board resolution put the value as at 414,118,000/-.  The Committee learnt that some equipment was rejected as obsolete.  It is difficult to believe that equipment professionally valued at more than shillings 200 million could be rejected. This is one of the many examples of how Uganda Airlines kept getting a raw deal from its partners in ENHAS. Uganda Airlines had other equipment on order, which on arrival was to be put on the consortium too. Its value of US dollars 135,882 was counted as part of Uganda Airlines payment for its shares.   
Payment for the shares:
The Committee asked CAA for proof of payment for shares as the first call on the 23rd January, 1996. The Committee confirmed the following payments to ENHAS Gold Trust Bank Account. Efforte Corporation paid 70,000 US Dollars in 5th January, 1996 and 200,000 dollars on 1st February 1996, A deposit on behalf of Efforte of Uganda shillings 30 million indicated on a deposit slip of 1st December, 1995 is not reflected on ENHAS account.  It was not established whether EFFORTE ever paid the remaining US dollars 30,000 for its shares.  
 
Global Airlines:
Members you can refer to the Schedule.  But it is worth noting that all the shares were paid by 28th February, 1998 by Global Airlines.  And Sabena paid its shares also on the same date. Uganda Airline's payment was in the form of equipment available, 214,000 US Dollars and equipment on order 135,000 US Dollars. By 9th March, Uganda Airlines still owed US Dollar 100,000 which was settled later. Workers shares were not expected immediately because both organisations had to first put in place policies and mechanisms for subscribing and benefitting from the shares. Final payment for CAA Workers shares was made in August 1998. Uganda Airlines first attempted to part pay for its workers shares in August 1997 but the payment was rejected by the management of ENHAS which was firmly in the hands of Global Ailinks and Efforte. The second attempt was made in 1998 but it too was futile.  Global Airlinks and Efforte pointed out that although it had originally been agreed to give the workers five percent shares, no allotment had been registered at the Registry of Companies in 1995. So the workers could only buy shares after the second call made in April 1998 at the current market value. By this time the value of the shares had multiplied by seven times their original value. The Executive Director of Privatisation Unit told the Committee that he arranged two meetings for the ENHAS Chairman to meet with the workers to resolve the issue of their shares before Uganda Airlines shares were sold and on both times the Chairman failed to show up. The Committee found it unfortunate that the Chairman who is also a government Minister showed insensitivity and arrogance to the workers of this country.  In this case, as in other privatisation, workers lost out to the economically and politically powerful private sector actors.
 
The period after privatisation of Uganda Airlines Ground Handling equipment.:
The agreement to provide ground handling services was signed between ENHAS and CAA on 30th March, 1996 and ENHAS started operations in April 1996.  The minutes of Board meetings available to the Committee showed that:
1.  Despite the fact that Uganda Airlines continued to provide services until April 1996 when it handed over its equipment to ENHAS, it had to pay its March revenue to ENHAS at the insistence of the new partners.  The Committee found this unfair.  The situation we observed was that, Uganda Airlines was still handling itself by April when it sold off its shares to ENHAS.  But when ENHAS assumed the management of this equipment, it demanded Uganda Airlines to pay back in April, and yet they took over management in April, but demanded Uganda Airlines to pay much.
 
2.  Uganda Airlines Corporation was dominated by the smaller shareholders and had a very weak bargaining position, a fact which must have been obvious to CAA, the architect of the consortium.  This weakness is reflected in the numerous proposals Uganda Airlines made which were ignored, and the decisions taken by top management without consulting Uganda Airlines.  The Committee observed from the minutes availed to it, that out of 20 Board meetings held between 1995 and early 1998, 16 took place at the Efforte boardroom in Impala House on Kimathi Avenue, 3 took place at unspecified venues and only one took place at Uganda Airlines Corporation's offices.  This is despite the fact that Uganda Airlines and ENHAS have board rooms of their own.
 
3.  Global Airlinks and Efforte through their Joint Managing Directors controlled the operations and finances of the company. Uganda Airlines did not control ENHAS finances and complained about financial mismanagement in the company.  It contested accounts presented by the Board Chairman.  To cite one example:  At the board meeting of the 20th February, 1997, two sets of conflicting accounts were presented which Uganda Airlines representatives and the Board Chairman had a bitter disagreement about. The meeting degenerated into a shouting match and had to adjourn temporarily with the departure of the Chairman.  Here we are trying to bring out the fact that, most often when Uganda Airlines demanded a clarification of the position of the accounts of ENHAS, the Management of ENHAS would always deny them a clarification.  And in some meetings, they would actually quarrel because of the situation.
 
4.  While these disagreements between Uganda Airlines and the directors of Global Airlinks and Efforte continued, the Uganda Airlines Corporation Board was terminated and a new one appointed.  The Minister of Works, Transport and Communication chose to appoint the Managing Director of Caleb's International to lead Uganda Airlines.  Members will remember that Caleb's International and Efforte both belong to Maj.Gen.Salim Saleh.  It is not possible that the conflict of interest could have escaped the Minister's notice.  Neither is it possible to believe that Efforte and Global Airlinks did not influence this decision.  The Committee found this an abuse of power by the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications.
 
5.  There was deep distrust and resentment between the partners as evidenced by the minutes of the Board and several correspondences between Uganda Airlines and Global Airlinks and Efforte.  The situation was complicated by the fact that the small shareholders were represented by politically powerful people who did not fail to remind Uganda Airlines officials of their public positions.
  
6.  Uganda Airlines depended on revenue from ground handling to pay for its other operations. It therefore, wanted to be paid dividends every three months. The other partners were interested in ploughing back the profits to improve the company. This was a source of constant contention.  A six-month period was set to declare and share dividends.
 
An Indian accountant left the company without notice and auditors found a shortfall of US dollars 445,761 which was written off as a bad debt.  Uganda Airlines felt that the responsibility to repay this money lay with Efforte and Global Airlinks who were controlling the company.
 
The Committee was concerned that CAA, which had created the consortium and which was represented on the Board, made no attempt to resolve the conflicts.  It noted with disappointment that this relationship never recovered.
 
Privatisation of Uganda Airlines Corporation Shares in ENHAS:
Although the Minister for Privatisation wrote to the Chairman of Uganda Airlines as early as February 1995, the Privatisation Unit only begun to prepare the company for privatisation late in 1997.  By this time, some of Uganda Airlines assets had already been sold to Uganda In-flight Services and ENHAS. The Committee believes that Uganda Airlines could have fetched a better value if it had not been stripped of its assets bit by bit. The Ministers for Privatisation and of Works, Transport and Communications are jointly responsible for this situation. The Committee wishes to point out an inconsistency on the part of the two Ministers. The Minister of Works, Transport and Communication and CAA conducted the first privatisation of Uganda Airlines ground handling equipment and the setting up of ENHAS, but it was Privatisation Unit which disposed of Uganda Airlines Corporations ENHAS shares. I hope Members note the controversy there, that the Ministers did the other two parts, then Privatisation Unit eventually killed it.
 
Valuation:
To pay off Uganda Airlines Corporation's debts, especially with IATA, DRIC decided to sell off Uganda Airlines Corporations in ENHAS.  The question of advertising them did not arise because of a preemptive article in the ENHAS shareholders agreement.  This article requires that all shares are first offered to members of the consortium before they are sold.
 
Privatisation Unit commissioned three renowned companies to value Uganda Airlines Corporation's shares in ENHAS. The following values were reported by Privatisation Unit to DRIC.
 
 Ernest and Young put the value of the shares between 5,279,502 US dollars and 8,851,000 US dollars.
 
DFCU put the value between 5 million dollars and 8 million dollars and Delloitte and Touche put the value between 3,375,000 and 4,856,000 million US dollars.
 
These values were based on the realistic assumption that ENHAS license would be renewed after three years.  The Committee learnt from the Executive Director of Privatisation Unit that, PU also did its own in-house evaluation which put the value at the lowest figure of 3.7 US dollars.  Global Airlinks and Efforte made an offer of 2.25 US million dollars.
 
" After protracted negotiations, the representatives of Global Airlinks and Efforte revised their offer to US 3.75 million. The matter was therefore referred to DRIC who in their 177th meeting held on Monday March 9th 1998, approved the price of 3.75 million dollars".  I was quoting that from a DRIC Note No. 181/1 of 19th March, 1998.
 
The Committee noted a wide discrepancy between the valuation of Deloitte and Touche and the others. Yet this was the value which DRIC decided to sell the shares at. DRIC favoured Global Airlinks and Efforte, DRIC favoured Global Airlinks and Efforte by offering them the lowest possible value.  This value was far too low compared to the other valuations and it was given by Delloitte and Touche which happens to be the auditing firm for ENHAS. The Committee observed that Global Airlinks and Efforte set a price for the Uganda Airlines shares which DRIC approved. The two decided and DRIC approved. Given that ENHAS was earning profits, the shares could have been put on the open market to realise the true market value, if the partners could not raise the funds to pay. The pre-emptive clause only applies if the other shareholders are willing and able to pay the true market value of the shares. As a result of DRIC's decision, the Government realised the minimum it could in this transaction.
 
Payment for the shares.
Sabena Airlines declined to buy any more shares.  An offer was made to Efforte and Global Airlinks to make a deposit of US 1 million dollars immediately and the balance was to be paid with 3 months.  The Committee requested PU and ENHAS Chairman to see proof of payments within the agreed upon time-frame.  The information availed was incomplete.  It indicated that some payments were made after the three months deadline.  Global Airlinks paid a sum of US dollars 10,710.37 as interest on delayed payment.  Efforte Corporation paid US dollars 1.2 million from a UCB loan.  The security was the shares of Efforte in ENHAS.  The Committee however cannot confirm that all payments were made.
 
While the ENHAS shareholders agreement sets out to ensure that ownership of this important service-provider remains in Ugandan hands, the Committee observed that the total participation of foreigners in the new structure is greater than that of Ugandans.  
 
Privatisation of the rest of Uganda Airlines:
Uganda Airlines was advertised in the local and international press in March, 1998.  Six bids were received and the following companies were pre-qualified:
 
British Airways; 
Sabena;
Air Mauritius; and, 
South African Airways/ Alliance Air.
 
These observations from PU are worth noting:  I quote,
 
"The key issue holding the divestiture of Uganda Airlines is lack of clear Government policy on the Gender African Air Services Agreement.  This Agreement has the following effects:
 
(a) The AJAS Agreements in their present form make Uganda Airlines unattractive to a potential Strategic Economic Partner other than Alliance/South African Airways in particular, because they grant and purport to entrench certain privileges and protections in Alliance in the allocation of route rights.
 
(b) The provisions of the AJAS Agreements are contradictory to the spirit, and in some cases to the letter of the Government of Uganda's aviation policy.  This is particularly so in those cases where the AJAS Agreements restrict competition and the on the Government of Uganda's sovereign rights to assign route rights to any airline.
 
(c) The Agreements must therefore either be cancelled or substantially renegotiated before Uganda Airlines can be divested. At a minimum, the rights enjoyed by each of Uganda Airlines and Alliance must be made explicit and alliance's exclusive designation as uganda's flag carrier on some or all international routes be removed.
 
 (d) AJAS is the final and substantive obstacle to the divestiture of Uganda Airlines.  The issues arising must be therefore be resolved without delay if the divestiture is to be completed or Government of Uganda continues spending approximately Shs.33 million per day to maintain Uganda Airlines". That is a quotation from PU.
 
The Committee was disturbed to learn that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication arrogated himself the responsibility of privatising Uganda Airlines routes without  consulting the PU, neither did he consult the CAA whose legal mandate is to designate these routes.  The Committee noted that without routes, ground handling operations or in-flight catering services, Uganda Airlines has been left as a shell and is unattractive to buyers.  
 
Moreover, it is expected that the core investor will seek to handle his/her own operations, like Dairo Air Services. It is a common practice globally for the major carriers to handle their services at their bases. The owners of ENHANS  have an interest in retaining the ground-handling market and have identified a need to partner with an airline.  It is important that the powerful owners of ENHAS do not use political clout to influence the sale of Uganda Airlines.
 
The Committee is strongly of the view that despite its poor performance, Uganda Airlines can attract capital from the public because its potential to turn around once it is in the hands of a competent core investor is very high.  At the end of our investigations PU was in the process of analysing the bids.  
 
Recommendations:
1.  The Government of Uganda should take note that the privatization process has been manipulated and taken advantage of by a few politically powerful people who sacrifice the peoples interests.  The case of how Efforte took control of in-flight catering services, then in partnership with Global Airlinks took over Uganda Airlines ground handling operation, and lately Efforte's declared intention to buy what is left of Uganda Airlines, brings out this fact. Strong and transparent leadership of the process is urgently required.
 
2.  Public officials who used their power to influence the divestiture of parts of Uganda Airlines or who took decisions which were against the national interest should be made accountable.
 
3.  After a core investor has been identified, the public should be given an opportunity to invest in Uganda Airlines through flotation of some shares on the stock exchange.
 
4.  At the end of the ENHAS contract, CAA should liberalise ground handling services and allow other players to introduce competition.
 
Some of Uganda Airlines routes should be returned to it before it is privatised.
 
UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK
The process of sale of the 49 per cent shares in Uganda Commercial Bank was managed and supervised by the Minister of Finance in charge of Privatisation, DRIC, the PU, with Bank of Uganda playing a marginal role in spite of its statutory role as a regulator and supervisor of financial institutions. In their testimony to the Committee, the Bank of Uganda said they were not allowed the chance to oversee the bank during the transition.
 
However, the Committee found that Bank of Uganda was involved in certain aspects as will be expounded further in this Report.
 
The Uganda Commercial Bank  Board, on the other hand, was totally ignored, although in a letter to the Minister of 29th May, 1996, the Board offered to advise on the method to include phased privatization and flotation of shares for the public purchase. During their testimony, the UCB Board informed the Committee that the then Minister, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, and the State Minister, hon. Rukikaire, had advised the Board to resign if they insisted on that position. The Board was quietened.
 
Members should recall the hot debate in Parliament on the issue of divestiture of Uganda Commercial Bank  and the intensive and high level lobbying and the subsequent voting which took us to the division lobby in 1997.
 
The Consultants hired on 23rd February, 1996, to advise Government on the privatization of Uganda Commercial Bank identified the topmost priority of Government to be the "Divestiture of Uganda Commercial Bank as quickly as possible", which, the Consultants noted was so important that it was willing to compromise the other objectives which were,"to maintain Uganda Commercial Bank as a corporate entity and retain its focus on the country-wide Banking Services", and "encourage local investor participation in ownership of UCB and stimulating the development of Domestic  Capital Market".
 
According to the Consultant,"as at September, 1995, the Bank had a shareholder's deficit of Shs.69b/= and capital deficiency of more than Shs.100b/= and suffered periodic liquidity problem". The Governor, Bank of Uganda,  confirmed to the Committee that through the 1990s, UCB was borrowing heavily  through the clearing house and had liquidity problems arising out of political influence in UCB, inside lending and mismanagement.
 
 A former Managing Director of UCB, Dr. Suruma, who testified to the Committee did not agree that UCB was worthless. He pointed out that the hole created on the asset side of the balance sheet by transferring the Shs.67 billion worth of loans to NPART, leaving the deposits on the liability side depicted a picture worse than the reality. The Committee also learnt that the book value and the market value of UCB were not synchronized to take into account the value of all assets - core and non-core. The UCB tower valued at 33 million dollars and other assets like the famous house at Munyonyo, the go-down in industrial area, the residential houses in London, vehicles, branch buildings, et cetera, should have been properly valued with a view to clearing the total accumulated loss.  This was not done.
 
As part of the divestiture action plan, the Consultant observed that there was need for capital injection and introduction of a strategic partner with significant shareholding. The recapitalization plan included the waiver of Shs.26 billion of liabilities owed by UCB to Government, the capitalization of the asset revaluation reserve and issue by Government of Uganda of bonds worth Shs.72 billion. By the time of the final payment UCB's liquidity problem had been solved and the bank was making profits. This was not considered while the deadlines for payment by Westmont were being extended.  

The bank had appreciated in value. After Westmont had failed to meet the first deadline, the Government should have considered re-negotiating  because the position had changed.  This was not done, to the disadvantage of the Government.  
 
The Sale Process:
The Committee found this to have been irregular right from the beginning. The closing date for submitting indicative proposals was 14th March 1997 by which date only five parties, excluding Westmont Holdings, had submitted. Westmont Holdings submitted its indicative proposal on 4th April, more than three weeks later, and this was approved by PU on the grounds that Westmont Holdings had requested for the prior  information before the deadline.
 
 Bank of Uganda qualified only three Companies namely, Westmont Holdings, NED Bank, City Bank and found the Greenland Bank bid unacceptable on the basis of lack of management capacity. Marathon Corporation Limited's bid was rejected for lack of adequate information.  The Committee may note that Marathon Corporation is owned by Maj. Gen. Salim who is also a shareholder in Greenland Investment through his Company called, 'Caleb's International'. As the Report will indicate later, the owners of Greenland and Marathon surface later in the management of UCB after privatization.
 
Valuation:
According to the Consultant's and PU's recommendations, Westmont Holdings bid was found to be the most favourable and a Government delegation which included Bank of Uganda Officials, led by hon. Matthew Rukikaire, travelled to Malaysia and Philippines to evaluate the status of Westmont Group which had showed interest in taking 49 per cent equity in UCB.
 
 You may note here, that Westmont Holdings, the Company which bid is not a Westmont Bank, rather via another of its companies, Westmont Land Asia, owns 40 per cent shares in Westmont Bank in the Philippines.  Westmont Holdings is a privately owned Company and is not a listed Company in Malaysia. The Consultants, Morgan Grenfell point out in their Report,"Westmont Holdings is making a bid on its own, without participation of Westmont Bank. Therefore, information provided  on Westmont Bank  should be viewed by the Government solely in the context of Westmont Holdings experience  as an active investor in a sizable bank". The Committee noted that despite this observation by the Consultant, PU went ahead to offer UCB to Westmont. 
 
The contract which was later signed on 27th October 1997 between Government of Uganda, UCB and Westmont, was signed with Westmont Land (Asia) BHD and not Westmont Holdings, the Company which had bid.  The Committee found this irregular.
 
The Bank of Uganda participated in the discussions and meetings in Malaysia, and in their report of findings to the governor, point out, "On the Group's expertise to run a retail Commercial Bank, we could not establish this from Westmont Bank where the group has only 3 out 11 directors on the Board. The Committee noted a contradiction when the same Report continued to say, "The groups association, experience and participation in the strategic business planning of Westmont Bank in the Philippines should be put to good use in their proposed venture in UCB". Bank of Uganda recommended Westmont Holdings proposed equity investment of 49 per cent in UCB and control of its management.  The Committee noted that Bank of Uganda wilfully failed in its duty to give appropriate advice on the matter.
 
It was after this that the Government team travelled to the far east in September, "to clarify aspects of Westmont proposal and assess its capability as a potential shareholder". During the meetings Westmont was advised to modify their offer to reflect certain issues.  -(Interruption)
 
 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members,you see, the Chairperson has read over 40 pages and he has to read up to 58, I do not know whether I should suspend the proceeding for 10 minutes.  
 
THE MEMBERS: No.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.
 
MR. OMONGOLE: PU hurriedly prepared notes to DRIC which met on 23rd September 1997 to discuss the Divestiture of UCB. PU sought approval to proceed with detailed negotiations with Westmont Group with a view to concluding the sale as, "as quickly as possible" before the closing audit on 30th September. In PU's brief to DRIC, it was pointed out that Westmont had conducted due diligence of UCB, that was done in June-July, and submitted their final offer on 30th July 1997.  It was after this that the Government team travelled to the far east in September 'to clarify aspects of Westmont's proposal and assess its capability as a potential shareholder.' During the meetings Westmont was advised to modify their offer to reflect certain issues.
 
1. There should be no future obligations on the government to inject Capital into UCB.
 
2. Any Management fee should be borne directly by UCB (and not Government)
 
3. The proposal should provide a framework for operating all of UCB's branches at the outset.
 
There was now need for Westmont to submit a final proposal, which was summarized to DRIC by P.U in the same DRIC Note on 23rd September 1998.
  
These aspects of the final proposal which are worth noting: 
a)  US $ 11 million as the purchase price fo the 49 percent shares comprised a combination of capital injected into UCB of US$ 5 million.
 
b) Government was responsible for recapitalizing UCB to a position where it's net asset value is zero at 30th September 1997 which was done by injecting Uganda Shs 72 billion in interest bearing loans.
 
c) The Government granted Westmont an option to purchase a further 2 percent of UCB's share from it.
 
d) Bank of Uganda would be required to approve senior management members of the Bank prior to their appointment. (This is a normal Statutory requirement).
 
e) That Westmont will undertake (subject to market conditions) to invest a further $ 50 million into UCB or into Uganda projects in the next 3 years.
 
But Members will note that instead of injecting they have taken away 50 million. In their note to DRIC regarding the takeover of UCBL, PU states that, "Westmont, a quoted Malaysian Company with property, power and plantation interests in Malaysia and banking interests in the Philippines will the vehicle used to purchase UCB."  It is at this stage that Westmont Land Asia replaces Westmont Holdings in the rest of the UCBL transactions.  This DRIC meeting and the subsequent one of 17th October approved the transaction and gave a go-head to P.U to proceed with final negotiations with Westmont Land and to seek the approval of the Solicitor General to sign the agreement.  The agreement was signed on the 27th October 1997.
 
What the Committee noted here is that, even the Solicitor General either wilfully or unknowingly could not detect that the contract was being signed by Westmont Land Asia and not Westmont Holdings, the ones who bid.  
 
The Agreement:
The agreement was signed on the 27th October 1997 between the Government, Westmont Land Asia  BHD and UCBL on which date Westmont was to pay Government of Uganda $ 1 million and later $ 4 million as the "Initial sale Price" through Citibank  NA 111 Wall St. New York for forwarding to the EDP - Divestiture a/c No. 355 in UCB. In the agreement it was also stated that on or before 31st December, Westmont was to pay $ 6 million US Dollars as a "Further sale price" by T.T. through the same a/c at Citibank  - New York for forwarding to EDP Divestiture a/c No. 355 in UCB.
 
It should be noted here that by the date of 31st December 1997, Westmont had not paid and apparently could not pay. The payment date was therefore extended to 30th April and a supplementary agreement was signed on the 22nd April 1998 to allow Westmont to pay the "Further sale price". Whereas in the original agreement US $ 6 million was to be paid to  Government of Uganda in the supplementary agreement the said amount was to be paid to UCBL (as part of capitalization).  This amendment was to give Westmont a discount of US $ 6 million.  In effect Westmont paid only US $ 5 million.
 
It may also be noted that contrary to what is indicated in the agreement, the payment from Westmont came to PU through Greenland Bank other than Citibank - New York.
 
On the same date of 27th October, a management contract between the 3 parties was signed. It is this contract that actually gave absolute power to Westmont Land to manage the Bank, putting the Government to a great disadvantage.  It went beyond the normal parameters of management contract, and in a number of instances, ousted the powers of the board in respect to the operations of the Bank.
 
The following are worth noting:-
The Management contract under clause 4(a) obliges Westmont to "comply with the policy and directives issued from time by the Board."  The shareholders agreement in clause 3(e) and (f) subjects Westmont to the applicable rules and regulations laid down by Bank of Uganda and to the provision of the companies Act or any other written law relating to the decision making of the companies.
 
Section 200(i) of the Companies Act and the position at common law require shareholders or Directors to refrain from entering into contracts with their Companies except where full disclosure has taken place and a general meeting has approved or ratified the contract.
 
Westmont Land Asia BHD, being a shareholder in UCBL and a member of the Board at the same time is a clear conflict of interest. Where in the shareholders agreements it states "...The Board shall, delegate all of its powers and duties of management contract;" and where in the articles of association of UCBL directors are permitted to contract with UCBL and are not liable to account for any profits made by them by reason of any such contract, fraud is apparent even in the articles of association themselves, that is in Clause 8(d).
 
This is a pure attempt by Westmont to contract themselves out of taxation.  The obligation on the bank to gross up payments to Westmont to cater for tax deductions is intended to defraud the bank and the Government of Uganda.
 
Clause 18 states that "...This agreement shall be governed in all respects by the laws of the Republic of Uganda."  The agreement drafted by a firm of advocates of Nairobi-Kenya went through the Solicitor Genera who signed on behalf of Uganda Government.  It is however, surprising to note that this contract does not conform with the laws of Uganda.
 
Members will recall that several other contracts have been signed by the Government of Uganda on the advice of the Solicitor General and such contracts have turned out to cause financial loss to the Government.  Such contracts include:  Lake Victoria Bottling Company, Nile Hotel  International, Foods and Beverages, UFEL, Apollo Hotel and many others.
 
This Kenyan Law firm for drafting this bad contract was paid Uganda shilling 144.095,205 from the divestiture a/c; and yet a Uganda Law firm would have been paid much less as per "advocates' remuneration and Taxation of costs" regulations of Uganda.
 
In the practice of Commercial contracts, it is the purchaser and not the Vender that meets the Legal costs of the contracts of the transaction. In this unique case, it is P.U which paid the costs, moreover to a foreign firm.
 
Members may wish to note that for managing the bank, Westmont are paid 2 million dollars per year and the money for the 3 years had been paid in advance  -(Interruption)
 
 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order please.
 
MR. OMONGOLE: This is in  violation of the agreement.  The supplementary agreement also gives Westmont an extra share on completion of payment of the "Further Sale Price".  This therefore gives them equal share holding with the Government on top of the management contract.  This gives Westmont Group  an upper hand in the operations of the bank.
 
Valuation: 
At the time the final payment was made for the 49 percent shares, UCB was making profits and the bonds (72 billion worth) had matured.  This was totally ignored, let alone the other assets which were not considered in the valuation.  The Committee noted that, to prepare the Bank for divestiture, PU had to pay for consultancy, pre audit and other services to the tune of Shs. 4,002,839,445/=. Government therefore did not get any more than Shs. 1 billion out of the privatization of UCB.
 
POST DIVESTITURE PERFORMANCE: 
The Government of Uganda on behalf of the people of Uganda still holds 51 percent shares in UCB.  The Committee expresses its concern at the level of mismanagement of the bank by Westmont.
 
The Committee has found evidence to support the public's belief that UCBL is currently under the control of the Greenland Bank and it's associated Companies;  Greenland Bank which bid for UCB and was un successful now owns UCBL through a secret agreement.
 
The facts available to the Committee are:
1.  Three Senior managers were transferred from Greenland Bank to UCB to head key decisions in the bank.
 
2.  A series of questionable loans to Greenland Bank - these loans are also attached, but unfortunately like I said they will come later.  A series of questionable loans to Greenland Bank and other irregular inter-bank placing.
 
Regarding the 3 managers, the Committee found no evidence that their jobs were applied for competitively. Mr. Muhammed Ali Nyanzi who had left Greenland Bank to  head the International division had no file with UCB.  He said he had been given the job by Westmont after he had resigned from Greenland Bank. His hand written papers looked fresh on the file of Greenland Bank, leading the Committee to suspect that they had been prepared purposely for this inquiry.
 
After the effective take over of the operations of the bank on 30th April, UCBL embarked on hasty inter-bank lending (placements) in total disregard to the requirements of the Bank of Uganda regulations and the Financial Institutions Statute requirements. We have observed that these loans are being continuously rescheduled and no payments have been made. The Committee learnt that Greenland Bank has entered into an agreement with Bank of Uganda and repayments of these loans has been suspended indefinitely. Well, maybe my Committee should have corrected this, it would have been not necessary now since Bank of Uganda has moved in to take over Greenland Bank.  It is important that the Government finds a way to impose on Greenland Bank and other banks to pay these loan. Bank of Uganda has recently injected Shs. 4 billion into Greenland Bank Limited to strengthen its financial position. The schedule of inter-bank lending is hereby attached for ease of reference - like I said, you will receive it.
 
Notable is the total of Shs. 10 billion which has been transferred to Greenland Bank, where 4.5 billion has been "rolled over" (re-scheduled) this means that when the time for payment of the loan comes, if it is not paid it is then taken as a loan and re-scheduled, but the Committee of course noted that cumulative interest was not being paid after the due date for repayment.  At the time of rolling over there is no mention whether interest on the initial loans has been paid or not.
 
The Committee discovered that Greenland Bank offered Uganda Commercial Bank a total of $ 5 million  for which local cover was paid by UCBL  but Greenland Bank never remitted the forex.
 
The Committee was shocked to learn from the Chairman of the Board of UCBL that this money may be lost for ever.
 
The money that has left UCBL in form of loans and overdrafts to companies related to Greenland Bank and Greenland Investments, most of it without collateral is further evidenced that Greenland is controlling UCB, stripping UCB of its assets and fraudulently accessing depositors funds.
 
The Uganda Grain Milling Company previously bought by Caleb's International of General Salim Saleh and immediately sold to Greenland Investments at a profit was one of the first companies to benefit from UCBL with shs. 2.5 billion. Members should note that the account through which the loan was obtained was only a few days old, and the Chief Executive, Mr. Anandan, admitted to the Committee that the land title to secure the loan was deposited with UCB long after the money had been disbursed. The other related companies which received loans well above ther 25 percent limit of the core capital in violation of the Financial Institutions Statute are:-

Uganda Millers      		Shs 2.5 billion (Without even an account with UCBL)
Fiba Coffee Ltd.      	Shs. 2.5 billion
Nsamba Coffee Ltd.    	US Dollars 700.000
Hajji Nsamba and Sons	Shs. 2 billion credit line
Concorp International  	1 billion (on top of an overdraft of Shs. 1.5 billion)		

Most of these companies opened accounts one or two days before receiving the loans.  All this was done irregularly without prior sanctioning of Bank of Uganda and single handedly approved by the chief executive who the management contract has given so much power.  The above companies and several others all related to Greenland group, through shareholders and/ or directors have benefited from loans or overdrafts. The other related companies which have benefited through a similar arrangement are:-
Efforte Corporation Ltd.       	US dollars 1.75 million 
Uganda In-flight Services Ltd.	US dollars 250,000

One director common among the two companies is Maj. Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho who is also a major shareholder in Greenland Investments.  The collateral offered  by Eforte for the loan are its shares in ENHAS The Committee found this extremely irregular.

A close look at the overdraft reveals that since May 1998 to November 1998, a total of Shs. 15.026.919.743/= was given out to various companies without security.  Most overdrafts were given on new accounts evidently opened to take advantage of this facility.  It is important to note that some of the companies already mentioned above to have benefited from loans have received more money in overdrafts.  In spite of the outstanding loans, the following companies have been allowed to overdraw:-

Uganda Grain Milling Co.      		Shs. 2.431.307.030/=
Fiba Coffee Ltd.              		Shs. 2.471.369.970/= 
Fiba Coffee Ltd (on a different A/c) 	Shs 2.5 billion
Nsamba Coffee                  		Shs. 1.133.217.499/=
Concorp International          		Shs. 1.463.013.915/= 
      

In addition to the above, there are other companies also related to Greenland group which have benefited from overdrafts, and some of them as late as October/November when this select Committee was already in place.  The Committee believes that the system of overdrafts was intensified after the Committee started investigations to hide the fact that money was leaving UCBL in form of unsecured loans.  Members may be informed that banks are less strict on overdrafts than they are on loans.

Kampala University owned by Dr.Sulaiman Kiggundu, Fiba Uganda Limited and other members of Greenland group has had an overdraft of Shs. 975 million without security. Entebbe Resort Beach owned by Dr.Sulaiman Kiggundu and Fiba Uganda Limited among others has received 1.306.838.360/= without security, Sapoba Bookshop owned by Greenland group through Fiba Uganda Limited and others got Shs. 950 million also without security.  A detailed list of the companies and their directors is attached to this report. This is one of the documents you will receive later.

Members should note that Concorp International was given a job of Shs. 250 million to renovate the premises of UCB.  The former Chief Executive of UCBL testified to the Committee that, Concorp was recommended to him by Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu.  After the decision had been taken, there was a mock tender to officialise this decision. The Committee has noted with a lot of concern the heavy involvement of M/s Concorp International (owned by Sudanese) in the economy of this country; given the hostile political relationship between Uganda and Sudan.  The Director of Concorp International, Mr. Geralnabi, is also a shareholder in Greenland Bank and FIBA and therefore through FIBA, he is involved in Entebbe Resort Beach, Sapoba Printers and Kampala University. FIBA is heavily involved in export of coffee which is the mainstay of our economy.

The Committee would like to express fears of possible political infiltration by Sudan through this economic involvement.

The Committee has established the relationship between UCBL and GLB.  Even before the Committee finalizes on its work there are all reasons to suspect that Greenland Bank and UCB's ownership is not accidental.  There is heavy involvement of Greenland Bank and UCBL.

I want Members to note here that some part of our report was pre-emptied and the report still goes ahead to produce this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think proceed with your report.

MR. OMONGOLE: Arising from the above scenario, the Committee took several steps to establish the source of the funds which paid for UCB.  The Committee can now confirm that US Dollar 10 million came through other foreign banks to "pay" for UCBL as follows:  Members can look at the table.

Date  2.03.98; Receiving Bank, citibank, Order party, Bankers Trust; Beneficiary, FIBA Coffee; Amount US $3,000,000.

Date 2.03.98; Receiving bank, Citibank;  Order Party, Greenland Bank; Amount, US $1,100,000.

Date 31.3.98,  Receiving bank, Citi Bank; Order Party, American Express, Beneficiary, Greenland Forex Bureau; Amount, US $1,100,000

Date 1.04.98, Receiving Bank, American Express; Beneciary, Greenland Forex Bureau; Amount, US $ 2,200,000.

Date 3.0498, Receiving Bank, Citibank; Order Party, American Express; Beneficiary, FIBA Coffee; Amount, US $ 2,449,980.

Date 3.04.98, Receiving Bank Citibank; Order Party, American Express; Beneficiary, Other; Amount, US $ 10,000,000.

Total       US $ 10,000,000

Well, the term 'beneficiary' to the Members, we thought the origine of the money was the beneficiary. 

The confession of Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh, after the Committee had drafted the above report on UCB, Maj. Salim Saleh came out with a statement admitting that he had bought UCB using Westmont as a front.

The Committee, having read the statement is of the opinion that it leaves a lot of questions unanswered.  For example, where did the money traced in the table above originate from?  Who now owns UCBL?  Is it Westmont, is it the Government of Uganda or is it Greenland Investment?

When Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh was carrying out a fraud, was the PU, the Central Bank and the Minister of Finance in the know?  What does Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh  mean when he says, "I have decided to come out in the open in order to save the Government of Uganda, the Bank of Uganda and all those through whom I worked out this deal."  What role did each of them play in this fraud?  Does his withdrawal from the deal mean that he will pay back to UCBL the over Shs. 40 billion irregularly lent to Greenland and related companies?
These and many other questions arising from our investigations are yet to be answered. Most importantly, the source of the funds which purportedly paid for the bank should be revealed and the key players in this grand robbery exposed and dealt with. (Laughter).

RECOMMENDATIONS ON UCBL:
1. The Government of Uganda immediately cancels the whole contract ie between Westmont Land Asia, UCB and Government and takes over the Bank immediately.

2. While the Central Bank has managed the current crisis in the financial sector caused in part by the irregular and excessive borrowing from UCBL by Greenland Bank and its related Companies, it must also institute a mechanism to ensure that all debts owed to UCB are paid back and the Minister of Finance should report back within 3 months.

3.  The Public Officials responsible for the fraudulent contract with Westmont which has caused a financial loss to the people of Uganda estimated at more than Shs. 50 billion should be prosecuted.(Applause)

4.  The Bank of Uganda should prevail over all Commercial Banks -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are we approving the report before the debate?  Please, proceed.

MR. OMONGOLE: The Bank of Uganda should prevail over all Commercial Banks that owe UCBL money through Interbank lending whose dates for payment are due or overdue to pay it back with the interest. This should include all amounts that have been rolled over.

5. Bank of Uganda should examine UCBL loan portfolio with a view of reviewing the loans which were issued without collateral or those where properties given as collateral are over valued.

6. Bank of Uganda should ensure that loans that were given out to Greenland Investment and related companies exceeding the 25 percent of the Core Capital in contravention of the Financial Institutions Statute should be withdrawn immediately.

7. The officers of Greenland Bank Limited who contravened the Financial Institutions Statute or failed to meet the requirements of section 40(3) and section 53(3) should be prosecuted and dealt with according to the law.

COMMENTS ON THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM AND DIVESTITURE STATUTE 1993 AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS MADE THEREUNDER:

The Committee also looked at the statute being the vehicle for the divestiture process.

While the Statute read together with Statutory Instruments 1997 No. 12 and 1997 No. 14, gives detailed provisions for the divestiture process, the Committee notes that there are definite loopholes in the statute that require filling.

1. Parliament is the watchdog of the public on the divestiture process.  That is why the Minister responsible for Finance has to make a half-yearly report of the process to Parliament.

Parliament's role in this respect is however complicated by the fact that the Statute provides for its representation on the Divesture Committee.

The Committee recommends that for Parliament to critically check on the process of privatization without being seen as having taken part in the process in anyway, the Statute should be amended by deleting the two membership of Parliament on DRIC. This would remove the possibility of conflict of interests.

2.  The Statute should also be amended to give the Minister of State for Privatization a clear role on the Divestiture Committee.

While Statutory Instrument 1997 No. 14 gives a detailed account of what role the Minister of State is supposed to play, the parent statute is silent on what role the Minister of State should have in the process to the extent of not defining who "the Minister responsible for Privatization" is.

This is dangerous because at the end of the day, it becomes legally difficult to determine where the Minister of State's responsibilities end and where that of the substantive Minister begins.

3.  The Statute makes no mention of Government's role in divested enterprises. One could argue that once an enterprise has been privatized the Government should have no role in its management.  Such an argument becomes lacking if one takes into account the possibility of privatization of public utilities like water and electricity.

The possibility that a privatized enterprise could end up adversely affecting the public should always be borne in mind.  For certain strategic enterprises, Government should continue to play a directing role even after privatization.  It may even be necessary that Government retains some shares in such enterprises.

The Divestiture Committee should therefore be empowered to oversee such divested enterprises for a specific period of time.

4. The statute makes no mention whatsoever of the unfortunate practice of asset stripping in respect to enterprises being prepared for privatization.

As a result, both officials i.e Government sanctioned and unofficial asset stripping carried out by Management and/or the employees continues unabated. Because of this, an enterprise which is finally divested may have lost so much value and assets that it ceases to be the scheduled enterprise.

In order that the public is re-assured that no deliberate move are being made in order to "give-away" enterprises, the Statute should be amended clearly outlawing asset stripping and providing for stiff penalty for persons involved in such a practice.  

The Statute is non emphatic on the management of the accounts of the Privatisation Unit and leaves a lot of discretion on how the money is to be used. It is important that the Statute lays down priorities on the use of the money and the persons accountable to the issue and or misuse of the same.  

Finally, as stated before, the law, without the above loopholes should be broad enough to enable the process of privatisation to be carried out to the satisfaction of all. 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Committee has noted that:-
1.  The Privatisation process has been derailed by corruption.  Corruption should not just be treated as a matter of morality to be forgiven upon confession.  The economy has greatly suffered through the actions of such corrupt officials who should be relieved of their duties.  Hon. Matthew Rukikaire, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, and Mr. Tumusiime Mutebire should take political responsibility for failing to supervise the privatisation process to achieve its stipulated goal.  Hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. John Nasasira on the other hand, should be brought to book for having used political influence to run down Uganda Airlines.  The Attorney General and the Solicitor General should be held accountable for their role in preparing of bad contracts that have caused loss to the Government.

Serious crime has been committed and some individuals should be investigated and prosecuted. Examples are: Maj. General Salim Saleh, Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu, Mr. Leonard Muganwa, Mr. Vijay Anadam and Mr. Chong. The elements of crime in the privatisation process of UCB require that Parliament considers hiring the services of an International Crime Investigation Agency to assist the Committee to complete the investigation.

The trend of growing nepotism as a result of transparent systems for good governance must be addressed and corrected forthwith. The Committee finds this trend absolutely dangerous for democracy.  Some politically powerful families have been manipulating the process of privatisation. The problem of nepotism must be addressed politically and urgently.

To protect the integrity of Parliament, individuals who testified to Parliament and committed perjury should be prosecuted.  Examples are: Major General Salim Saleh, Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu and Mr. Mohammed Ali Nyanzi and others.  Members, you will note here that there is an addition which may not be in your copies, but I will read it to you; that is No. 5.

5.  The magnitude of corruption revealed in this report threatens the political and economic stability of this country.  The Committee recommends that the Leader of Government Business reports back to Parliament within a period of three months on the steps taken. (Applause) - (Cries of order).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you see, it is this Parliament which set this Select Committee to do a job.  The chairperson has read a report, they have just suggested certain recommendations as far as the Committee is concerned.  After he has read the report, we shall get time to debate the report, look at the recommendations.  You will accept some of the recommendations, you may enlarge the recommendations.  So, take your time, you just listen to him and when you are given the opportunity, you do your job.

MR. AISU OMONGOLE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.	 The Committee recommends that the Leader of Government Business reports back to Parliament within a period of three months on the steps taken by the Executive to address the recommendations of Parliament.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, if it is the wish of Parliament this Committee would like more time to:-
(i) Complete investigations of Uganda Commercial Bank privatisation.
(ii)  Begin and conclude investigations on other enterprises mandated to this Committee but has not had time to complete;
(iii)  Investigate the use of the proceeds of privatization which the Committee has not touched.

Hon. Members, I wish to make a few acknowledgements.  The Committee wishes to express its gratitude to all those people who volunteered information to assist the investigation.  We are grateful to those who helped the work of the Committee in preparing its report.  The Committee also wishes to thank the Members of Parliament who in particular, volunteered information to the Committee and at times helped interview some witnesses and participated actively on this report.

I wish also as Chairman to thank most sincerely the members of the Committee who have worked tirelessly to produce this report, and we as the Committee would like also to request Parliament for forgiveness where we have erred.  I know we were given 45 days, but because of the load of work that we had, we were not able to report in that time.

However, the Committee would like to point out the difficulties it had in working through a very junior and untrained Clerk, who is not formally employed by Parliament. In future, the Committee recommends that the Clerk gives due priority to the work of Select Committees to be able to fulfil their mandate in the specified time. I thank hon. Members for listening to me. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I want to thank the Chairperson and all members of this Committee for the good job done in producing this report. Hon. Members, you remember when we started dealing with this report, hon. Woman Member for Rukungiri raised a point that the Chairperson was going to read the report when members had no copies of the report, and you have heard from the Chairperson that there are certain vital annexure which should be attached on the report, which are being worked out and will be availed to members in due course.  Therefore, it appears it is not proper for me to call upon you to start debating or commenting on this report, although I have seen that you have been passing judgement even before the debate. So, what I propose to do is to give you sufficient time for you to internalise the contents of this very involved report, and then when we start debating, you debate when you have fully internalised the contents. I do not know, Chairperson, when you think the annexure will be availed to the Members. Is it today?

MR. AISU OMONGOLE:  Hon. Speaker, I think by the end of the day, I will put the annexure in their pigeon holes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, so today you will get copies of the annexure.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance from the Chair on a matter of interpretation of the law.  There are issues here which have been raised that pertain to the law.  Shall we call upon the Attorney General who has also been named in the report to help us in interpretation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, I think the functions of the Attorney General are well known, and I know the Attorney General is a professional person who is able to separate the two - his personal matters and that of his office.  So, the House will have the benefit of the Attorney General whenever the Attorney General is required.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, since the Chairperson has assured us that we will have copies of the report by the end of the day and the annexure, may we now hear it from you, Mr. Speaker, - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will come to that.   Let me receive other comments, if any, then I will say how we are going to proceed.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you for anticipating what I wanted to inquire about, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. OGWAL:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Since this report touches on top personalities in the country, some of whom may be military, I am wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether this House has made provision for security -  (Laughter) - Mr. Speaker, this is not a laughing matter, this is a very serious exposure, it is a historic report and we should not laugh over it.  It is extremely important that we are assured that the security of the Chairperson of the Committee, the security of the Committee members and the security of some personalities who are outspoken in this House is guaranteed, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have been able to receive this kind of report because of the Constitution.  The Constitution under which we run as a Government, the Constitution under which the Executive runs. That Constitution must have set up various organs with certain functions, and I believe those organs that we set up to deal with the security of the people of this country, will take their responsibility and there is nothing more I can add on that. 

MR. PINTO:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to request as a matter of procedure, considering the gravity of this report, that you establish some timing element for Members, such that as many of us as possible get an opportunity to contribute early enough, so that there will be, when we start, ample opportunity for each and every one to put in an input, because, I believe, this is a milestone, it is touching on the fabric of our Government, it is touching on the fabric of our nationality, it is going to show us a way forward. So, I want to request as a matter of procedure, Sir, that we establish, if you want, to give us 15 minutes, we prepare, come here and we do not rush this report, because, it is going to be the gateway to deciding how we are going to deal with public affairs. This is just an element, it is a cornerstone, but in all areas which Government has been entrusted with management of public funds. There are many questions being raised.  So, I would like to ask for this procedure, through you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as a matter of good judgement, I would imagine everybody who wants to contribute on this report will be accorded opportunity to do so.

MR. WASSWA LULE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Considering the gravity of the allegations in this report, the amounts of money involved are colossal sums and there is risk of flight.  My query is whether any arrangement has been made for the suspected culprits to be put in safe houses as - (Laughter) - Mr. Speaker, on a serious note, having also to have their passports impounded until we conclude our deliberations and find whatever action we are going to - because, you see, we are a bit worried.  One of the principle suspects is reported in the press previously to have said that he is prepared to take flight to the United States, for example. So, we are a bit worried, not only has the country incurred a loss but some of these people, we might have to go through a Pinochet type of trial in some country where we do not have extra judicial visa.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you see, I have no comment to make on this, save to say, as I have said, we are working under the Constitution. It is the Constitution which has enabled us to conduct the business in the way we are doing. This Parliament has no way of apprehending people and so forth, but there are other agencies of Government. This report is public, if they think that this has to be done, I think we leave it to other agencies of Government to take their responsibility other than us. 

MAJ. J. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, you will agree that this is not an ordinary report.  I am saying that this is not an ordinary report - (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, there has been a word going around and some group trying to lobby that this report is not debated urgently for reasons well known to them.  Mr. Speaker, as we talk now, some of the people mentioned in the report could be running out of the country.  The money is still being siphoned from UCB. I am not pre-emptying your ruling, Mr. Speaker. The Chairman of the Committee has said that the annexure are ready, we have gone through the report, we shall burn the midnight candle and read the report.  Mr. Speaker, in your ruling, I request that you take these circumstances into account.  I thank you.

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to give additional information to hon. Kazoora. I have learnt while we are here that some of the Westmont officials, or some of the staff at UCBL have been heard to say that they are leaving the country today, and that let the UCB find other people to replace them.  And Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the House that while the Committee found evidence of crime, we have not heard from the Executive that anyone is assisting Police with investigations. It has not happened.  So, it may be that the Executive has not yet seen crime, but we have, and it is urgent. So, Mr. Speaker, I feel as a Member of that Committee, that there is need for Parliament to look at this Report immediately, there are some decisions that should be made immediately in order to avert or even to apprehend certain criminals.  So, Mr. Speaker, my request is that you allow that this debate starts now.  What I mean, we do not postpone it for other business, we treat it as an urgent matter.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:(Budadiri East, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My worry -(Interruption)-  Mr. Speaker, first of all I should not welcome him, he knows what is going on.  So why should I welcome him?   Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my fears as much as the hon. Member of Parliament for Lira Municipality said about the security of Members who have been involved in this investigation. At the same time we are aware this is a very explosive situation. This Report is looking like it is a film, it is looking like a saga, it is a fiasco and at the same time people are saying they have seen worse things than these, but to me this is not the best.

MR. DOMBO:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we deliberate on this Report -(Interruption)- this is for the information of Members, that the few years I have spent in the Movement -(Laughter)- I have come to learn and to believe in ideals and ideas instead of colours and that is what I will always be. Today, I am celebrating my birthday and this was my present. The information I wanted to give is that, as we deliberate on this Report, we have the Minister of Internal Affairs in this House who is responsible for internal security. He must specifically be mandated to protect the Members who have been involved in investigating this issue so that they must be alive throughout the whole process until its conclusion.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: The Minister or the Ministers concerned -(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information was for his birthday, but the other one was -(Laughter)

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Apart from thanking him for reaching his birthday, I also thank him for the information and I believe those concerned have taken note of that. But my worry is beyond the individuals who are involved, my worry is for the whole country. This is a very, very explosive situation, high ranking army officers have been implicated in this Report, Ministers, Senior Ministers have been implicated in this, Senior economists of this country are implicated in this, the Attorney General and all the top brass of this country are here except the President alone. (Laughter). At least a big, big chunk of officers is involved. Now my worry is this one, are Ugandans safe?  Shall we not wake up tomorrow morning and say, because we have caused this to happen somebody has come and said the Government is taken over?  This is a question.  This is my fear.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Excuse me.  Order, order.  Do you accept the information?

MR. PINTO:  Point of order.  As earlier advised, Mr. Speaker, by one of my hon. Colleagues, if hon. Kirunda Kivejinja has also been named, s it in order for him to give guidance results now.(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, order.  In the first place, a Report has been presented to us, we have not pronounced ourselves on the Report whether we accept the Report or we do not.  his Report is open for every Member here to comment on, and I do not think now, at this juncture, we have started debating the Report.  Even when we do, hon. Kirunda and any other person named in the Report will definitely contribute.  I have heard about the Attorney General, the Attorney General has not been named as an individual as such, it is the office of the Attorney General, it is the office of the Solicitor General, therefore, the Attorney General as far as I am concerned, his office only has just been named.  But everybody will be given an opportunity.  I think this is a fair way of dealing with such a matter.  So, he is in order to give the information to the Member who was on the Floor.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the worried Members, especially the one celebrating his birth in red colours, and the previous speaker, that, it is true that Constitutions have been changed by debate within this House, when the major players in the army, charges have been brought against them.  But presently, we are in a different order.  And the Constitution, as Mr. Speaker, you have said, empowers anybody who overthrows this Government to raise up in arms and fight it.  So, hon. Members, if at all anybody turns up tomorrow, it is a chance for all of you to be historical.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, that this is a very, very profound Report on the fabric of our State, cannot be over emphasised.  You have pointed out yourself about its importance; the Chairman has told us we have documents that have got to be appended; Members have raised the issue that we should debate this Report as expeditiously as possible.  I therefore, think, Mr. Speaker, that you should give us ample time for us to go and read this Report. By very good coincidence, tomorrow is a regular Cabinet day, but even if it were not, it is necessary for us to have an executive look at this document, because we have only received it here.  And Members are asking for Executive's action and so on.  So, I suggest, hon. Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS. ATIM OGWAL:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, this House has been given the impression that the hon. Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business, and if he is not, he is a Senior Minister in the Government, and therefore, he should be the person most worried about this Report, and he should stand here to express the urgency of disposing of this Report.  Is he therefore, in order to tell us to have more time to discuss this document, when this document is not new to us, and it is not new to him either?  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Prime Minister to stand here and to ask this House to give more time for us to study the document which is not new to many of us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know the problem here. I have heard hon. Members saying the Report is very urgent, we should start now.  There are others who are saying, 'No, we should be given time to internalise it.' I am going to make the decision.  But I was only hearing incidental matters about security and so forth which were being raised by Members.  At the end of that kind of debate, I will tell you how we are going to proceed with this Report.  So, I think the debate should be restricted on that issue which was raised on security, and as I told you, there are agencies of Government who are in charge of security.  And as hon. Dombo has pointed out, we have the Prime Minister here, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here, the Minister in charge of Security is here, the Minister in charge of UCB is here, the Attorney General is here, so why do you worry? I mean, Parliament itself cannot provide security,  that is not our function.  But I think this matter has been raised publicly, everybody has heard, the Report is a public Report, so necessary remedial action will be taken, I suppose, by the appropriate bodies to ensure that what has been recommended or will be recommended in this Report is not pre-emptied, money is not stolen, people who are supposed to be here are not there, I think let us leave that.  

So, with this, I think I am coming to the end of this business, and it is my considered view that since the annexure are going to be availed to Members just now or before this evening, I am going to adjourn this House until 2.00 p.m. when we shall start the debate on this Report.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose and adjourned until Wednesday, 9th December 1998, at 2.00 p.m.)                                         
