Wednesday, 4 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a few minutes ago, I received a copy of a book whose title is, “Through the Eye of the Needle”. It is authored by none other than the Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East, hon. Hamlet Kabushenga Mbabazi. 

He has been able to write it within a very short time. In spite of the short time that he has taken to write it, the quality of his publication has not been dented. Therefore, I congratulate him and urge you to read it, because it is written to address different groups. 

Hon. Kabushenga apparently belongs to different groups. Currently he is a politician - a Member of Parliament, but he is also a minister of the Church. He was a taxi driver, a bus driver, and therefore, a member of UTODA - (Laughter). He has travelled widely and, therefore, knows other experiences. This is reflected here. He is also a person who has also been guided by the Bible. That is why he has been able to walk through different terrain - boggy, dusty and so forth. However, he has succeeded to be like a camel that has managed to pass through the eye of a needle. Thank you very much.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Motion in recognition -(Laughter). Mr Speaker, in recognition of his tremendous efforts and his intellectual capacity, coupled with his other accomplishments, I beg to move that the book be added to our Parliamentary Library.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR WILBERFORCE NABWISO: Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, I brought a question on the legal status of presidential advisers. You wisely ruled that the Attorney General would come here and explain to us the same. Is it not lugubrious that up to this time nothing has happened? (Laughter) May I ask that since we have Prof. Nsibambi, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, he should make a comment on this matter? 

Could he also make a comment on what happened, for us to find two ministers on the front bench quarrelling before the press? They sent out wrong messages to this nation. Should they continue to be in the Cabinet? Is he still taking charge of the situation? (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember, on 15 May 2002 I moved a motion about the privatisation process of UCBL. A committee was formed at the end of the day to carry out investigations and report to Parliament. Up to now, I have never seen this report presented to Parliament, and we are here going to make more laws concerning commercial banks. Is it possible that this report could be presented first before we move on to make more laws? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just 20 minutes ago hon. Ekanya rang me to say that we should not proceed with the business on the Financial Institutions Bill before we debate the report on UCBL. It is the same thing that you are saying. Apparently, you must have talked it over with him. 

Anyway, hon. Ekanya said the report had been presented. You are now saying the report has not been presented. I told hon. Ekanya, and I want to put it on record, that, “if you want information, seek the information rightly, rather than relying on newspapers or people who have no information”. Hon. Ekanya said that for us not to bog down the work of Parliament, we should debate the report first. I told him that I had not received the report. This is what I told him, because he said the report was here but that we are not debating it. 

I know that the chairperson of that ad hoc committee is Prof. Kamuntu. I do not think he is here, but the latest information he gave me was that they were not in position to finalise the report because they had somebody they wanted to talk to before they would present the report. That is the position. Well, you may shake your head, but I am telling you what he told me. So, that is what he told me, and I think it is not true that the report has been presented to the House. It may be with the members of the committee, but unfortunately I have not received a copy.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report on UCBL was finalised a long time ago - (Applause). To the best of my knowledge, this should be with the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, and at any notice we should be in position to present that report.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have not presented the report.

MR OMACH: At least not on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: You have not?

MR OMACH: No.

THE SPEAKER: Right! Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I wish to find out from hon. Mafabi, in the absence of hon. Ekanya –(Interjections)- Oh! They tell me he is here. In the interest of members like me who do not belong to that committee, how important is it that we should debate that report first before we move to the bill on the Order Paper? How would it affect it? Because if it is true that the report on UCBL has got implications to this bill, then depending on their information, we may have to decide accordingly. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to know why these two distinguished Members of Parliament are advising the Speaker, and us, that we should have that sort of approach.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I think the members have not been following what has been going on. We have already started the Financial Institutions Bill, and we are at the committee stage.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. In institutions there is always the practice of consultation. I have consulted you always, and we have always had consensus. My consultation with you was not to bog down the issue in the House. However, I feel it is very good for this country. 

I have been investigating this matter and I have even learnt that the committee never even consulted the report of Justice Ogola’s Commission, which was established by Government to look at how Bank of Uganda and commercial banks interrelate. This House also went ahead to find out how Bank of Uganda and commercial banks interrelate in order to help the management and the performance of our economy improve. 

I realise, Mr Speaker, that it would be prudent for this House to be informed of the findings of these two reports: of Justice Ogola’s Commission, which was established by Government, and our own. That way we shall be well informed, such that when we pass another law, this House does not wake up tomorrow and regret it. God forbid, but if there is any problem between Bank of Uganda and any commercial bank tomorrow, we should not rise up and say, “Bank of Uganda, you are committing an error”, and yet we have just passed a new law giving the Bank of Uganda all the authority. 

Supposing tomorrow there is a recommendation in that report, which requires amendment or legislation, don’t you think it will be wastage of money for this House to again sit and enact an amendment? That is why I decided to consult the Speaker to use his wisdom, since this bill is not very urgent, according to my knowledge, for us to debate that report first, inform ourselves and pass a good law for this country. It was not to bog down the House.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, you were not present yesterday, honourable member. Because you were not present, you did not follow the debate that ensued after the motion for the second reading. Members who were present are conversant with the deficiencies in the Financial Institutions Statute operating now. They mentioned many banks that had become victims because of Bank of Uganda’s powers. 

These matters were addressed, and since you know the defects in the present law, it is now an opportunity for you, during this committee stage, to make an improvement to the law. This new Financial Institutions Bill gives you an opportunity to suggest remedies that will cure what went wrong in the past.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know the work of Parliament should not at any one time be bogged down because we are anticipating some other report elsewhere. But in this case, a chairperson who was mandated to investigate and report on something has given contrary information to the Speakers’. He says that actually the report is not yet ready because he must talk to somebody, like you have said. The vice chairman has come here to say that actually the report was submitted to the Clerk. That in itself leaves a lot to be desired. On the other hand, where we are going to make a law and we suspect or anticipate –(Interruption) -

THE SPEAKER: Let me inform you. The chairperson of the committee is Prof. Kamuntu. Before he went away, he told me that the committee could not finalise its report because they wanted to get the views of the President. They have not managed to see him yet. That is what he told me.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the way things are done in this Parliament needs to be re-addressed. I see things being mixed up in the wrong way. I am a member of this committee, we discussed, worked on the report, signed it and it was submitted to the Clerk many months ago. To be told today that the report is not finalised, when I am a signatory to that report, I find it very interesting!

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is go back to your committee and sort it out.

MR SABIITI: How?

THE SPEAKER: We cannot help you. What I am telling you is what I was told. You go and sort it out. In the meantime, what do you want to do; because what we have next is the committee stage.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report is the property of the committee and not of Prof. Kamuntu. What this House wants is a report. Some of the issues they were investigating were the flaws in the law, the Financial Institutions Statute of 1993. It is of great importance to this Parliament to finalise that report and make a good law. It is in the best interest of this country to continue in a manner that can save this country very many resources, Mr Speaker. I propose we get that report and continue and make a good law.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you can get the report if it comes, but we have different business now. The alternative is for you to move a motion, we consider it and then see how we proceed.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Motion - (Laughter). Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we put on halt the debate on the Financial Institutions Statute, 2002 until the report on UCB has been presented, debated and the House pronounces itself on the matter. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Justify it.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we note with great concern that the two members who lead the committee, the chairman and the vice chairman, do not seem to be at concurrence on the whereabouts and the status of the report. 

Mr Speaker, you were given information, which is being contradicted. You were given information by the chairman of the committee, hon. Kamuntu, that the committee had not finalised the report, that they are still awaiting further input from another source. We have been told in this House on the matter, addressed to you by the vice-chairman of the committee, that this report is actually lying in the office of the Clerk. 

A number of honourable members of this august House have said that the committee report is important to advise them on how to proceed in making the new law. It is not a matter of amending the Financial Institutions Statute 1993 as such, but a matter of repealing it. If we are going to repeal it, we need to know the loopholes, we need to know what happens in the operations of financial institutions.

It is in light of this confusion, pending information, and lack of this report that I beg to move that this matter of debating the Financial Institutions Bill be put on hold until this House has pronounced itself on the report on UCB. I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are two committees. The committee responsible for investigating the affairs of the sale of UCBL was an ad hoc committee. The committee that I now sit on as vice-chairman is the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and at that time I was not the chairperson of that committee. But at the committee level, I was a member of that ad hoc committee, and we did all that was necessary as far as the report was concerned. 

If the report has not reached where it should be, that is another matter. But the terms and conditions that were given for that committee did not, for instance, include what hon. Ekanya was talking about, the Ogola report. However, the committee did consult it. The findings of this committee do not have that much bearing on the bill that is now being presented to the Parliament at this level.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable colleague. When he says the findings of the report have nothing to do with this bill, then he is grossly mistaken. We are dealing with financial institutions. This bill pertains to operations and regulations of financial institutions. So, I wish to inform him.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stated that I learnt that while the committee was debating this bill, they did not consult Justice Ogola’s Commission Report on commercial banks and Bank of Uganda. I did not say that the committee did not consult while they were writing their report on UCBL. These were very different matters. Thank you.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification in reference to the statement of hon. Omach. Earlier, he indicated that actually the report was with the Clerk’s office. Is he trying to suggest that the statement he is giving now is withdrawing the other one? He sounded authoritative on what he was saying, and yet he is conceding that he was not the vice chairperson then. I am getting confused. Which is which? Could he clarify on that matter, please?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I do not think there is any contradiction between my previous statement and the one I have just made. What I have said is that this report was completed at the committee level, and submitted. I have not contradicted that.  

The report on UCBL may have not referred to consulting the Ogola report however, that does not in itself mean that the committee did not have a look at it. There are a number of others that were consulted, which may not appear in that report. And I am not in any way trying to pre-empt that report. 

The ad hoc committee that discussed and finalised that report is in no way trying to sit on that report. As I mentioned earlier, at any notice notwithstanding what you have reported from the chairman of the ad hoc committee, the committee will be in position to present this report to the House. What I am saying is that the report, as it stood then and now, did refer to the 1993 Financial Institutions Statute, which is now standing to be repealed however, the coming in of the Financial Institutions Bill, 2002 does not in any way impact on that report. Whether we discuss the Financial Institutions Bill before the UCBL report is discussed is really not that material. That is the point I was trying to make. Having already gone to the committee stage, I think that it is only right and fitting that we should proceed with this Financial Institutions Statute, 2002. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I rise to oppose the motion by hon. Aggrey Awori. The reason of my opposition is that while it is true that the investigation into the affairs of the sale of UCB touches some aspect of this bill, it does not necessarily touch the entire bill. This bill covers so many other provisions that do not have anything to do with Bank of Uganda powers. So, my proposal would be –(Interruptions) - may I be protected? 

I am saying that there are so many other things, which do not necessarily touch Bank of Uganda’s supervisory powers over banks, in this bill. My proposal would be that we could go ahead and debate the bill, and when we come to the supervisory powers of Bank of Uganda, then we stand over that chapter. There are so many other provisions –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much. I am saying that there are so many aspects here, like licensing of banks. Does that have any relevance to the investigations on UCBL? It does not. There are other aspects: corporate governance, capital requirements and collective actions. To stand over the bill because only one of its aspects is affected by the report would not be to do justice. 

Besides, hon. Ekanya has been striving to raise the issue of the Ogola report. I wish to point out to members that in coming out with the new Financial Institutions Bill, Government took into account all the recommendations contained in the Ogola report. It took into account all the concerns that have been raised by members over time, including the transaction of UCBL. I think those issues should be handled as and when they are raised, during the debate of these sections. 

I propose that we proceed with the debate, and where issues arise, or if Parliament finds that the powers of management and the supervisory role of Bank of Uganda are of relevance in as far as the report is concerned, we could stand over that chapter. Otherwise, there are so many aspects of the bill, which could go on. I beg to move.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Uganda Commercial Bank case went the way it did because of the flaws, because of the inefficiency or inadequacies - you can use as many English words as possible - of the 1993 Financial Institutions Statute. The statute was silent on the procedure that the central bank should take when it takes over a failing bank. The central bank took advantage of the silence in that law to continue and do what it thought was fit and proper, which we did question in this Parliament. 

What are we trying to do, Mr Speaker, by stopping debate and passing this Financial Institutions Bill of 2001? We are saying, let the status quo remain, given the kind of circumstances, which are coming up today. 

I am a member of the committee. As far as I remember, when we went on recess, the Uganda Commercial Bank report even appeared on the Order Paper as business to follow! I am now surprised to learn that there are things, which we did not do, and yet I am a member of that committee! As far as I know, I appended my signature on the report. Perhaps the position of the committee changed after that; I do not know. 

I agree with my two honourable colleagues that this report on UCBL and how it was sold should come here, but that it should halt the debate on this Financial Institutions Bill, I do not see the rationale behind that. Let me give you my justification. –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the woman MP for Kisoro?
  
Uganda Commercial Bank was privatised against our continued resolutions. It was privatised; we have investigated the manner in which it was privatised, and we shall come up with facts of what we have found out about who did what, and how it was done. I wonder whether when we pronounce ourselves here on the Floor, we shall reverse the process. I do not know about that. I do not know whether we are going to reverse the status quo of Uganda Commercial Bank, or the status of ownership - (Interruption).

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification from hon. Kiraso. She says the privatisation of UCBL went the way it did because of flaws and the silence of the 1993 Financial Institutions Statute. This particular bill is to amend that statute. Don’t you think we need to actually know these flaws in the 1993 statute, to be able to make a good law for the future of this country?

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I am about to wind up. To answer hon. Byaruhanga’s question, I think the central bank, under the existing law, can even move now and take the same action it took on UCBL, on another bank. The law under which we are operating is what it is. It allows them to do so. 

My own understanding might be different from other people’s understanding, but please, I request you to respect it. I think we should go ahead to debate this, amend the law, then the report comes at its time, because I do not even know when it will come. The report will highlight to you what happened and did not happen during the privatisation of UCBL. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, we seem to be mixing two issues. The debate that is arising now is what transpired in our Committee of Finance. We are basing on those anomalies of the old statute in order to create and come up with a good report. 

I think it would be prudent that if anything was missed, or was not answered during the UCB report by the committee of which I was a member, this is the right time to debate and bring it in as an amendment to strengthen this law, instead of blocking it. I thank you.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the view that we withhold the debate for a while as we look at the outcome of the report from the committee. My feeling is that when we ask a committee to do work on behalf of Parliament, we expect to learn from that committee. We expect them to do an in-depth analysis of what went wrong, so that the performance and the final decisions of Parliament tally with what they find out from whatever they were undertaking. 

If the financial institutions law was faulty, I do not think there is another opportunity for us to use the findings of this committee other than now. If we are not going to use it now, then there will be no other opportunity.

Secondly, just two days back, we also put off debate on the election violence report because we thought it was not going to be very helpful to Ugandans at the time. I would think that we should follow the same precedent this afternoon – (Applause)- and go ahead and do away with this report, because it will not be very helpful to Ugandans if it passes in that state. We need to get all the recommendations, improve on it and give it to the nation to consume when it is very useful.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Mr Speaker and honourable members, about this bill, which is at committee stage, I tried to inform some members that recently our people were crying of poverty. What I am saying is that the people in the villages are complaining about the delay of this bill.  

Secondly, we are allowing Bank of Uganda to use the same law. We need to use this law to trim off their powers so that this does not happen again.  This is the use of the bill we are going to discuss -(Interruption).

MR DOMBO LUMALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I really want to agree with everybody, like it was stated in this House, that Members of Parliament and the Executive would not wish our people to suffer in poverty.  

I wanted to seek clarification from the honourable member, which particular section in this law really prevents or would fight poverty in the country that he is referring to? 

MR KAKOOZA: I want to inform the honourable member that Clauses 40 and 88 – (Laughter) - yes, it talks about the mechanism of lending money from the central Government to our banks, and how it can be regulated. This can help our people at the grassroots to get money. This bill was brought -(Interruption)-

MR LATIGO: Mr Speaker, arising from the inquiry of our honourable colleague as to what section addresses the issue of poverty, the honourable member told us that Clause 40 does. I have just looked at Clause 40, and, Mr Speaker, allow me to read it verbatim. The sub-heading of Clause 40 says: “Foreign Exchange Holding.” That is the title. Sub-section (1) – (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I have been advised that the title of that section alone is enough to inform the House.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it in order for an honourable member, who is frequently relied upon to guide the House on many issues, to deliberately mislead the House that Clause 40 deals with how the Central Bank can control issues of foreign exchange to alleviate poverty; is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the member said that this section deals with poverty but definitely, foreign exchange, once not properly utilised, may increase poverty - (Laughter).  

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I think what I was trying to say is that when you read Claus 88, Bank of Uganda has control over other banks, and yet we said that the other financial institutions’ law of 1993 had more powers. So, here we are using this law to reduce the powers of Bank of Uganda, so that we don’t have another case as that of UCBL.  So, I do not see any reason for us not to discuss this report. I prefer that we proceed and then the other report of UCB can come after. It can face the same problems as we had on election violence.  So, to avoid that, I prefer we proceed.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE (Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the principle of sub judice should not be watered down. It is a very clear legal principle, and it refers to matters before court, and as such, cannot refer to a report of Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, we have been with this bill for the last couple of months. Members have had an opportunity to visit the relevant committee and put in their views, especially when the issue of the powers of Bank of Uganda have been debated in this House so extensively. If members were concerned, they ought to have taken their views to the committee in respect of the powers of Bank of Uganda.  

We have been debating bills and never before have we said that we need a report of Parliament to guide us to debate the bills.  Mr Speaker, we all represent the people – (Interjections)- Indeed I am glad you are saying you were elected. We are supposed to present the views of our constituents.  So, unless we are saying we are failing to do our job, and the committee of Parliament is the only one that can do that job, I am afraid we ought to proceed, because we ought to have done enough research. 

I know we all have the competence to debate this bill. We started the debate yesterday, I don’t see the reason why members should rise up at this point and say that we stop the debate. Since we are at committee stage, I implore members to continue with the debate. Let us use the views of the people and the research that we have done. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am wondering what our duty is in this Parliament, and what we take as very important to us. The case of UCBL is one issue we all appreciate, and that is why we set up a committee to discuss the issue of UCBL and bring the report here. 

I am wondering, Mr Speaker, what the priority is; whether the priority is to settle the issue of UCBL and leave any other problems that could arise because of lack of a proper law to guide Bank of Uganda - (Interruption) -

MR AWORI: Thank you, madam, for yielding the Floor.  I would like to inform you that what we are looking at is essentially how to handle matters of a similar nature.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, hon. Aggrey Awori, for that information. I do not disagree with what you say but what I would like to ask here is, what is our priority? Is it to waste time and have nothing to discuss, when we have this report of the committee right now? If we didn’t have all these discussions here, Mr Speaker, we would have gone very far with the debate on this bill. 

Therefore, it is your Office, Mr Speaker, which should instruct the Office of the Clerk to bring the report on UCBL to this House. That could be done either tomorrow or any other day.  Why should we waste time here when we could have discussed this bill, and then the following item on the Order Paper would be the report of UCBL? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what hon. Alaso said sent the real message; that because we stay the debate on one bill therefore we must stay debate on another. That is what she stated, explicitly - (Interjections)- That is what I understood!  

Mr Speaker, I want to agree with hon. Mwesigye that this Parliament must stand on the right side of fundamental principles of good management of public affairs. When you are talking about matters sub judice, it has nothing to do with matters of procedure in this House. They are totally different, and they must be understood to be so.  

I actually want to agree with hon. Ezati when he said people are anxious to debate this. That is precisely why we are saying, wait for this sub-judice encumbrance to be over so that you are extremely free to debate, as you want. Now, this one has absolutely nothing! You can say and do anything you want -(Mr Awori rose)- I want to be allowed to finish my contribution. I know these interferences by some honourable members. We know them - (Laughter)- Yes, we do! There is no question. In my own view, this is nothing but clear politics, and I would like to persuade this House not to accept that.  

You remember, about two years ago, there was a big conflict between the Bank of Uganda and the rest of us in the country. We were struggling to set up financial institutions to be able to fight poverty. And actually, what my colleague should have said is, part three of this bill states it all.  

What we want to do is to mobilize funds, and if you delay this bill you are saying, “you people, go to sleep, keep money in your homes, do not buy shares, and do not do anything”. So, this bill, if debated and passed, definitely is a major contribution to fighting poverty in this country. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think it is wise for us to continue debating this bill.   

By the way, I want to agree with those who say that the UCB report must come and be debated. Hon. Awori said it is a post-mortem report, or an autopsy; they are they same. Let me advise you, they are the same. But you do not want an autopsy report to be able to treat those who are still alive! An autopsy report is to confirm what you already know. We already know the problems; we should continue with the debate. When the autopsy comes, we shall deal with it accordingly. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening very carefully to this debate, but I want to start from the onset by saying that it is unfortunate to think that committees are set in this House for no purpose. I do not agree with what was stated by one of the speakers that we have the opportunity to participate and benefit from what happens in the committees.  

My understanding is that these committees are set so that we can have an in-depth analysis, and the rest of us can benefit from the committee work on the Floor of Parliament here. If it was not so, Mr Speaker, I don’t think we would waste time setting up committees where everybody would be expected to go and participate. I think that was an erroneous assertion.  

This country has suffered a lot of losses, as it was stated by one of the speakers before me. Losses in the UCB sale are still fresh in our minds, and this was because of the flaws in the law that was in action then. And here we are trying to make a law, which can stand the test of time and protect the interests of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, if we want to make laws, which can be effective and protect the interests of Ugandans, why are we not able to wait only for a few days and discuss this report, so that we can look at the loopholes and plug them as we go along? I really wonder what we are trying to say here, because if we say we are just doing a post-mortem and, therefore, wasting time, I do not think that is a good comparison. Here we are, talking about laws and about making laws that will last for a very long time in this country.  

I therefore think that if we are really seriously working for the country, let us benefit from the past mistakes and let them be cornerstones of the future foundation, so that we move as one, with knowledge and with purpose. Unless we are able to do that, Mr Speaker, I see us doing things, which will make our people suffer - (Interruption).

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, honourable member. I have been listening to your debate and indeed I agree with you. My only confusion is, if there was a question of saying we are going to privatise a certain enterprise, but according to the recommendation of the UCB report, unless we come with a new rule to re-visit the old anomalies that have created this, we should not privatise another enterprise, I would be one hundred per cent in support of you.  But what we are revisiting now does not mean that what is missing in the other report of UCB is what we intend to incorporate in this bill. This bill is going to address the Statute of 1993, in which there were a lot of loopholes. And we are saying, the committee having sat and addressed all those loopholes that made the Governor take the powers in his hand, the bill is here now to be dealt with so that we do not make another mistake. 

Should there be any recommendations you know from the UCB report that can be a good provision in this current bill, once you open the debate, they will come as a matter of an amendment of any particular section, and then we shall move forward.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we decide on this issue so that we can continue.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, he has stated a very strong case in my argument. Both committees have sat and have looked at certain things. We as Parliament want to benefit from the work of the other committee so that we can be able to follow the arguments, which they have put in the proposed bill. So, I do not see any contradiction here. 

I think it is important for us to agree to learn from the past, unless you do not want to learn from the past. If you do not want to learn from the past, we are bound to make a lot mistakes.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the first time this week, I would like to agree with my senior colleague, the hon. Nandala Mafabi, that it is important that we are informed of any relevant findings that could have arisen in the investigation of the sale of UCBL. However, I do not think that we should wait for that report to come to Parliament before we are informed of those relevant findings.

The hon. Nandala Mafabi, with whom I am agreeing for the first time this week, was a member of the ad hoc committee. He is also a distinguished member of the Committee of Finance and Planning, and he is also a member of the Parliament that is sitting right now. This House can still benefit from any important thing that he has, without waiting for the report. 

On top of that, Mr Speaker, the responsibility of dealing with bills that come from the Executive rests with sessional committees of Parliament. A distinguished committee of this Parliament has considered this report, and it is composed of distinguished members. To say that we wait for the work from another committee before we can proceed with this bill is to move a vote of no confidence in these honourable members, something that I would not like to do - (Interruption).

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When this House proceeds to set up committees and it expects a report, the committees undertake this work on behalf of the House, which in the first place sets up the terms of reference upon which those committees should proceed. To say that this House cannot wait for the work of another committee, when actually that committee was mandated by this House so that this House can make an informed proceeding on matters that are important to the laws that we pass, becomes a little bit unfair.  

So, I want to inform the honourable member that that committee was set up by this House, and it is the report that we expect to enable us to proceed in an informed manner. That is why members are proceeding in such a manner. I thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I heard the speaker holding the Floor saying that if we postponed the debate on this bill, it tantamounts to passing a vote of no confidence in this committee. I want to know from him whether postponing the debate on the report on election violence was a vote of no confidence in my committee.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I am telling you to look at that report is to build insight, so that you pass a good law. I want to tell you that you need to look at that report before you deal with this bill. Thank you.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, colleagues are asking us to consider a report that is not even before Parliament. You heard the chairperson of the committee saying different things from the vice chairperson. I am even worried that the report may not be ready and may not come soon.  

This House recently passed a bill on deposit- taking institutions. I do not know why colleagues did not suggest that we wait for this report to come to Parliament before we can consider this matter.

Honourable members, our colleagues from the Committee of Finance and Planning, I believe, ably handled this report, and I have no reason to doubt their capacity. We have already presented the report, debated and adopted it, so I see no reason why at this time we should try to re-invent the clock.

MR AWORI: Exercising the powers conferred upon you by the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, we seek your guidance. Can the question be put clearly so that members know what they are voting on? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was essentially to end the debate so that I put the question. I have not yet put the question on the main issue of postponing the debate. 

Now, honourable members, I am going to put the question, but the issue question is, how are you going to decide. I would prefer that we clearly see how you have decided, and the best way to do it in the quickest time is for you to put up your hands. I put the question to the motion that we postpone the consideration of the bill until the report is tabled and debated.

(Members voted)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have three abstentions, 41 against and 54 for the motion -(Applause). So, the motion is carried. Now, it means the committee stage will wait until –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, in order for this House to pronounce itself on such an important issue, it must constitute a quorum. Arising out of your total figure, do we constitute a quorum?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the number of members who constitute a quorum for purposes of a vote must exclude the ex-officio Members of Parliament, and I think we have 10 ex-officio members, and there are two constituencies being contested. So, this number we have here really constitutes the quorum - (Applause). 

Honourable members, we shall not proceed with the committee stage. We have finished the second reading, it is the committee stage remaining but this will only come after we have received and debated the report by the ad hoc committee on the sale of UCB.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I put questions to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, and I think he was willing to answer those questions. So, I request that you let him answer.






THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let him answer.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question is related to the legal status of presidential advisors. As a layperson, I was inclined to quote Article 171 of the Constitution. It says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, and any Act of Parliament, the President may, after consultation with the appropriate service commission, establish offices in the Public Service of the Government of Uganda.” 

But then I remembered Article 119 of the Constitution, namely that when we are dealing with legal matters it is our Attorney General who must guide us. Under the circumstances, I must ask the Attorney General to answer this question. And I am asking the Minister of State in charge of Parliamentary Affairs to ask him to do so within five days from today. He has been extremely busy in courts of law, so I am sure you will understand.

With regard to the second question, that two ministers were reported to have quarrelled in public, first of all, we cannot depend on mass media reports because they may be incorrect. So, the question should have been, did they actually quarrel in public? I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Mr Speaker, honourable members, as requested, I would like to make a statement to this Parliament on the divestiture of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd. 

Following the presentation of the Divestiture Action Plan in 1997, DRIC approved that Kinyara Sugar Works be divested by way of sale of shares to institutional investors and the general public through the Uganda Securities Exchange. 

The above strategy was guided by the objectives of divestiture of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd, which include among others:

• The broadening of share ownership among Ugandans to empower them economically.

• Facilitation of the sustainability and expansion of the company.  

These two objectives determined and shaped the policy that was agreed on at that particular time. 

The foundation of the Initial Public Offering (IPO) structure, which followed that decision of DRIC, was expected to be strong institutional participation, which would provide significant investment funds and give direction to the company, with dispersed ownership. If you have a company with many shareholders, they need guidance and direction. So, it was believed that institutional investors would give guidance and were supposed to be known fund managers.

On the basis of those objectives, it was decided to divest Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd through IPO, to institutional investors and the general public, and listing of shares on the stock exchange, as follows:

• Ten per cent to the employees of the company.
• Ten per cent to sugarcane out-growers.
• Ten per cent to the corporate manager, who happens to be Booker Tate.
• 70 per cent to the general public and institutional investors (in tranches).

Mr Speaker, there has been a modification of this strategy because the initial pre-market testing, which was undertaken by the transaction advisor, has revealed that institutional demands for the shares, which were allocated to them, is low. Only 18 per cent of the initial public offering was underwritten. 

In view of that, Mr Speaker, Government is of the view that, firstly, while the short-term expansion currently going on is being funded entirely from internally generated funds, medium and long-term development will require a substantial investment capital expenditure, which is over and above the internally generated funds. 

Secondly, Government is of the view that dispersed ownership by small shareholders, without a core investor who will have a major stake in the company, may not give adequate direction to the company.

Thirdly, Government realises that the objectives for Kinyara divestiture, which I have outlined above, can still be achieved by using a modified approach.

What is the new modified strategy? In order to achieve the original objectives, as I mentioned above, Government has therefore decided as follows:

• 49 per cent of the shares be divested immediately to a core investor, Government retaining 51 per cent to start with.

• Two per cent of the shares - Mr Speaker, I would like to insert a word, which the secretary omitted, it is the word “may”. So, it should read, “two per cent shares may be divested to the core investor later at the initial public offering stage.”

• The initial public offering and listing of shares on the Securities Exchange shall be as originally envisaged: 10 per cent to the employees, 10 per cent to the sugarcane out-growers and 29 per cent to the public.  

The point I would like to emphasis here, Mr Speaker, is that only the shares that had been identified for institutional investors are going to be affected by the change in strategy, not the shares that had been identified for the employees, sugarcane out-growers and the public.
 
How the New Strategy Addresses the Objectives of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd Divestiture:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are saying that the employees, sugarcane out-growers and the general public will still be able to buy shares in the company in the same proportions as previously envisaged, thus fulfilling the divestiture objective of broad-based share participation. 

Secondly, by injecting the requisite equity capital that is necessary, and providing direction, the core investor will ensure that the medium and long-term objectives are realised, thus ensuring sustainability and expansion of the company.

Mr Speaker, allow me to note here that we are arranging to meet the joint committees on the Economy, on Trade and Industry, and on Finance in order to discuss the details on the proposed divestiture strategy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I would like to thank the minister for this statement, which contains half the truth. I want this House and the honourable minister to bear with me. He knows he has as much information as I do, and he knows that the picture he is giving is not the correct one.

I will start with the objectives. He has only stated two objectives and left out one, which is of fundamental importance: the one of developing the capital market. That one was also considered while Kinyara was being considered for privatisation. 

Honourable members, it is this House, which resolved that public participation in the companies being privatised should be considered, and also the need for developing the capital markets. To say that these two objectives - now they are three - will be met by the new strategy, leaves a lot to be desired.  

Mr Speaker, about the modified strategy; one, the honourable minister is telling us that the transaction advisor has failed to raise the number of institutional investors. I would like to inform this House that the Privatisation Unit and even the stock exchange have not been given the opportunity to get these institutional investors. Much as they too had confirmed and committed themselves to buy shares, there are some who said, “we want you to list Kinyara and then we will buy shares”. 

How is one going to commit oneself without knowing the details? I am saying the opportunity should be given for Kinyara to be listed, then we will see whether we get the institutional investors or not. Even Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom had committed funds to buy shares in Kinyara. That is for sure and for real.

Then there is the Government’s view of short-term - honourable minister, I want you to tell me what you mean by “short-term”. I have three volumes of a study on the viability and expansion of Kinyara, and the preparation of Kinyara has cost us not less than Shs3 billion - (Interruption).

MR PAJOBO: The total amount is about Shs5 billion, not Shs3 billion.

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, there is no contradiction. Five billion falls within more than three billion. This is a ten-year strategic plan for the expansion of Kinyara. Honourable members, I want to inform you, they have already started implementing this strategic plan, and through studies, research and everything, it is viable. 

When the honourable minister tells this House that they are not sure, I would like to be informed, without any contradiction to the second reason, why. The second reason is, “dispersed ownership by small shareholders, without a core investor with a major stake in the company, may not give adequate direction to the company.”  This is a statement and an argument, which has been meddled and taken around circles, including the highest circles of this country, by Mr Madhivani. 

I was also among those at the IPO strategy, and after consultation, after technical advice, after transaction advice, after DRIC, we all agreed on the IPO. But one person comes and says, “no, if there is no core investor, then it will not happen!”  

Honourable members, I want to tell you the problems we have had in the country of core investors; the experience has not been good. I would like to quote some companies, which have been sold and they were doing well, but after being divested to core investors, as I talk now they have collapsed. 

African Textile Mills was sold to someone I will not mention, and it collapsed. Foods and Beverages was also sold to a core investor. You know Nile Hotel was also sold to a core investor, it collapsed. Nytil was sold to a core investor and it collapsed. Uganda Fisheries was also sold. Printpak was sold and resold until it collapsed. You know the UCB story; you have just moved a motion here. Uganda Grain Milling Company was also doing very well and was resold.  

Honourable minister, I am not convinced, and I am sure the honourable members will agree with me, and I want you to go along with me.  We do not need a core investor for Kinyara as of now! Everything has been studied and -(Interjection)- on the contrary, there are some which have been floated and they are doing well, like Uganda Clays and BAT.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the minister has not told us the implications of this change in strategy.  What are the implications? One, Booker Tate is the company managing Kinyara. Kinyara has just signed a five-year contract with this company. Selling it to a core investor will mean that Booker Tate has to come out and that contract has to be cancelled. Even if it is to remain, it will be under a new arrangement. Now, how much will that cost Kinyara and Uganda?

Two, the potential benefits, which would have accrued from the Uganda Stock Exchange, will not be realised.

Three, more than Shs3 billion - the figure is now 5 billion - has been spent in preparing Kinyara to be divested under the IPO. I am informed that if you have to sell it to the core investor, then you have to start afresh. Everything will change, and of course the sale will delay. 

I want to say that there is a lot of anxiety in Kinyara, in Bujenje, in Masindi, in Bunyoro and in Uganda. Kinyara employs people from all over the country. Some people have rented land, and they do not even come from Bunyoro, and they are benefiting as out-growers.

Mr Speaker, maybe most importantly, we do not have laws to prevent monopoly in this country, and anti-trust laws. Once Kinyara is opened up for bidding, and we know what bidding means in Uganda, anything can happen and anybody can bid. God forbid! That is where Madhivani will appear, and you have no law to stop him from taking Kinyara! We have a long history with Madhivani.  There was a bonus of Butamira given to Madhivani. As we talk now, he has not utilised Butamira - (Laughter). 

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Kabakumba for giving way. I want to inform this House that up to now, 380 permit holders in Butamira have not been paid even one shilling, and this Parliament missed the chance to help peasants.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. That is the experience with Madhivani and Butamira, and also –(Interruption)-

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to this august House. About 80 percent of Butamira tree growers have already been paid, and only 39 permit holders have not received their payment. Their payment is now being processed by the Ministry of Finance, and after that everybody will have been paid. So, it is not correct as hon. Nabwiso says that 300 and something people have actually not been paid. It is only 39 permit holders who are waiting to be paid. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR NABWISO: It is true that 38 permits have not been compensated, but in each of those groups, each permit has more than 10 people. That is why we are talking about 380 people who have not been paid, and I think it is wrong for the Minister to come here and mislead this House -(Laughter).

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. Whichever way, the purpose was for Madhivani to push out these out-growers by growing his own cane. And those who are growing cane are suffering with it. He does not want to buy it! But that is beside the point. I was saying that Madhvani - (Interruption)-

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am one of the people who are very objective, and Madhivani has been mentioned several times. It is common knowledge that Madhivani cannot come to this Parliament to defend himself. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to continue mentioning Madhivani and yet he cannot be here to defend himself?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe she has a basis for saying so.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. But the facts are very clear, and I want to say, if I could proceed on that point, Kakira Sugar Works was given 30 percent of the government shares. As I talk now, unless you give me proof, I am sure he has never paid the 500 million shillings he was supposed to pay to Government. He went to State House and it was written off as a bad debt! And for us poor people, our things are being sold by NPART -(Interruption).

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to the speaker holding the Floor is environmental. As a result of that act, which caused or is about to cause the destruction of Butamira forestland, Uganda has been earmarked -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were talking about Kinyara?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am giving her information comparatively. Mr Speaker, the information I am giving to the speaker holding the Floor is environmental. As a result of the summary destruction of Butamira Forest Reserve, Uganda has been spotted as a wrongdoer, especially in view of its failure to implement Agenda 21, in which we are expected to protect all existing forests. We have gone against it, and the international community is going to react against us economically -(Laughter).

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. The point has been made. 

Sustainability of any business depends on four major factors: appropriate corporate governance, which we have in Kinyara; access to skills and expertise, which we have in Kinyara, and Kinyara has gone ahead, much as it is young in this sector, to put up a tailor-made training institute. We have it in Kinyara and it is producing the required technical people for Kinyara Sugar Works and Uganda in general. 

Thirdly, there is access to capital for expansion. There is already a plan. I have told you how they will go for more than 10 years. And there is access to sugarcane. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to request to move a motion at an appropriate time, if you allow me. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we are to succeed in this country, we should say the truth and nothing but the truth. I would have wished Government to tell Parliament the truth and the entire truth.  

Mr Speaker, the divestiture of Kinyara Sugar Works should not be taken as a divestiture of any other company in this country. First and foremost, Government must know that it is beginning at a level where the public of Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom is suspicious of the change. 

When Kinyara was set up in the 1970s, the stores for the sugar were taken to Gulu. Sugar was manufactured in Kinyara and would be shifted to Gulu for storage. That was suspicious enough. Why not build the stores in Masindi town? And we were told that from Gulu, sugar would find its way to Sudan, hardly would the sugar be taken by Ugandans. 

Now Government goes to Masindi, holds a meeting and explains that they are going to divest this company and a, b, c is going to take place. Before even the foam of the soap dries, Government has changed position. That is suspicion enough. 

I want to tell this Parliament that, much as the statement by the minister mentions DRIC, DRIC actually has not considered the divestiture of this company. It has not! Some decision has been made and this one may not be the final decision. Possibly, we may get another position, if somebody comes here and convinces the powers that be.  

Mr Speaker, Kinyara is a company that is doing very well. It is paying to government, on the average, ten billion shillings per year in form of taxes - VAT, Pay As You Earn. As my colleague, hon. Kabakumba, says, it has got a strategy that is flowing very well. Actually, the person who is going to take it over would have got something that is moving on very well. He may not even bring in a shilling; just come and sit in a very good office and claim ownership. We should have been told this, but it has not been mentioned.  

More importantly, Mr Speaker, whereas a colleague asked why we are mentioning a name of a certain company, I would like to ask, why not! If there is information that somebody is about to grab this institution, and possibly instead of even making it develop further, might first tap off the oxygen in order to create artificial shortages, why can’t we speak out? 

The out-growers in Butembe are crying. A certain member here has a letter from the out-growers and they are not being treated well! Now, if the same person makes a mistake of going to Kinyara, God forbid! It may not be easy for him when it comes to Bunyoro. You may think it is a simple matter, but somewhere, when we were telling the Government that things are not okay in Kibaale, people thought it was easy. But until fire started coming out, that is when they realised. Now for Kinyara, and you know a sugar industry is something that is so vulnerable, I imagine Government knows it - (Interruption).  

MS SARAH NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Kasirivu for giving way. I am concerned because the honourable member has said that there was fire from Kibaale, and being in Internal Affairs, we know what that means. So, I am seeking clarification as to whether we should get our people ready to go to Bunyoro for the anticipated fire. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR KASIRIVU: Well, the honourable minister has the experience. I do not want to add on it. If you want to get water or fire extinguishers, get ready. If a plantation of sugarcane catches fire, certainly you need fire extinguishers and water, and I would not want that to happen. But it can happen, once the neighbourhood of a plantation is not satisfied. 

I want Government to take this into consideration. If they are not satisfied, if they get mistreated as they are mistreated in Butembe, the Banyoro people are usually quiet, but they can easily react. 

So, Mr Speaker, I am just giving caution that we should, as much as possible, divest Kinyara Sugar Works in a transparent matter, and make sure that the stakeholders in this institution at least get satisfied. You may not satisfy everybody. 

If there is a change of attitude today, Government should help us, the political leaders from Bunyoro, to go and explain, because we have not been party to this change of decision. How do I go to explain to the people of Bugangaizi? Somebody else must go and explain. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have got two observations to make on the minister’s statement. One is on the modification in strategy; this is bullet number two, the second paragraph, which says, “Secondly, dispersed ownership by small shareholders, without a core investor with a major stake in the company, may not give adequate direction to the company”.  

Mr Speaker, given the history of divestiture in this country and the fact that Government had decided to give the majority shares to the farmers, I thought Government would, for once, trust the farmers. Yes the farmers can make mistakes, but we have also seen core investors making mistakes and getting away with it.

I had thought that the minister would also take a leaf from the tea industry. Farmers own the tea factories in this country and the tea industry is doing very well! I thought that the minister would study how the tea industries work in the country, so that the farmers who are out-growers in Kinyara would also benefit from this divestiture. Maybe the owners now would know that divestiture was meant for everybody but not for a few individuals in this country.

Mr Speaker, the second observation I want to make is on the new strategy. It says that the 49 shares are to be divested immediately to a core investor, with Government retaining 51 to start with, and then eventually two shares will be divested to the core investor at an initial public offer stage.

Mr Speaker, we have been in this country long enough, and I do not know whether the minister is really being honest here. We know that when you talk about 49, tomorrow when the final document comes out, it might even be over 60. It has happened before and it can happen again. 

So, Mr Speaker, I do not know, maybe they just use Parliament to come and read a statement, which they are not committed to. But I know the divestiture programme in this country; history is going to either vindicate or tell what happened to all these enterprises that have gone to the core investors, which have not benefited Ugandans - maybe some people. 






I would like to appeal to the honourable members, to the minister and the Government to rethink the modification strategy and to stick to the initial strategy they had envisaged, which was going to put trust in the farmers so that they can have majority shares. I thank you, Mr Speaker.


MR NYEHDWOHA MUTITI (Buliisa, Masindi district): Mr Speaker, I am really perturbed because the Minister held so many meetings, so many seminars, and so many workshops in Bunyoro region and he was advocating for the first strategy. It is really very interesting for the same minister to turn around and bring in a new strategy, which is very strange to the people. I do not know whether it is his own initiative or it is from external pressure. I really do not understand - (Interruption).

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So many members have raised an issue about the truthfulness and sincerity of the statement that we are discussing. The clarification I wanted to seek is; I know Prof. Kasenene, apart from being Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation, he is also the head of the Laity in the Catholic Church. Is he being honest and sincere with the statement, or is he portraying a different message when internally he believes a different thing altogether? That is the clarification I want.

MR NYENDWOHA: Mr Speaker, when the Government keeps changing posts, the population loses confidence in it. I think it is very important that we maintain the confidence of the people. 

The Minister quotes that the transaction adviser advised that there were very few institutional organisations interested in buying shares. But at the same time, DRIC also quotes the transaction adviser, and it is because of his recommendations - it is implied there - that they drew the timetable for implementing. I want to ask the minister, how many transaction advisors did you use? Was it only one or they were two or more? 

Mr Speaker, the people of Bunyoro region - I might even say Ugandans - support the first strategy. We had given you our full support during your meetings and seminars, but now when you turn around, we are not turning around with you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers the following motion without notice, under Rule 40(1)(k). 

THE SPEAKER: Read it.

MS KABAKUMBA: Rule 40(1)(k) says, “The following motions may be moved without notice–
(k) any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency.”

THE SPEAKER: Is there an emergency?

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Would you elaborate, please?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am saying there is an emergency because Kinyara was supposed to be listed on 29 November 2002, that is, last Friday. It was supposed to be listed on the Stock Exchange. It had been prepared and accepted by the Uganda Stock Exchange and the Capital Markets Authority, but it turned out that it was not listed, and that is why I am saying it is a matter of emergency. 

This decision was reversed on Tuesday, without following the normal procedure of DRIC approving the strategy. Whether they call it modification, but I call it fundamental change in the strategy. So, if we do not consider it urgently, anything can happen to Kinyara. And as I talk now, people out there are not sure. In any business, once people are not sure of tomorrow, anything can happen. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay then proceed.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the divestiture of Kinyara Sugar Works Limited: 

WHEREAS Kinyara Sugar Works Limited is a company subject to divestiture under the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Statute 1993; and 

WHEREAS the Divestiture and Reform Implementation Committee (DRIC), responsible for implementing policy reform and divestiture, at its 236th meeting approved that Kinyara Sugar Works be divested by way of accelerated public participation; and 

WHEREAS the accelerated public participation is through an initial public offer incorporating a placement of shares to institutional investors, employees, out-growers and the general public; and 

WHEREAS the indicative share-holding percentage was agreed to be: general public/institutional investors – 70 percent; Booker Tate - that is the current management – ten percent; out-growers – ten percent; employees – ten percent;  

NOTING that the management contract with Booker Tate has just been extended and signed for five years; and 

NOTING FURTHER, that the implementation of the decision of DRIC had commenced, following the appointment of the transaction adviser and setting up of an indicative timetable showing the offer period to be September and listing to be 29 November 2002; and

NOTING that all stakeholders have been consulted and are agreeable to the IPO strategy; and

NOTING ALSO that it has taken more than 300 billion shillings to prepare Kinyara Sugar Works for divestiture using the IPO strategy; and 

NOTING that Uganda Stock Exchange/Capital Markets Authority has approved Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd prospectus and cleared it for listing; and 

NOTING ALSO that Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd is profitable, and as a going concern, it can be sustained without a core investor; and 

REALISING that there are no material issues that prevent the implementation of the divestiture strategy for Kinyara Sugar Works, 

NOW THEREFORE, it hereby be resolved by the members of this House that: 

1. The Parliament urges Government not to adopt the policy of selling Kinyara Sugar Works to a core investor with the intent that the investor floats the shares to the public later. 

2. That Government, under DRIC, expeditiously continues with the initial public offer strategy to divest Kinyara Sugar Works, which is already in advanced stages of implementation.  

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the rule upon which the member is proceeding is very clear. It presupposes that the Speaker has certified the matter to be a matter of emergency – (Interruption).

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member of the Front Bench to challenge your ruling. I first requested for your permission and justified, and you allowed me to proceed. Is it in order for the honourable member to challenge your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not think he was challenging my ruling. Maybe he did not understand my ruling - (Laughter). Before I made a ruling, I asked for the justification, which justification you made, and I was satisfied and I told you to proceed - (Laughter).

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I fully support the motion moved by hon. Kabakumba Masiko, however, I have a problem with the way we formulate our policies and take decisions. It appears that policy formulation and decision-making in this country, as championed by the Executive, has certain weaknesses.  

We have a policy of fighting poverty, and I thought, in all honesty, when you are giving the people in that area access to the market and you are involving them by giving them shares in this company, this would be one way of fighting poverty.  But we appear to be diverting from the very policy, which is so core in the entire Government policy, because all budgeting processes do hinge on poverty.  

You find a project like this one, which is doing extremely well, people are getting involved, people are being assisted and we are saying they should have shares in a company. Now you turn around and say, “no, let us change the policy; let us take other decisions so that one person or two take over the entire company”, and this is to the detriment of our people.  Maybe I would call this “Musevenomics”. This is economics, which I cannot understand!  

As we talk now, Kinyara Sugar Works is fully operational, unlike other industries. That industry has sugar; the warehouses are full and there has been a complaint about where to sell this sugar. Now, the factory that is functioning well is the factory you want to sell to others, and you are not sure whether those who are going to buy it are going to make it produce the way it has been producing! 

Mr Speaker, I have visited this place myself, I found that this factory has one of the best skilled personnel/human resource in that place.  They are doing an extremely good job. I am a manager by profession, and, sincerely, if you went to that place and you found the way things are being managed, it is first class management.  Now you want to hand it over to someone you do not know; how is it going to be managed!  

Mr Speaker, this factory is helping the people in the area, and I would urge Government to reconsider their decision.  I have a problem; as I have stated, the problem is where the policy strategy rejuvenating the economy of this country is undermining the very factors, which would help the economy.

I therefore support this motion by saying, let us please adhere to the initial strategy. Let us first test it. Let our people buy shares and let these core investors who have let us down in various other factories wait. Let us use it as an example to show the people of Uganda that they too can manage this factory. With this, Mr Speaker, I support the motion.

MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to support this motion. This motion will put Kinyara in the right direction.  

First of all, we had a lot of consultation with the Privatisation Unit, as workers, to accept Kinyara to be privatised as a going concern.  That means the workers accepted to continue with employment without payment. That one, we have agreed.  

We are aware that the so-called core investor has turned work in Uganda into what we call “casualisation”. That means all those workers, who are over 4,000, their fate is not known. That means their jobs will be casualised. There will be no security of employment, so the workers are really concerned. 

Secondly, if we have a core investor, I doubt that we shall have confidence to even buy the 10 per cent, which you are giving to us, because we do not know what type of person he will be. Some of these core investors whom we hear about from rumours, we have known them and we have seen them.  So, we are really concerned. If Kinyara is going to be privatised by having a core investor, rest assured that he will have to pay all the workers, and that it may take long for Kinyara to be privatised.  

We are fed up of Kinyara being run this way; we do not know what is happening and then another day you do not know! But the earlier arrangement was so good that everybody appreciated it.  Why should we all the time accept to be driven by outsiders? Why can’t Ugandans participate in building this country? By doing this, it will allow us to participate in building our nation.  

We had a discussion with the honourable Minister several times, and we agreed. What really promoted these emergency meetings with the workers and the out-growers about the same issue? We are really concerned that there is something wrong. 

So, we want to request the House to support this motion, in order to put Kinyara in hands of Ugandans - (Applause). Ugandans should also participate! How many Ugandans are getting shares in UK, in India, in America, even to be shopkeepers? How many are they? Why don’t we participate in our industries?  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to say that the trust workers have in Booker Tate should not be removed.  Last year, we paid - when I say, “we” I mean the workers and employers - we made a profit and the Government was paid dividends of over 1.5 billion shillings. There are over 650 out-growers currently.  If we are to give shares to people, it is projected that there will be 1,350 out-growers who will join - (Interruption).

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, is it in order to debate such an important issue without quorum?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read the provision?

MR RUKUTANA: Rule 16 says, “(1) The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.  
(2) The quorum prescribed under sub-rule (1) of this rule shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question” -(Laughter).  

Mr Speaker, I will raise the same point at an appropriate time.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact, some of us are tired of people who think that Uganda’s economy should only be decided by two or three people in the kitchen. We are fed up! It is time for us to participate. We are asking to participate. We are not saying that Kinyara should not be privatised. This is the time; in fact it should not only be Kinyara but the rest of the parastatals should now be privatised through public participation, rather than one person owning everything. 

I want to also inform this House that we are able to raise enough funds to expand Kinyara and create more employment for our people. If 1,350 out-growers expand, how much poverty will you have chased from Bunyoro and the surrounding districts, and Uganda as a whole? So, if we are talking about the issue of fighting poverty, I would like us to use the first offer, where Uganda has paid enough money. Thank you very much.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a bit of difficulty in debating this motion. This House has always passed resolutions, and we spend a lot of time debating and sometimes Government pays a deaf ear.  I would like to get a guarantee from the Prime Minister that once the House passes a resolution on a motion, it will be respected.   

Most members are debating with a fear that we are creating a monopoly, and I know the Government policy is to do as much as possible to make sure that there is no monopoly. We do not have anti-trust laws, and the fear is that Madhivani is going to take over this company. Can we get a guarantee that we shall not have Madhivani taking over this company? That will give me confidence, Mr Speaker - (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to oppose or support the motion?

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, I thank the speaker for giving way. This same speaker was harassing somebody who was mentioning people by name, and he is actually doing the same sort of thing, because Mr Madhivani is not here to defend himself.

THE SPEAKER: Well, maybe he has forgotten.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, since there was no ruling when I raised the aspect of procedure, I thought it was normal. The concern people have is that we do not create a monopoly, and if that is Government position, I cannot support this motion. If we are going to have another company from somewhere as a core investor, apart from Madhivani buying this company - (Interruption)-

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Ekanya for asking a very important question. As you know, we are going to advertise.  So if we are going to advertise, how can I give any guarantee? And why do you assume that Madhivani must necessarily take it over? Why do you make speculations? Parliament should not speculate. But I want to add that, you have talked about Booker Tate performing well and we are going to advertise, why do you assume that such a good performer will not emerge victorious? So, I shall never guarantee when I advertise. It would mean that advertisement is fiction.

MS KIRASO: I am seeking clarification following the Prime Minister’s very emphatic and serious statement. Of course we know the rules of advertising and open competitive bidding, but can you convince this House, hon. Prime Minister, taking advantage of the question which was asked by hon. Ekanya, that the gentleman in question, whose name I do not want to mention, lobbied His Excellency the President and has been promised to take over these shares, hence the sudden change of heart on Tuesday? I would like you to refute or accept, in all honesty.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have never, as a professional, accepted speculation. Does the honourable member have evidence that the investor has in fact lobbied the President? Has she got any evidence? Why should we speculate? I do not think it is proper. She must first produce evidence and I shall answer.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give shows that there is a change of methods in the way Government is doing things. I have informed you that this was not a decision of DRIC. Ideally, it should be DRIC to decide whether it is a modification or a change, as it is here. I want to tell you that the evidence the hon. Prime Minister wants, he has it -(Laughter).

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that I am lying to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate that he has the evidence, and he is saying he does not?

MRS KABAKUMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker. In his heart of hearts, the Prime Minister knows that His Excellency the President invited him for a meeting - (Laughter). If there were minutes, he has those minutes -(Laughter). He was requested – and advice from the President is a directive - and a decision as the minister has put it, that the person in question should be assisted was made. That is what I wanted to say, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, Rt hon. Prime Minister, it has been put to you that you have the minutes and this was in the minutes. What do you say?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to say that His Excellency the President chaired a meeting, does not prove that Madhivani lobbied. That is the point. For the honourable member to say that there was a meeting, does not logically amount to substantiating. I use logic! So, I am asking for logic before –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a point of order and the honourable member said the Prime Minister was aware of the facts. The Prime Minister denies that there were any facts. I do not have the copy of the minutes; it becomes a problem for me to decide which is which.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening quietly, but one thing that comes to my mind is that we are losing the gist of this whole debate. The gist of this whole debate was focused on the fact that we would not like to have another core investor. That is the essence of the motion. 

When you look at the first proposal, you see someone called a corporate manager, Booker Tate, who does not feature in the new strategy at all. Then you find that when you add 49 per cent to the core investor and then you add two, it becomes 51 per cent, and therefore, he becomes the majority shareholder. 

I think this is the principal argument here. If you go back to the very first proposal, then you will be able to have some degree of harmony in that the 70 per cent will be shared, not only by the general public, which includes Bunyoro Kingdom and others, but also other institutional investors.  I understand this to be the essence of the debate, and I support the motion on the basis that -(Interruption) -

THE SPEAKER: Are you now contributing?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Because hon. Ekanya said he had difficulty in debating the motion, I asked him whether he was supporting the motion or he was opposing it. This question has not been answered.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would prefer that this matter be referred to a committee. I have no problem of having a core investor, provided we do not have a monopoly. That is my position, and therefore –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a motion. You either support the motion or you do not. If you do not appreciate it, you are just neutral; you let those who appreciate it continue with the debate. If you want to amend the motion, you are also free to do so.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I have said clearly confirms that I do not support this motion in its current state, because of the following reasons: there are allegations that DRIC has not fully participated. We need that clarified. This is an institution established by Government, so we need that clarified. 

Two; there are allegations that if the sale is done by public offer, the performance is not correct. We have companies where 49 percent has been given to core investors, and the rest listed, for example BAT and Bank of Baroda, which are performing very well. Therefore, I feel we need to be very sincere and make sure there is no monopoly created. 

I have no problem with the core investor of 49 percent because we have somebody in charge bringing new capital to this economy such that issues are directed. You cannot have every person taking 10 percent, five percent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, with this motion, is there a monopoly being created?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, as I stated, there are certain issues that need to be clarified. The fear was that a monopoly was going to be created, and the gentleman whose name has been discussed here was going to take over. That would create a monopoly, and it was the reason I said that provided there is no monopoly created, I think the Government’s position is correct. 

I would advise Government to lobby and discuss this issue and move ahead with selling the 49 percent. Thank you.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In order to guide my colleagues in this debate, I would like to clarify a few points that have been raised. 

The first one is, “Are we telling the truth? Are we honest?” Mr Speaker, we are telling the truth and we are honest. 

I would also like to clarify on the impression that has been made that we have moved from one strategy to another. Mr Speaker, we have not moved from one strategy to another. We have changed the sequence. The original sequence was to start with the initial public offering and then move on from there. Now we are saying that we are starting with the core investor, because the shares that were earmarked –(Interruption)-

MS ALASO: In your statement, honourable minister, you talked about previous strategy and new strategy. I would like to understand the difference.

PROF. KASENENE: Mr Speaker, I said “modification.” “Modification” means that the strategy is still the same and we are only modifying it by sequencing. 

The shares that were earmarked for workers, the 10 percent in the modified strategy, are still earmarked for the workers. It is 10 cent for the workers, 10 percent for out-growers and 25 percent for the public, as in our original strategy. Only that the sequencing is changing. These will be offered after identifying the core investor.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, considering the trend the debate is taking, and considering the mood of the Members of Parliament - a good mood - I propose that the question be put.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: You have appreciated the motion, which we have been debating, and I want to put the question to it.

MS KIRASO: I would like to move a small amendment to the motion, which I am supporting.

THE SPEAKER: Can you read it and then I will ask the mover.

MS KIRASO: I am the seconder to this motion - (Interjections) - Honourable members, give me a chance. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to move a small modification to the motion. The new strategy, which the minister has tabled here says, “Government has therefore decided as follows….”  Our motion was saying, “Parliament urges Government not to adopt the policy –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which page, please?

MS KIRASO: The last page; “Now, therefore, it is hereby resolved by the Members of this Parliament that this Parliament urges: (1) Government not to adopt the policy of selling Kinyara Sugar Works Limited….” 

Why am I moving the amendment? It looks like Government has already adopted a position on this. So, my amendment reads as follows: “That Government reverses its decision to sell Kinyara Sugar Works Limited to a core investor…” and the rest remains as it is. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does the mover agree?

MS KABAKUMBA: I have no problem with that, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, I want a clarification from hon. Kiraso on the modified amendment. Some time ago, we passed a resolution in this Parliament and said that Government should divest 49 percent shares of Uganda Commercial Bank. They sold 80 percent. I want hon. Kiraso to help me on how she is going to enforce this, because Government has already decided. How are you going to enjoin Government to accept this?  

MS KIRASO: To answer hon. Guma, I was comforted when the hon. Minister in charge of Privatisation said, after his submission, that, “We are now going to consult with the Committees on Finance, Trade and Industry and Economy….” He said this in spite of his earlier statement that Government had already decided. That gave me an impression that what Government had decided was still negotiable. 

I will also use this opportunity to say that I realise the tight situation in which the honourable minister is. He has his job in the Executive, and Parliament is playing its oversight role. I would like to say, honourable minister, that privatisation is a very tricky business. It has caused some other people problems before. That is what I wanted to say.

THE SPEAKER: We are not continuing the debate. Honourable members, I think you should be clear about the language used. “Urges” – that is what you are doing in this resolution. The question of asking how you are going to enforce this is different. The terms of the resolution are to “urge” Government. I now put the question on the amended motion, as moved by hon. Kiraso.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. I have a problem with tomorrow. I do not know whether it is Idd El-Fitri or not. Does anybody have an idea about it? Perhaps what I can do is to adjourn the House until Tuesday, at 2.00 p.m. I wish you a happy and enjoyable Idd El-Fitri.

(Parliament rose at 5.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


