Tuesday 5th December, 2000

Parliament met at 11.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is need to adjust the Order Paper immediately after this. We shall add a statement by the Prime Minister to the Order Paper. This has been caused by the sad news we have received from Gulu. As far as item 3 is concerned, the Minister concerned has advised me that he has not received that question, and therefore, we shall not be able to deal with the item here until maybe Thursday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, Government has learnt of the very sad news of the death of Dr. Matthew Lukwiya, the medical superintendent of Lacor hospital. He was diagnosed with Ebola, which has caused his death. He has been at the forefront of grappling with this deadly disease. 

He has been one of the pillars of Lacor hospital, especially during the difficult times. At one time he was abducted by the rebels and was kept in the bush for about a week. On his return, he resumed his duties vibrantly and assiduously, a great indicator of his dedication to the medical profession. 

Government wishes to convey its condolences to the bereaved family, the medical profession and the entire nation. We would like to assure the medical personnel in Gulu and in other affected districts that everything possible is being done to reinforce our determination to eradicate the Ebola epidemic. Please do not lose heart. As a tribute to Dr. Lukwiya, remain steadfast. 

We must take this opportunity to send condolences to the families of the medical staff and to other families who died of Ebola. We wish to register our appreciation to the international community, which has promptly assisted us in combating the Ebola scourge. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved family during this difficult period!

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, I would like, on behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary group and on my own behalf, to thank the Government for the message of condolence, which we have just received through the Prime Minister, in the form of a statement to Parliament. I am sure that this message will go a long way in encouraging the people of Gulu, in particular, in fighting this Ebola scourge. 

The news of the Dr. Lukwiya’s illness, which came out on Saturday, was received in Gulu with a lot of shock and fear because Dr. Lukwiya was, as stated by the Prime Minister, one doctor who was completely dedicated to fighting this deadly disease. I should inform Parliament that it was in fact Dr. Lukwiya’s effort, which lead to the discovery that this disease was actually Ebola. He was the first person to suspect that this there was something wrong around, and he brought it to the notice of the authorities in Gulu and the medical people there. This led to the investigation where they discovered that the disease was actually Ebola. It was his effort.  

Dr. Lukwiya, as I said, was a dedicated doctor. In fact, Lacor hospital was more or less synonymous with Dr. Lukwiya. His death is similar to that of the late Dr. Corti, who died of AIDS, which she contracted as a result of treating AIDS patients in the hospital. Dr. Lukwiya is yet another of those very dedicated members of staff of Lacor hospital who died as a result of treating Ebola patients. We know that he must have contracted this disease at the time when medical staff almost went on strike. The medical staff almost went on strike, but Dr. Lukwiya went on to work alone for a short while, and maybe that was the time when he contracted this disease. The Prime Minister has appealed to the medical staff to take courage and continue. This is also our appeal. His death should not discourage people from working to fight this disease. 

We would also like to officially appreciate the prompt effort that was made by the Government to contain this Ebola disease. Government acted very promptly, and this why the disease has been contained to some extent. We know that the disease is still there. The information we have got today is that in the last 24 hours, 14 more people were admitted to the two hospitals in Gulu, and two more people have died, that is including Dr. Lukwiya. But the effort to fight the disease is still there, and we appeal to the staff, through Parliament and Government, not to lose heart and continue fighting. We know we have lost a General in this fight, but the loss of a General should not stop the effort in the war. In fact, we should double our effort to fight this disease.  

Before I sit, I would like to appeal to the Government to find some ways of assisting the families of members of staff who died as a result of contact with Ebola patients.  Dr. Lukwiya, I think, makes the 13th member of staff who has died from this disease. I would like to appeal to Government to find how best they can assist the families of these members of staff who died while fighting for the welfare of our people.  I thank you very much. 

MRS MPANGA JOYCE (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank Government for moving that Dr. Lukwiya be mourned for nationally. I would like to propose that we go further and declare him a hero.  When Ebola struck and when others were giving up, he gave them the morale to go on, and he died in the battle. He died a brave man, and we would like to give condolences to his family, to the people of Lacor hospital, and to the whole nation. We have all been shocked, but we thank them for the job done, and probably it is too early, but we would like the Government to write their names among the names of people who have fought bravely to save this country.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join my fellow colleagues in thanking the Government for those very kind words spoken in memory of the late Dr. Lukwiya. Indeed we must also thank Government for having come up openly, the way it did with HIV/Aids, and declaring the issue of Ebola an open secret. That made all the medical doctors of this country aware, and they were able to mobilise resources to support the late Dr. Lukwiya in the fight against the deadly Ebola disease.  

In terms of human resource capacity, Dr. Corti and family have largely supported Lacor Hospital. At the local front, Dr. Lukwiya became the local pillar in the area. Those of us who come from the northern region know Lacor Hospital as a life-saving hospital, and indeed Dr. Lukwiya was a very instrumental person in rendering such services. 

When the Ebola epidemic was declared, the districts surrounding Gulu were all scared. I do remember one case when I reported to the Ministry of Health a similar death in Nebbi District. The Ministry, through the Minister, Dr. Kiyonga, and Dr. Omaswa immediately dispatched a helicopter to the district to do some surveillance and to report to Dr. Lukwiya. That gave assurance that the Government and Dr. Lukwiya were working to safeguard the entire population from this deadly disease.  

As we mourn this illustrious son of Uganda in the medical profession, let us dedicate ourselves to the cause of working for unity, peace and the well being of all Ugandans. Dr. Lukwiya’s death should be taken by Government as an example of dedication, a dedication that goes beyond the call of selfish interests. He died because of service to others. 

My request to the Government is that, since we are not sure as to what extent the deadly Ebola virus has penetrated our society, Government should come up with a more stringent and elaborate arrangement, particularly in districts, which are neighbouring the districts, which have been declared disaster areas. In other words, Ebola task forces should be set up in the neighbouring districts like Nebbi, Arua, Moyo, Adjumani, Kitgum, Lira and of course Hoima, Mbarara, and the districts neighbouring Mbarara District. We should have Ebola task forces, which should be facilitated, and the people should be drilled to ensure that the spread is curtailed.  

As we mourn the loss of this illustrious son, we should also remember the other medical staff who died. We pray that the Lord keeps them in eternal peace, and God should support the family during this time of great loss. As my colleague said, maybe Government should come up with a token of immediate support, and maybe later on, long-term support through the Ministry of Health could be devised for these people. May the soul of the late Dr. Lukwiya rest in eternal peace. Amen.

MR. BEN WACHA (Oyam North, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I come from a constituency that borders hon. Ongom’s constituency, and I must inform the House that when I heard about Dr. Lukwiya’s death this morning, I felt a hollowness in my heart, which I had never felt for a long time. The news of his death was very tragic to me. While I want to commend Government for what is being done to try to curtail this Ebola scourge, the death of Dr. Lukwiya raises some fundamental questions, which I think have not yet been addressed by Government.  

The first one, which has been mentioned in passing, is the effect that Dr. Lukwiya’s death will have on the medical personnel who are supposed to fight the Ebola scourge.  What basic inducement is Government thinking about to make these other personnel continue working on Ebola, taking into account the fact that they have so far lost 13 very close colleagues?  

Secondly, we are told that there is provision for clothing and some medical wear, which persons dealing with Ebola patients have to use to prevent the spread of Ebola. How safe is this clothing, taking into account that even those who wear it still get infected with Ebola?  

Thirdly, while we commend those who have fought Ebola and died in the fight, I have not heard anybody talk about compensating the families of those who have died in the fight against Ebola. 

Fourthly, for those of us who border areas infected with Ebola, we have heard constant questions being asked of us. We have been asked questions like, what provisions is Government putting in place to see to it that any report of Ebola is urgently addressed? Why don’t we have ambulances at the border clinic stations? Why don’t we have this medical wear supplied to the border gombololas? Why don’t we have supplies of jik made available in various dispensaries, which are close to areas affected by Ebola?  I think it is time that Government comes out with a clear statement indicating strategies that it is putting in place to help combat Ebola.  I thank you, Sir.

DR. MWEBESA CHRISTINE (Woman Representative Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the medical profession and on my own behalf, we are very sad because of the death of Dr. Lukwiya. Dr. Lukwiya was my classmate, and he was very hardworking. He was devoted, and he was one of the few doctors who preferred working up county for his own people. As you all know, when most doctors finish, they want to keep in the centre because of many reasons. One of the reasons they want to stay is post-graduate development, and another is better remuneration at the centre. So, Dr. Lukwiya was a different man from most of the doctors. He volunteered to go and serve his people.  

On behalf of my colleagues, I would like to thank the Government for coming out with a motion through the Prime Minister, on the death of Lukwiya. We are grateful, and we are also grateful to the Ministry of Health for what it has done in trying to combat this epidemic. They have put in place all possible ways to make sure they stop the spread of Ebola to other parts of the country and also to help the people who are infected with Ebola.  

Most of us thought the Ebola epidemic was a big battle for the country and for the medical profession, but the Government has tried and the medical profession has tried.  It is a tough battle and some of them have succumbed, so we are appealing to the Government to recognise these who have succumbed in this big battle. As you will recognise, people who die at a battlefront are heroes in their own way, and they should be given special recognition by the Government as heroes. 

Again, the medical professionals, namely the doctors, the nurses, the midwives, the medical assistants and the support staff are saying this is an eye opener. There have been so many diseases affecting the medical professionals, and which have infected them during the course of their work. We have had HIV, we have had cholera, but because they are not as bad as Ebola, and they are cases were one can survive after treatment, the Government has not taken them very seriously. So, we appeal to Government to properly remunerate the medical professionals, so that they can afford to do their work efficiently. They should be given good working conditions. If you go to most of these hospitals, for example, you will find that they are not clean and they are not well kept. 

I also ask for compensation for families of our colleagues who have died in this battle of Ebola. I also want to appeal to Members because this is not possible without a big budget for the Ministry of Health. Members of Parliament, we need to increase the budget for the Ministry of Health so that we can achieve what I have enumerated.  We are very grateful for what has been done so far, and we hope more will be done to stop the spread of Ebola to other parts of the country. And we say; may God rest the soul of Lukwiya, and the souls of the members of the profession, who have died, in eternal peace.

MAJ. OTOA TONNY (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We in the UPDF have lost a friend. Insurgencies in the north have taken more than 5 years now, and for all those years we have come to Dr. Lukwiya with our broken ribs. We went to Dr. Lukwiya when we were dripping with blood and never at anytime did Dr. Lukwiya send a soldier away from Lacor Hospital. He restructured our ribs, he made us gain hope, and he urged us to fight on for peace. Dr. Lukwiya was a great man, and I think the state should give due recognition for the work that he has done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MUTESASIRA TIMOTHY (Busiro East, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank Government for the statement about the late Dr. Lukwiya. I join others in mourning him. I learnt of his death very early this morning, and I went to the Ministry on behalf of the Committee on Social Services, and I had a meeting with the Director General of Health Services. The Minister was already on his way to the airstrip to board a plane to go to Gulu. He was to be joined by the Director General of Health Services. It is not very usual for the Minister of Health and the top hierarchy in the Ministry to go and bury a health professional, but Dr. Lukwiya was in a special category. He was dedicated to his work and he was at the forefront of fighting this disease in the north. 

Despite the Government coming out so openly and making funds available to fight this disease in the north, the health professionals still remain exposed to the risk because of the tools they use. They use needles, they use blades, and as you know, when you have Ebola you bleed. In spite of the gloves and the masks, with the needles and blades you use, you might break the protective clothing you are putting on and you may get in contact with this disease. I am strongly suspicious that our colleagues may have fallen through these circumstances. It is very, very unfortunate.  

Government has rightly come out to recognise Dr. Lukwiya, but in many cases we recognise our heroes when they have fallen. I would like to tell Government, on behalf of the professionals, that the health workers need to be recognised in their service. They need to be given better terms and conditions of service than what they are getting now. This song has been going on and on, it is unfortunate that I am emphasising this when a colleague has fallen. 

I must say that 20 years ago, a medical officer was earning more money than a state attorney. Today, they reviewed the salaries of the lawyers, they reviewed the salaries of people collecting revenue, but people like Dr. Lukwiya have fallen without seeing Government’s promise being fulfilled.  This should be an eye opener. Doctors, nurses and midwives are exposed to risks everyday. Praising them when they are dead is not enough, we want Government to come out and support the health professionals in their terms and conditions of services. We have discussed this in the Ministry, and they have said they are looking at it.  

I have been in touch with some departments, some of which are represented in this House, and when they are going for what they called ‘a special operation’ they earn a special allowance. For doctors in the north and health workers in all categories, including support staff, fighting Ebola is a special operation. Government should grant them a special allowance to fight this disease, because I think they have done a commendable job. 

Our Government is being commended, and I think rightly so, because as a professional, I also see that the war they have fought to control this epidemic is very commendable. There are very few Governments or Ministries in developing countries, which would have handled this disease the way it has been handled in Uganda, without getting quarantines for international travel. We have to commend them, but I think the health workers should get this special risk allowance.  I see the Prime Minister nodding, I hope that is a ‘yes’ from Government.

Lastly, we have to look at the present methods of surveillance of this disease. Enough has been done, but the outbreak still continues. The latest information I got as I was coming in was that some health workers in Masindi Hospital have also contracted this disease. If you look at the control measures which they have instituted, you will definitely be satisfied that we would not have this problem. So, the task force in the Ministry of Health, as I left the Ministry this morning, were trying to review their strategies. 

I think we should join the rest of the Ugandans in mourning Dr. Lukwiya, and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

MR. ILUKORI SAMSON (Dodoth county, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for making this statement in respect of this dark and black happening in our country.  

I would like to say something on behalf of the people of Dodoth, whom I represent in this House, and maybe also on behalf of the entire region of Karamoja, which apparently is far from Gulu. Members have mentioned districts neighbouring Gulu District as facing possibly more danger.  I wish to say that Ebola did erupt in Gulu and it never stayed there. Alas, it was reported in Mbarara, and we are hearing about it in Masindi!  

I would like to appeal to the Government to prepare to combat the Ebola epidemic in the entire country. The people of Uganda are not static, people move, and Lacor is a hospital where the people of Dodoth have always been referred to for further medication. Therefore, it is not specifically for those areas, which have been affected.  The people of Dodoth County do share in this grief and look forward to a day when the medical profession will not only be recognised by word of mouth but in reality.  

In some of these health units, there is no means of transport. The health units in Karamoja are so dispersed, and for the case of Dodoth County, we are open to danger because we move across boarders with the people of southern Sudan and Kenya. Therefore, in the event of any spread of Ebola, it will be difficult to contain the epidemic if we are not prepared earlier. 

I wish to join the rest of my colleagues in mourning the death of Dr. Lukwiya and his other supporting staff who have left us. I pray that the Almighty God receives their souls in eternal peace.

DR. KIIZA KABWIMURA (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I heard about the news of the death of Dr. Lukwiya this morning, and I join the rest of the world to mourn his death. I would like to commend the Government for the control measures they have put in place to try and control this deadly Ebola disease. We have already lost nurses and today we lost a doctor. 

The people of Masindi are very worried because we have already lost four people in Masindi, and rumour has it that more and more people are getting this Ebola disease. I understand one of them is a driver, and another one a doctor, but this is yet to be confirmed. 

What the people of Masindi want is for Government to put in more and more effort so that the medical staff are protected. If we do not do that, we are going to lose a lot of people. Patients are now running away from Masindi Hospital. The ward where the Ebola patients are is very near the women’s ward. In Masindi Hospital we have two small wards, one for women and one for men. So, the wards are now virtually empty because people are running away. While I commend the Government's effort, I would like to urge the Government to have an isolated ward that is some distance from where it is now.  

Secondly, I would like the Government to have a special ambulance for these Ebola patients, because they are being ferried from Kiryandongo to Masindi. So, we are asking for that ambulance, and we are asking for better gadgets. If a doctor, with all that gear, can contract a disease, what about the ordinary people! So, we are asking Government to come up with more sophisticated gadgets, and maybe we should try to investigate the kind of gadgets that we are using now? I know the doctor had all this gear, but he contracted the disease. As I end, I pray that God rests the doctor’s soul in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall end by standing and observing one minute’s silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence in memory of the late Dr. Lukwiya)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We concluded the general debate on this Bill. The motion was for the Second Reading. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr. Kajara Aston): Mr. Chairman, in clause 2, the Committee proposes that section 98 of the Land Act be amended by deleting sub-section (7) and substituting it with the following, to be named as clause 7:
“Until the Land Tribunals are established and commence to operate under this Act, Magistrates’ Courts and Local Council Courts shall continue to have jurisdiction they had immediately before the commencement of this Act.” 

The justification is that, the re-introduction of the jurisdiction for the Magistrates’ courts and Local Council courts will fill the vacuum created by the Land Act until Government is able to establish land tribunals. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to

MR.KAJARA: Mr. Speaker, we would like to add another clause 3. We propose that a new sub-section (8) be introduced after sub-section (7) of section 98 to read as follows: 
“Any person who immediately before the commencement of this Act had a right to appeal to a Magistrate’s court or a Local Council Court in respect of a land dispute but could not exercise that right owing to the provisions of sub-section (7) of this Section as they stood at the commencement of this Act, shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, have the right to appeal to that Court”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, is it a new clause or a sub-clause?

MR. KAJARA: It is a new clause, Mr. Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are dealing with section 98, and this is also a proposed new 98. Wouldn’t you think it is a sub-clause rather than a clause?

MR. KAJARA: Mr. Chairman, it should be a sub-clause.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I support that provision, I would like the chairperson to give the justification for this amendment and to advise where it will fit exactly. Thank you.

MR. KAJARA: Mr. Chairman, when we read this report, it was made clear that this Amendment was meant to cover cases which had been completed by the time of commencement of the Land Act, but where the aggrieved parties had not exercised their right of appeal to higher local councils or to Magistrates courts or even the High Court. So, we are saying, by that time, when the Land Act came into force, those people had not exercised their right and they were not able to do that because there had been a change, and they would have to take the cases to the Land Tribunal and so on. So, we are saying that these people should be accorded an extension of time within which to exercise the right of appeal. That is the justification, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.   When he first read the amendment, he had not mentioned the High Court, and I was worried that the appeals would be going only to the LC II, LC III and Magistrates, but if it includes the High Court, then I will be satisfied.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is talking about adjudication that commenced with LC courts. I think the last court to appeal to from this adjudication by LC was the Magistrates’ court.  He could not go with an appeal from LC I to LC II, LC III, Chief Magistrate and High Court. The position of the law is that those disputes starting with LC, assuming the law did not abort, only ended with the Magistrates court. I think that is why they left out the High Court. Otherwise, the High Court is always there, and if it has jurisdiction, you can always appeal.  

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: But from the way he read it, it sounds as if somebody could appeal up to the Chief Magistrates’ court and stop there. I wanted to be clarified that even if a man was not satisfied with the Chief Magistrate’s decision, he could still go up to the High Court.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, not under this. Land disputes used to be decided by what they used to call RC courts. The last court is the Chief Magistrate’s court. I think that is the position. But for other cases, from the Magistrate, of course, you appeal to the High Court and to the Court of Appeal. So, I now put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2000” and passed it with two pertinent amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Sir, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2000” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations!

THE LAND REGULATIONS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr. Kajara Aston): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to present, for the House’s consideration, the report of the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources on the Land Regulations, 2000. They were referred to that Committee as required by the Rules of this House.  

The Committee scrutinised the regulations in consonance with Section 94(1) of the Land Act, which states as follows:“The Minister may by Statutory Instrument and with approval of Parliament, make Regulations generally for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act."

The Committee held a series of meetings to study, scrutinise, and raise issues concerning the regulations with the Minister of State for Lands and his technical team. The Committee also scrutinised the schedules to the draft regulations and the forms contained therein.

The regulations are essential for the operationalisation of the Land Act. They provide for procedures, fees and charges to be followed in carrying into effect the provisions of the Land Act. The regulations also prescribe the procedures to be followed in alienation of freehold and leasehold and the terms and conditions of any such grants. They also fix the charges to be made by the Board or Commission in respect to agreements or other documents for the occupation of land.

I must say that the regulations are contained in a very bulky document, which took the Committee a number of sittings to scrutinise, amend and make recommendations.  The contents of the regulations are as follows:

Part I sets out the functions of committees, the district land boards and those of the Uganda Land Commission. They provide for the manner of application for a certificate of customary ownership, certificate of occupancy, leaseholds and customary land tenure transferred to freehold.

Part II of the regulations provide for the manner of parcel identification and land demarcation of boundaries in customary ownership of land.

Part III of the regulations provide for the procedure of registration of land, rights of occupancy and related transactions.

Part V of the regulations deal with communal land associations, the manner of application therefore, procedure of incorporation, manner of dissolution, and model common land management scheme.

Part VI of the regulations provide for mediation as provided for in Section 31 and 90 of the Land Act in respect of claims for compensation, dispute settlement and general principles of mediation and agreement. It also provides for allowances for the mediator.

Part VII of the regulations provide for miscellaneous actions done under the Land Act such as preparation of documents, application for Registration of Titles Act, immunity of recorder, delegation of functions and provision of technical services.  

Part VIII of the regulations provides for fees payable in respect of application and registration of different activities, fees relating to communal land associations and fees for preparation of documents.

The regulations have four schedules. The first schedule contains 48 forms for different transactions under the Land Act. The second schedule provides for fees chargeable for different activities. The third schedule has contents of a model construction of a communal land association. The fourth schedule has the manner of delegation of powers by a board or commission laying out functions and to which office functions are delegated.

In considering the regulations, the Committee observed that under section 65 of the Land Act, the chairperson of a parish, urban area or division committee has a casting vote. In case of equal votes he votes twice. The Committee thought this was unfair, because it gives the chairperson an upper hand in decision-making in land matters.

The Committee therefore recommends that section 65 of the Land Act be amended to provide for an odd number of membership of the land committee, to overcome the possibility of equal votes. The Minister has informed us that he intends to bring in new Amendments to the Land Act, and this is where the Committee thought Government should consider amending.  

The Committee noted that there is no regulation relating to section 41 (6), which deals with conversion of land from freehold or mailo tenure to leasehold for persons who lose Ugandan citizenship. It was further noted that there is no law on enemy property. The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment promised to address these anomalies and provide for the procedure.  

Further scrutiny of the regulations revealed that there is a missing link in the case of inability or incapacity. It would be difficult for one to transact business with an insane person who is a legitimate claimant. The Committee recommends that an enabling position be provided in such cases.

The Committee further observed that section 94 of the Land Act empowers the Minister by statutory instrument and with approval of Parliament to make regulations for the better management of the provisions of the Act. The Committee notes that regulations are by their nature subsidiary legislation, which could be made without approval of Parliament. 

It is further noted that Parliament has a lot of business at hand, and for it to be engaged in subsidiary legislation, which is often bulky, and which may be subject to being amended from time to time, is to expect too much from Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government amend section 94 of the Land Act to the effect that the Minister can make regulations, being subsidiary regulations, and possibly only lay them before Parliament.

The Committee recommends that the regulations be approved with the amendments as attached to this report.I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support this motion and also to thank the chairperson of this Committee for the concise and brief report. More particularly, however, I would like to thank the Minister responsible for this sector for the elaborate form in which he has developed these regulations, which are meant to operationalise most of the sections of the Land Act. 

Land is a primary commodity. In fact, apart from entrepreneurship, land is considered the most valuable resource in the process of production. Entrepreneurship is also regarded as important because you may have land, but if you do not have adequate knowledge to use the land, the land becomes redundant. The primary resource is land. So, the regulations before us will help to operationalise the Land Act. 

My concern with regard to the regulations we are going to approve is related to the effort that the Ministry of Lands is making to sensitise the population. Alot of effort is being made through various NGOs to educate people about the existence of the Land Act, the provisions of the Land Act, and above all how these regulations will be applied. I am happy that at least in my district, and I believe in many other districts, there are many NGOs, which have been commissioned to do this work. This has eased the tension, which had either existed before or immediately after the commencement of the Land Act.

Funds will still be required to continue sensitisation to support these other committees, particularly at district level, and to equip the district land offices. In every district we have land offices and these land offices should have qualified surveyors. They should be run by qualified personnel so that they ensure that the process of demarcation and preparation of documents, which should go to the land committee and the district land board, must be done in time. The problem we have in some districts, particularly Nebbi District, is that we do not have a properly constituted land office, and I would like to believe that the Minister responsible will ensure that district land offices are properly equipped.  

Since I do not have much time - we have only five minutes - my last point will be with regard to the land fund. The land fund is a clear provision in the Land Act. Every effort should be made by Government to ensure that the land fund is in place to support the operationalisation of the provisions of the Land Act. The land fund is important, not only for the people of Kibaale, not only for the people who have been deprived historically, but it will also support all aspects of the management, acquisition, and proper certification of documents for land.

Since we are only given five minutes, I will stop here, and I would like to thank the Committee and the Minister.

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the comments they have made on the regulations as suggested by the Ministry. I stand merely to disagree with the recommendation of the Committee that the Minister should take steps to amend section 94 of the Land Act so that they do not have to bring regulations to Parliament to approve.  

This thing was put there purposely because of the importance of land transactions. In fact, I am surprised with this recommendation, because the Committee itself has already recommended amendments, which they are asking us to approve. This shows how important it is for the Ministry to bring this issue to Parliament to scrutinise and make improvements if necessary. So, I am surprised that the Committee thinks that it is not necessary, when in fact, for the very first time the recommendation has come from them to amend certain sections.

I would not like to approve the Committee’s report if that part of their recommendation is not removed. In other words, I would like to support their recommendations minus the recommendation that the Ministry should take steps to amend Section 94 of the Act. I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Sir. As the Minister responsible for implementing the Land Act, I thank the Committee on Natural Resources for having considered the bulky text of the regulations and given the advice as contained in the report. As I do that, I also want to thank the hon. Okumu Ringa for the compliments about my Ministry.

Regarding the land fund, which he commented on, this has been quantified, and the rules and regulations on its management are also under preparation. They will also come to this House for approval. The Uganda Land Commission, the institution that is going to manage the land fund, is also undergoing reorganisation so that it takes on this assignment.

Lastly, I will comment on the proposal by the Committee that the Minister of Lands should consider amending Section 94 of the Act. Section 94(1) reads as follows:
“The Minister may by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament, make Regulations generally for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”  

In connection with the Land Act, I prepared this text and laid it before Parliament in April. Because of the business before the House, it has not been possible, until today, to bring this here for approval. It was laid on the Table ten months ago. This has held up a lot of businesses and alot of transactions in the countryside. 

These regulations are going to enable the land committees, the recorders at sub-county level and town council level, the land boards, and the other officers, who handle land matters, to deal with land matters. After Parliament has enacted the law, all the principles will be agreed to, and these regulations will only enable the institutions named in the law to carry out their statutory obligations and functions. 

While the Minister is preparing these regulations, he consults all the stakeholders, and according to our working methods, the relevant Sessional Committees of Parliament are consulted. If it was not for that provision in Section 94(1), which I have read, the advice given by the Committee would only have been incorporated in the text and by April or May this year I would have signed the statutory instrument containing these regulations and land transactions would be going on. 

I request hon. Ongom and other colleagues to give a second look at the need for subsidiary regulations coming to the House for approval. It congests the system. After approving the principles, the subsidiary operational details could be worked out after consulting the relevant Committees of Parliament. With that explanation, Sir, I request the House to approve the text.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a recommendation, but at an appropriate time when the Minister brings the amendment, we shall debate the merits and demerits of the amendment. 

Secondly, when the regulations are laid here and you have a pressing reason as to why you think we should not proceed, you will be free to raise such an objection and the objection will be addressed. Otherwise, I think what the Committee was questioning was the issue of Parliament making the main law and also making subsidiary legislature.   I will now put the question that the report of the Committee be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question that the land regulations laid by the Minister be approved.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the business to follow on the Order Paper was supposed to be the Parliamentary Elections Bill 1998, but the chairperson of the Committee has informed me that their final report on that Bill is not ready, but he has a report on the Political Organisations Bill. 

We had a problem when we had lined up the Political Organisations Bill for debate. I checked with the records and I found out that the Bill was still there. So, since we have that report, I would rather suggest that instead of the business listed to follow, we deal with the Political Organisations Bill. And that will mean a general debate, because the Minister had moved a motion for the second reading, which had to be followed by a report from the Committee, which I think was not given. So, the Committee will give the report, followed by a general debate today and maybe tomorrow, so that we deal with this particular business.  

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, some of us, Members of this Parliament, who came here late, did not get this Bill. And when it is being talked about now, it is as if we are just seeing something falling from the heavens. Are there any arrangements from the Clerk’s Office so that we also get this Bill in time so that we go through it and we participate actively in this debate? We are many.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many new Members do we have? Anyway, that will be dealt with.

MRS. NANTONGO ZZIWA: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the importance of the Political Organisation’s Bill. I would also like to find out when some other legislation, like the Condominium Bill, are being presented on the Floor. The Condominium Bill is long overdue and yet it has been listed. The Committee finished the report long ago, so I think it should really come. Some of our constituents are very uncomfortable now.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think it was listed as business to follow. We shall do our best to ensure that we deal with it before the Christmas recess. So, we need to come to Parliament very early so that we start business early and then we can dispose of as much business as possible.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would just like some clarification as to when the NEC report will be presented to this House? It was also ready long ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For that one I cannot say when. I think I have to consult the Business and Welfare Committee. 

MR. ONGOM: Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate the concern about the Condominium Properties Bill as stated by hon. Zziwa. I have noticed that when the Business Committee is considering priorities, this Condominium Bill always falls back. It is always the last on the list of work to be done. So, I am worried that we might even go away before considering it, because it has always been put last and the other ones come ahead of it.   Can we be sure that we shall consider it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can assure you, hon. Ongom, that the Speaker and I shall try to ensure that this Condominium Bill comes as soon as possible. We are also interested, you are also interested, Members are interested, and the public is interested so we should really deal with it. Actually, when we came, it was supposed to be the first business, but then it was interrupted by the Budget. The chairman has also complained. He has said that people are asking why business is being pushed aside. So, we shall try our best to ensure that it comes before we go for recess. With this the House is suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 12.29 p.m)

(On resumption at 2.56 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)
 
BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the first reading of the Political Organisation’s Bill 1998, the Bill was referred to the Legal and the Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Pursuant to Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee critically examined the Bill and has come up with recommendations and amendments for this august House to consider.  

Article 72 of the Constitution of Uganda, 1995 requires this Parliament to make a law regulating the financing and functioning of political organisations. The Article also requires political organisations to conform to the principles laid down in the Constitution and for registration of such organisations. The Bill is divided into four parts. Part one deals with preliminary matters.  Part two of the Bill deals with registration. Part three deals with the functioning of the political organisations, while part four deals with the general provisions.  In view of the referendum that was held, we will now have to proceed to also incorporate Article 73 of the Constitution.  

The Committee invited and held discussions with the Free Movement, Uganda People’s Congress led by Prof. Mujaju (RIP), Uganda Law Society and National Democrats Forum Party. The Committee also received written memoranda from the Uganda People’s Congress, Muhammed K. Mayanja of Justice Forum, the Justice and Peace Commission, Democratic Party, the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Conservative Party.  

From the 20th to 26th February 1999, adverts were carried in the mass media informing the general public of the Committee’s intention to conduct public hearings upcountry.  On 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th of March 1999, other adverts were carried in the mass media informing the general public that the hearings would be conducted between 5th and 9th March 1999. The Clerk to Parliament had earlier, on 26th February 1999, sent by registered mail copies of the Bill to all administrative officers of the areas the Committee would visit. Consequently, views were received from the public in Arua, Moroto, Mbarara, Kabale, Kabarole and Hoima.  

Arising from the discussions held and scrutiny of the memoranda and the views received from the public, the Committee has been able to take into account the major concerns about the Bill into consideration.  

At this juncture, it is necessary to inform the House that the Committee also invited the hon. Minister of Justice, who requested for more time to enable him to study the Committee’s proposals. When he was invited again, he was unable to come and the Committee is of the view that the Minister can still contribute during the debate.  

Criminalisation of non-compliance with certain provisions in the Bill
The Committee notes that a crime is an unlawful act or default, which is contrary to the order, peace and well-being of society and is punishable by the state. The ultimate aim is, therefore, to protect society against acts injurious to the society in general.  

There are 33 clauses in the Political Organisations Bill and there are 49 offences created by it. Most of the offences carry a term of imprisonment of three years or a fine of Ushs 2,000,000 or both. For example, political organisations or parties can be prosecuted for failing to provide the following information to the Electoral Commission:
-Evidence of existence and location of the national office of the political organisation.
 -Particulars of office holders of a political organisation.  
-Declaration of the assets and liabilities of the Party’s income and expenditure.
-Declaration of assets and liabilities within 21 days before presidential, parliamentary or local government elections.

Other offences are:
-Forming a party which is not of national character.
-Forming a political organisation or party based on sex, religion, tribe, etc.
-Using words or symbols which would arouse division based on sex, race, tribe, etc.
-Failing to give a police officer information relating to a meeting, which the police officer may require.
-Sponsoring or campaigning for a candidate on behalf of a political organisation when the Movement system is in power.

For each of the above offences I have enumerated, a political organisation or any of its officers is liable to two years imprisonment plus a fine of Ushs. 2,000,000 from the courts of law. 

It is the view of the Committee that there is excessive criminalisation for non-compliance with the law, which seeks to regulate the functioning of the political organisations. Most of the offences are not acts against the state nor are they contrary to the order and well being of society. They may be acts against the members of the political organisation, for which remedy will be provided in the agreement, the constitution of the political party or organisation.

The Committee is apprehensive that this will lay ground for conflict between political parties and police. It places the police in a difficult position of having to crack down on political parties. If, for example, the organisers of the political rally do not inform police 72 hours before such a rally is to be held, the police officer will be obliged to disperse the gathering. What the supporters of the party may do to the police and what the police would do in return, may result in violence. It is the considered view of the Committee that the law should emphasise the peaceful means to resolve conflicts. It is dangerous to penalise political expression.  

Powers of the Minister
The Minister, who according to the Bill is responsible for presidential and parliamentary elections and Referenda, is given wide powers under the Bill. The Minister can, in consultation with the Electoral Commission, declare a political party a prohibited organisation. He may make regulations prescribing the conditions in relation to opening of branch offices, holding delegates’ conferences and public rallies, and any other activities of political organisations as may be necessary to prevent interference with the operations of the Movement political system.  

The Minister is also given power to declare any foreign government, institution, body or person as hostile to the Government of Uganda and therefore prohibit political organisations or parties from receiving any assistance from them.  

It is the view of the Committee that for impartiality, political parties cannot be under the direct power of the Minister. Every political system appoints Ministers according to its ideological belief. The authority to regulate political activities ought to be independent of Government. When a multi-party Government is in power, a multi-party Minister with such wide powers could easily make it impossible for the Movement system to operate. The Minister is placed in a position of conflict of interest.

Registration of Political Parties
The Bill provides that registration of political parties or organisations will be carried out by the Electoral Commission. The functions of the Electoral Commission are spelt out in Article 61 of the Constitution, and basically they are to conduct and supervise elections, demarcate constituencies, hear and determine election complaints before and during polling, and to carry out civic education. Registration of political parties is not one such function.

Further, under Article 62 of the Constitution, the Commission is an independent body. Disputes will arise as to the registration and de-registration of the political parties and to involve the Commission in these disputes is to undermine this constitutional independence and impartiality to conduct a free and fair election. It must be pointed out here that regulating political activity, controlling, monitoring and managing political organisations are contentious matters. If there is a clash between a political organisation and the Electoral Commission during any of these stages, that conflict could become worse during the campaigns when the Commission conducts the elections. 

Companies are registered by the Registrar (section 15 of the Companies Act, chapter 85) and partnerships are registered by the Registrar (section 18 of the Business Names Registration Act, chapter 87). Building societies are also required to register, and this is done by the Registrar (section 2 of Building Societies Act, chapter 91). There is also the Registrar of documents created by the Registration of Documents Act, chapter 90. Registration of patents and trademarks are also carried out by the Registrar in the Ministry of Justice (chapters 82 and 83 of the Laws of Uganda 1964).  

The inevitable conclusion is that in matters of registration we already have an authority since colonial times. The Committee has not been given any reason for departing from the well established legal system of registering entities, such as the political organisations, as body corporates. The Committee proposes that political parties/organisations be registered under this law. Indeed the new law, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act, 1998, encompasses all the registration services required by the law.  

State Oversight on Finances Received by Political Organisations 
The Bill provides for scrutiny of the finances of the political organisations including sources of such finances.  The Committee is of the view that political organisations need to be transparent in the way they handle finances of the organisations. The funds are received on behalf of the party and should be so utilised. A few party officials ought not to turn the assets of a political organisation into personal property.

Further, Article 71 (e) of the 1995 Constitution provides that political parties shall be required by law to account for the sources and the use of their funds and assets.  Though there was considerable opposition to this from some quarters, this is a constitutional matter and this is not the right way to address the same. The only question to debate is: 

Whether the sealing of 50,000,000/= in any one year is reasonable. 
To whom the declaration of assets, liabilities, e.t.c should be made.

In conclusion, the Bill addresses the crucial issue of democracy within political parties. It requires constitutions of political organisations to conform to democratic principles, i.e. to be of a national character, non-discriminatory, and hold regular elections.  

The Committee is satisfied that on the whole the Bill meets the constitutional requirements for democratic practices within a political organisation in Uganda. The provisions in the Bill sufficiently answer the question of democracy.

In light of the above comments, the Committee, at an appropriate stage, intends to move a number of amendments to the Bill, which are annexed to this report. The Committee is of the view that subject to the proposed amendments, and any which may be moved by hon. Members, there is need to pass this Bill into law so as to fulfil the obligations placed upon this Parliament by the Constitution. It will be another contribution to the democratisation process in the country.  
I beg that the report be adopted, Mr. Speaker. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Members can now start contributing to this Bill.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let me begin on a note of disappointment, with reference to the previous scenario, where we questioned the status of the presentation of the report vis-à-vis the Minister's interaction. I am surprised that we are repeating the same exercise. We have hijacked the system, where we would have properly presented matters, by going away from the image where we are seen to be doing things affably. However, let me stop there on that particular point and come to my contribution.

I am surprised because according the reports, which we have received, that report has not come out to say or to recognise the point that the political parties, which have been chained with reference to Articles 269, 273 and 271 and others, are still in chains. We do not see any move to release the parties to be free to participate in the national affairs of their country. You must all understand that political parties are initiated to contribute towards the betterment of democracy in the country. Political parties are not trading companies. They are initiated to improve Government and to fight excesses in Government.  (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Sorry, but I have to interrupt my hon. friend for the first time. When this Bill was actually drafted and published, that was before the referendum of June 2000, this meant that under the Constitution, Article 269 had to remain, instead of the restrictions we are talking about. But after the referendum, they are going to be removed, at least most of them.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Tell us the circumstances in which you were seen to have lifted the ban, because in my own opinion the ban is still on. We are still in chains, and I insist on that. Unless you, as the Minister of Justice, comes out to specify the circumstances under which we have been released, I still count myself as being in chains, and the struggle must continue. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken. Lukyamuzi, when you pass this Bill, the provisions of Article 269 will be history. They will remain in the book because you are not editing the book. Whatever restrictions you now want, after passing this Bill, will be in this Act rather than in Article 269.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I have been mandated by the people I represent to specifically seek the circumstances under which we are being relieved of the chains I have referred to. In specific terms, I would like to quote Article 269:
"On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with article 73 of this Constitution, political activities may continue except- 
    (a) opening and operating branch offices; 
    (b) holding delegates’ conferences; 
    (c) holding public rallies; 
    (d) sponsoring or offering a platform to or in any way campaigning for or against a candidate for any public elections; 
    (e) carrying on any activities that may interfere with the movement political system for the time being in force.”  

I want to assure this august assembly that if we are seriously referring to the activities of a living political party, a party that cannot openly register new members is a dead party. A party that cannot hold delegates’ conferences is a dead party. This is why there are problems in my sister-party, the Democratic Party, including my own party, the Conservative Party. We cannot change leadership! How do you improve on the quality of leadership in a party if you cannot go to Karamoja to recruit new members publicly? Do you do this in the dark behind a closed door? You have to go and interact with the people in Karamoja, in Kitgum, in Masaka, in Rakai.  

I became a Conservative Party activist after listening to the present Ambassador of Uganda to Tanzania, Katenta Apuli. He was publicly articulating the values of the Conservative Party in Iganga and I became fascinated by the idea. I was recruited as a member of the Conservative Party and I moved on successfully to become general secretary of the party. So, the issue related to passing the Political Organisations Bill when the chains, as articulated by Article 269, are still in place, is open evidence that the political parties are not at all free.  

I would like to end by commenting on something, which is mentioned in the conclusion of the report. It said that the political parties should be of a national character, non-discriminatory, and should hold regular elections. How do you hold regular elections if you cannot recruit new members, because some die and others resign? 

I am surprised that the report has been adamant on the issue of how we can improve democracy with reference to the political parties. I know, as a student of Governments, and Prof. Nsibambi is my witness, among other things democracy implies institutional building. We have attempted to use the taxpayers’ money in Uganda to institutionally build the Movement, but we also know that according to our Constitution, while today we are under the Movement system, tomorrow we can be under the multi-party system of Government. 

What have we done to invest in institutional building as far as the political side is concerned? We have been unfair, we are building only one side of the institution and we are ignoring the political parties. Suppose we win the coming general elections, and yet the multi-partyists have noted that we have not invested at all in the institutional building of political parties, and we cause a sudden mess in the arrangement, can anybody blame us? We must be fair. 

I beg you all, hon. Members, to think twice before you decide. This is a serious matter. When you are addressing institutional building, you are addressing democracy, do not build only on one side. Build even on the multi-party side, because we can win the coming elections, and we are likely to win the elections. You better give us support so that we know this is our country also and you have tolerated us, the partyists. If we come to power, we shall also tolerate you. So, the time has come for you to re-consider.  Thank you very much.

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to say something small about this Bill and the report of the Committee. To start with, I would like to say that I agree with the comments made by the Committee in the various sections of the report. I also agree with most, if not all of the recommendations they made for amendment to the Bill. 

When we debated this Bill before, we could not go through with it because the Minister withdrew it. He said the Committee amended the Bill so extensively that they mutilated it to such an extent that the Government needed to have a second look at it. When the chairman reported, or when the Minister introduced this Bill again for the Second Reading, no reference was made as to whether the Minister did go back to the Committee to say that they now agree with all this, or they are making this other proposal to the Committee’s proposal. We have not been given a report as to whether the Minister went back and told the Committee where they want variations, and this makes me rather uncomfortable. I do not know what the Minister has under his armpit, and because of that, I am only made to suspect that perhaps there is something sinister awaiting us. (Interruption)  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, hon. Ongom. I may just as well tell you now that I went to Cabinet and we went through all the amendments proposed by the Committee. I am glad to say that most of them were actually accepted.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you for the information. You know, when you say that most were accepted, it is that little which is remaining which worries us, because we do not know what that little bit, which has not been accepted, is about.  

I have heard some people arguing, although the Constitution is very clear, that the passage of this Bill may not necessarily mean abolition of Article 269 of the Constitution. I thought the Constitution was very clear on this. The very first statement says that this Article will last for only as long as the Political Organisations Bill has not been passed. In other words, when we pass this, it should automatically elapse. I will therefore, oppose any amendment that anybody may want to re-introduce to alter the intentions of those who made the Constitution. To me, any amendment, which is contrary to that intention, will definitely be unconstitutional.   

There is always an impression given when people who support the Movement system are speaking about political parties or their leaders. The impression is always given that the political parties or their leaders are very irresponsible members of the society and if you let them free they will destabilise the society. Nothing could be further from the truth. In my political life, I have never known any political party in Uganda taking up arms against another political party. Whatever small arms they have taken up have always been in an effort to try and stop their harassment. It is the political parties and their governments that have always been harassed by other people, and the political parties have always been put under guard and so forth. So, any reaction to that is obviously natural.  

So, to say that political parties and their leaders, when let to organise freely, will cause instability in the country, is definitely wrong. We are all responsible people, we have the interest of the country at heart, and I do not see why anybody should fear the return to political activities through the multiparty system. 

I do not want to waste time on this issue because we should have passed it a long time ago. It is because of this fear, which I think is not really fear but just a political ploy to keep the parties under chain, as hon. Lukyamuzi calls it, that these reasons are given. So, the sooner we free political parties so that they can also freely take part without harassment in the political life of this country, the better it will be for this country. I therefore urge Parliament to pass this Bill into law and accept all the amendments that the Committee has suggested. They are really supposed to improve the well-being of the political life of this country. We should not think of introducing any amendments that will water down the intentions of those who passed the Constitution and who put the restrictions in Article 269, which should lapse after this Bill has gone through. I thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi county, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand just to register my happiness at the fact that we are noting political developments and political landmarks taking place in our country. I must say that we, as current Members of Parliament, are happy to be part of this cornerstone and the laying of these foundation stones for the future development of our politics. 

What is very clear in our Constitution is the fact that the political parties are guaranteed existence. We are not guaranteeing the existence of parties as Parliament. That was done by the Constitution. The job that the Constitution asked us to do is now being done. We are to regulate the activities of political parties, their financing, their registration, their discipline, inter-party relations, and how they should conduct their affairs as they compete for office to govern our country. Also, how they should perform if they lost in the referendum, so that they should allow the proper functioning of the Movement system when it is in power. In other words, they should not interfere with the Movement while it is running the country, but they should be allowed to do certain things, and those were mandated by the Constitution for Parliament to regulate. (Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Karuhanga, for giving way. I seek some clarification. I know very well that the management of society is collective and carries collective responsibility. Even the smallest taxpayer from Nyabushozi, regardless of whether he or she is a multiparty advocate, could cause some change or reform as a way of improving on the excesses of Government. What do you actually mean when you say that when the Movement is in power, the political parties should not interfere with the management of society? If they came up to correct an error, would they be interfering in the management of society, where they have already got an investment?

MR. KARUHANGA: I think the hon. Member misunderstood me.  If he understood me, he would know that I did not mean that they would not be allowed to bring ideas. That is not the case. What we are saying is that when the Movement system is in power, the political parties, which are guaranteed existence, must perform certain acts in a certain regulated way, which this Parliament has been empowered to do by the Constitution. 

You hear many people talk over radio about this Political Organisations Bill as if Parliament is going to abolish parties or is going to start parties. And it seems as if we do not get time to explain to the population what the Constitution empowered us to do, what we have to do, and what we are now doing. There was a delay in bringing this Bill, and that delay brought a lot of discussion with many political groups. They thought that the Government was sabotaging political parties so that they do not exist and function. 

Now this has come, and I stand to say that I am very happy that I am debating this as if we were in a multiparty situation and I was having my own party, or I was a member of a party. This is the way I am participating, and this is the law that would be governing us, and it is important that we address ourselves from that standpoint and not otherwise. Once we do that, then we would not really get into a position of conflict. 

As far as I am concerned, I am happy to see that the Minister, for example, has now conceded and accepted the Committee’s recommendation that he does not regulate the political parties. In other words, he does not become the head prefect to registration, disciplining and fining. If the Minister can stand aside, my only worry is that there has to be somebody who should be there to regulate these parties. At a time when this country finally opens up into the multiparty system, the history of our parties is a very sad one -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Thank you for allowing me to seek this clarification. You said that there must be somebody to regulate these political parties. The impression is that if somebody is not there to regulate them, they will misbehave, they will, as I said, destabilise the society.  Can I ask you to tell me who is now regulating the Movement system?

MR. KARUHANGA: Again, here you have a situation where people think not just beyond their –(Interjections)- I am sorry, but I say this out of respect for my friend. I think it is putting the argument upside down again. He knows very well that in other countries where the multiparty system has developed, there is a commissioner for parties, the person who finally administers the finances. For example, in the United States, there is a commissioner for parties. What is his job? During elections so much money is allocated from that office to nominate presidential candidates. He makes sure that the money is audited and it is spent adequately. He makes sure that campaign funds coming from outside sources are approved, and if they are not approved and they are spent, the presidential candidate is punished and that party is punished and can even be disqualified. 

We need an organisation in this country to be able to superintend these political parties when we open up. We should not leave it as it is. My Brother, hon. Ongom, asked who is now regulating the Movement. It is the Movement Act.  The Movement Act has provided for all those matters, which regulate the Movement. If he was not satisfied with what was there, he could bring an amendment. 

We are now looking at the Political Organisations Bill, let us just find ways of making sure that we do not allow a situation where our history repeats itself and where foreign interests come here and grab some of these little parties. You find a member who is going to start a political party running and spending one year in a particular country, and then he comes back and says, ‘I was given helicopters, and I am going to really show these people how I am going to do this.’  There must be a commissioner who will ask him what type of money he got. 

Someone comes with photographs from an enemy country! Another takes off and says ‘I am heading towards Sudan’! This is ridiculous! There must be some organisation to stop our country’s interests from being compromised by hungry politicians who do not care about the people, who only care about grabbing power. And that should be in this Bill. If it is not here, and if the Committee never addressed it, an amendment must be brought to cater for it. This institution exists in all political party organisations. 

In my view, there must also be a disciplining organisation within the party. A party must have a constitution. A party must have certain things, so that it is called a party. It is not just enough to say that it must have a national character. Internally, it must have some kind of organisation. People within the party must know that there are primaries, which will determine the election of a representative of party X in a particular constituency.  Those types of primaries must be regulated. So, I call upon the chairman and the Minister to satisfy me that when we eventually break into a multiparty system, we shall get into a multiparty order and not anarchy. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I note that some Members may be disadvantaged when participating in this debate, because they do not have copies of the Constitution. It is necessary to note two Articles when making contributions to this debate. The Article, which is going to be phased out when this law is passed, is Article 269. The Article, which will now come into play and which you will use to regulate other political party systems, is Article 73. For those who do not have copies of the Constitution, I want to read out these Articles so that when you debate, you know that any restriction that you are going to bring up will be based on Article 73.  

Article 73 of the Constitution reads as follows: 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 29 and article 43 of this Constitution, during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe 

(2) Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate.”   

So, you will be guided by the principles behind this particular provision when making restrictions here and there. That is what I wanted to read out, so that those who do not have a Constitution can know what has to be done.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Possibly it is worthwhile to note that the institution of political parties is not a new phenomenon in this country. We are aware that as far back as 1952, the Uganda National Congress was formed in this country, and soon after that a number of political parties, the Democratic Party, Uganda Peoples Congress, Peoples Party and so on. By the time of independence, Uganda had practically close to five political parties.  

The important point to note is that when these political parties were being formed, they were focussing on the struggle for independence, for the freedom of the black people, and that was a struggle that was all over the world and all over Africa. So, before we demonise political parties, I think we must recognise the great role they played, otherwise some of their leaders would not have been Presidents, Prime Ministers, Vice Presidents or Ministers in this country. Without the contribution of these parties towards achieving independence and, therefore, sovereignty, even this Parliament would not be what it is today. 

Of course, like every human being and every institution, we are bound to make mistakes as we grow. As we grow, we fall down and we hurt ourselves, and who has not hurt themselves? I do know that the political parties, as much as what you call the political system of the Movement, have equally made mistakes. I think the contention in Uganda today, which will continue to be a very serious contention even after the so-called referendum which was won by the Movement, will be how the so-called two systems will exist. We are being told that there is a provision under Article 73, which will operate. In other words, when one system is in existence, another one possibly has to leave the bed for other one to sleep on nicely, and then it has to go in the cold for as long as the other one is supposed to be enjoying the good time of power.  

Let me alert this House and possibly caution you, when the Constitution was made in 1994 and promulgated in 1995, it was not made out of self interest. It was not made by angels or people greater than God himself. This Constitution was made by human beings, and these human beings, among who are you and I, were the ones who said that there is an alternative system to the other one. And it was put in the Constitution that the Movement is a system, which is alternative to the multiparty system, and the two cannot co-exist. One must exist alone at a given point and time. 

While we make this law, I do not think any multi-partyist, except the Movement, which is a party, will be happy with this law. We multi-partyists may tolerate this as a step towards greater struggle to obtain total freedom. As my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, said parties are formed not be in a museum to be watched, but parties are formed because these are organised civil, not military, but civil societies competing for power. Now close to 20 years, parties are in chains, and these chains are being slowly released. 

This law is not going to free parties completely.  It is simply going to say that the chains that have been put on you by the Movement will be of the following tightness or looseness. It will define how tight this chain should be or how loose this chain should be, but it is not going to free parties. Therefore, what does this mean? It means you are going to have political parties continuously aggrieved, and once political parties continue to be aggrieved, I say we are still chained. This means that it affects the body politic of this country. It affects the relationship between societies. It affects relationships between human beings within this country and, therefore, you have a dissatisfied category of people called multi-partyists. They will feel that they have been left out of the struggle for power, and a very satisfied group calling themselves the Movement will be very happy. What is the result? The result is that there is going to be conflict, and we must face it.  

In conclusion, I would like to say that parties are being unfairly treated in this country. Those of you who are deceiving yourselves that you can belong to the Movement, and you derogate parties to chains for as long as you want, you are simply deceiving yourselves. It is not in the interest of this country for you to continue to live as you are living and to think that by being in the Movement and chaining parties you are doing great things for this country.  You are doing a great disservice. Let us open up and compete with one another for state power. That is the greatest day that I hope will be there for this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say a few words about the Political Organisations Bill. I would like too to commend the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and the Chairman of the Committee for coming up with the Bill and the report we are considering in this House.  

I want to state right at the beginning that I do share the views of those who commend the political parties for the role they played right from the time before independence up to the present time in various parts of our developing world. In saying this, I do recognise fully that political parties have made mistakes, which is normal, and non-political party organisations have also made mistakes. I think it will help all of us if we looked forward to see how best we could be more accommodating to the parties concerned.  

I am very happy with this Bill because it is indeed recognition of the special situation obtaining in our country. We are getting away from the idea of putting our heads in the sand and hoping that there is no problem at all. This Bill is recognition of the need to relax, and I think the Minister and the Government should be commended for that.  

When hon. Ken Lukyamuzi refers to as chains and hon. Daniel Omara Atubo refers to tightness and looseness, in my view, with my other colleagues, I would say that we are moving away from the chains to ropes. Instead of chains, we are going to have ropes, and eventually I suppose the ropes will also disappear. It is important for us to recognise -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank the hon. Kyemba for giving way. I rise on a point of information. Now that you have recognised the point that hon. Omara Atubo and I made, namely that we are in chains and we should move away from the chains and move towards ropes, with reference to the history of political struggle in Africa, do you mind if one cuts the ropes?

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, hon. Kyemba, for allowing me to give you this information. You know that even a rope, depending on how you use it, can sometimes be worse than chains. NRA introduced something called, ‘kandoya’.  They never used any chains, but they used ropes and tied kandoya at the back, and very many people got crippled because of that. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, hon. Kyemba, for giving way. I wonder whether you can shed any light on these issues.  What was the cause for looking for ropes to tie these parties? What was wrong with them? Why did they have to get themselves into this situation?

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you very much for your interventions.  Actually, I was referring to paper ropes, which are really not very strong. They are not made of sisal, but they are ropes, which can almost disappear with water.  

Certainly, the need for some relaxation in stages is understandable, given the situation where the Movement came in. But I would like to emphasise and agree with those who have said that regulations that are being put in place must really be meaningful. The regulations must be of such a nature that the political parties, as you read in Article 73, must be able to operate. If we are going to have regulations where political parties cannot perform anything meaningful, then obviously we are pretending in the whole exercise. 

I would like to see a situation where we know for certain that this kind of regulatory authority, whatever it is, is giving the parties an opportunity to get up, start crawling and walking. Otherwise, we are in a situation where we are going to have parties operating as if they are illegal organisations. In fact, I would like to see a situation where once these parties are given certain operating mechanisms, people should support them without fear of favour, because we know that eventually the Movement might itself decide to be a political party and might be able to compete with the others.  

I would not like to see regulations that are so stringent that it is impossible for these parties to operate, and then at the end of the day, we say ‘you are free to operate’. When we do that, they would do more damage than they did possibly in the past, and I do not think that is the desire of any Member in this honourable House. Mr. Speaker, I do not have much to say, I just want to add my voice to those who have supported this Bill before this House. Thank you very much indeed.

CAPT. BABU FRANCIS (Central Division, Kampala): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I was in Committee number 5 in the C.A, and as we debated, we looked at our historical background. We looked at all possibilities. We even had an eminent Member, who presented to us a paper on proportion representation. Everybody who was on that Committee, including some of the speakers today, took part. 

The historical background of political parties is very clear. In the 1967 Constitution, the part on freedom of association ended with a requirement of the then Parliament to make a law to regulate parties. The Parliament and the Government of the day never did make that law. In other words, they never fulfilled the requirement of the republican Constitution of 1967. This Parliament, through you and the Government have brought a law, and to me that is a great step forward. While the people who profess to be multi-partyists at the time never brought the law, the people they claim are chaining them have brought the law. In my sincere opinion, you can refer to this very clearly –(Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, the 1967 Constitution did not provide for the law for political parties as hon. Babu has said. You will recall that that Government did not have time to make the law. That Government was over thrown in 1971 only after 4 years. But for this Government, the Constitution was made in 1995 and it has taken you more than 5 years, more years than that Government was in power.  So, which is better, somebody who had only 4 years and did not have time to make the law, or somebody who has deceptively postponed making it for the last 5 years?  

Another difference is that, if that Government had survived beyond 1971, it was going to make a full law for full participation of parties. Parties were not changed at that time under the Constitution, but this Constitution changed parties, so there is a fundamental difference between the two.

CAPT. BABU: I want to thank the hon. Member. What he has not told you, and he purposely did not tell you, is that in 1962 it was the same Government and it operated on the 1962 Constitution. What he did not also tell you is that the first group to stop elections was the same group, in 1966. They actually refused the elections in 1967, and therefore, they never did fulfil it in the first term and in the second term. We did not even elect -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Babu. I would also like to give you information that in 1969, that is after 1967 obviously, the UPC Government banned all other political activities and a statutory instrument was issued to that effect. So, the question that hon. Omara Atubo was asking about this one which has brought this Bill now after five years when it is not over thrown or –(Mrs. Ogwal rose_)- I beg your pardon, I did not know you were here.

MRS. ATIM OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, hon. Karuhanga is a lawyer, and he knows very well that Mzee Boniface Byanyima was a member of the opposition. How can he explain the situation where there would be opposition in the House when there is a one party system? Is he, therefore, in order to tell lies and confuse this House on the history of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To enable me decide on this, you would have to tell me the facts from your side and why you are saying so.

MR. KARUHANGA: I would like to remind my friend and sister, Cecelia Ogwal, that I probably think she was part of the delegates’ conference of UPC which passed a resolution asking for a one party state and banning other political parties. This resolution was unanimously passed by the UPC delegates’ conference. So, I do not know, but I think she has a short memory. I hope this will help her.

MR. KUTESA: I would like to inform the speaker that the date was exactly 19th December 1969 at Lugogo. This was when the resolution was passed, and subsequently it was brought to this House. Actually, there is a statutory instrument to that effect on our statute books.

MR. KYEMBA: Mr. Speaker, I think it is only right that I should let the hon. Members know that I was at Lugogo on the 19th December 1969 at the UPC Conference. I was still the Principal Private Secretary to the President of UPC, who was the President of Uganda. After passing that resolution, we were shot at as we were leaving the building, including myself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, there was a point of order, and from that, I think hon. Karuhanga was in order.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, the reason I brought this small historical background was to make sure that when our Brothers and Sisters come to this august body, they quote history in context. They must tell us about the demise of political parties, and that the last nail was driven in by political parties. In fact, the Movement is theoretically an offspring of political parties. I want to make this very clear. Nobody has chained them, they have taken part in this Government, they have stood for elections, and they have even taken very important seats in this country. Some of them have occupied very high-level positions in Government, and they are highly respected. Some of them are highly respected Members of this House, and I would give them their due respect at any one time. 

I would like us to stop saying that somebody is chained. Hon. Lukyamuzi is my Brother from Kampala, we sit in the same meetings as Members representing Kampala, and he is one of the best contributors. We would have missed him had he not been elected to this House, and here he professes –(Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Babu to mislead this House by saying that parties are actively participating in the Movement Government, and by quoting individuals like Ken Lukyamuzi, and possibly me, and hon. Cecilia Ogwal? We know that these are individuals who are participating based on this obnoxious thing called individual merit. We are here on this thing called individual merit. Parties, according to Article 269, are not allowed to sponsor candidates, to hold rallies, and so on. Is it in order for hon. Babu, who should know better, to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding of his contribution on the issue was that, although you came on individual merit, you are able to effectively articulate the principles of multi-partiysm.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise guidance, and I would like to thank the hon. Member for his information. I would like to end, however, by congratulating the Minister for bringing this law here. For the first time in this country, we will be able to register parties. They never registered them before. It was free for all. There were no rules, and it was meant to be that way. It was meant to confuse the system. It is time for them to capture this new offer and use it, and we see where we can go next.  

I have no problems at all if at one time in the future the people of this country are convinced that the political parties should be the system of the day. If that happens, we shall respect the judgement of the people of this country. But let us have a law, and let us be like other countries. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to contribute.  Thank you.

MRS. CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start by expressing disappointment because of the way some of the Members in this House are trying to distort the history of Uganda.  

It is true that Uganda Peoples Congress held a delegates’ conference in December 1969, and on 19th December, the conference was closed and there was some confusion. I was one of those who was shot at on that very day, but there was no resolution that was passed on that day which banned political parties. There was no resolution like that, and you can take trouble to check on the resolutions the party passed on that day. There was no resolution passed that banned political parties.  

It is important for us to know that at the time the Government was overthrown by Idi Amin, there were Members of the opposition in Parliament. How can we go around and say parties were banned when some of the Members of the Parliament in this House know that they were in the Democratic Party, and some members of the Democratic Party were active Members of this Parliament. (Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, we have been informed that only the Movement system is now operating in Uganda. It is a fact that hon. Cecilia Ogwal does not profess to be a Movement person. Would hon. Ogwal tell this House that simply because she sits in this Parliament, now that parties are not frozen, she is a Movement person? Her allegation is that simply because there were five members of DP in this House, parties were not banned. Would she clarify that simply because she is a Member of this House, she is now a Movement person and therefore parties are free?

MRS. ATIM OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Member has actually clarified the matter. The Democratic Party members who are in this House were not members of the Uganda Peoples Congress. They were in Parliament by virtue of being members of the Democratic Party, elected by members of the Democratic Party. I am in this House not by virtue of standing on a party ticket. I was elected by members of the party. That is the difference. I hope you will understand that –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, I am not accepting any information at the moment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but I just want to point out that an hon. Member, in his contribution, mentioned that a statutory instrument was signed. Is that true or not? That is the point.

MRS. ATIM OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, anybody may attempt to conscript me, but they will need my conscience to agree to follow them. So, there has been an attempt by law to conscript me in the Movement, but I have not accepted. I have remained as an individual member of this society, subscribing to what I believe in, not in the Movement politics. (Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member has refused to take any information from colleagues, much as she is always giving information to others. Is the hon. Member in order, knowing that in 1966 when elections were due, the UPC Government abolished elections, extended the term of office of even those DP members who were sitting here on the licence of UPC and not the licence of the people? And she is aware that the delegates’ conference, which took place on the 19th of December, decided that there will be a one party state in Uganda at the next elections, and the statutory instrument was duly issued subsequent to that. Before it was implemented, however, the Government was overthrown, and this has been confirmed by the Principal Private Secretary of the President at that time. 

Is the hon. Member, who is now a leader of the same party, and who has taken the reigns and the old files of UPC, in order to mislead this House? Is she in order to say that they were more democratic, while now we are in the middle of an exercise that is trying to free the parties that she had locked up? Is the hon. Member in order to refuse to answer your question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since your evidence is a statutory instrument, which was signed to effect the resolution, maybe she is not aware of the gazette under which it was placed. Therefore, she may not be in position to appreciate that.  Proceed.

MRS. OGWAL:  Mr. Speaker, maybe I need to inform Members that Uganda Peoples Congress, as a party, operated its institution completely distinct from that of Government.  We were not intertwined, and we were not fused as the Movement is fused with the civil society. So, if there is any Member in this House who was a Private Secretary of Obote as a President of Uganda, there is no way he could have had any access to the secret document of the party of Uganda Peoples Congress - (Laughter)

MR. KYEMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I think it is only right that as a historical, I should inform my colleague that as far as I am aware, the party president of the UPC never had a Private Secretary to handle his papers at State House other than myself.  Thank you.

MRS. OGWAL: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That is the reason why UPC always had problems – (laughter) – because of allowing unauthorised persons to handle secret documents –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there was a resolution at the party’s delegates’ conference, a resolution that was passed there cannot be secret document. It was open. It was for a public party. If there was a statutory instrument, which was signed to effect a resolution, that cannot be a secret document, because it was a gazetted document, and therefore anybody is in position to say that this happened and that happened without having dealt with secret matters. So, we can proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of information. Like my colleague, hon. Kyemba, I am also a historian. Like him, I was also in a fairly senior post in the Government of the day in 1969. I was a High Commissioner in London.  With regard to the documents that were printed and whether they were of the party or of the Government, more than an average civil servant of the day had almost as equal access to them as the Private Secretary in Entebbe at the time. This was for the simple reason that many of them were printed in London, and I had the honour of supervising them. 

The problem that I think we need to look at, and I would like to offer this information to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, whom I respect a lot, is that particularly between 1967 and 1971, there was a quandary in the UPC ranks. This really rendered all discussions in the party, however secret, exposed to people who were even unauthorised to receive such information, even as far as London.  For example, during the events that led to the Lugogo fire incident, some of us were in London at that time, but we saw them as if we were looking at them on a television. I can claim that the UPC Government of the day more than exposed itself on these particular grounds to more than an average senior civil servant of the day.  

We all intended well, but I would like to comment on the issue of the parties, as to whether they were banned or not. I confirm that there was a statutory instrument to that effect. But as colleagues have been told, and I take the opportunity of repeating it, the 1969 Parliament, which was the Parliament of 1962 to 1965, extended by a resolution of this House that Parliament also have DP and CP members here in their individual capacity, the parties having been banned. So, like now, we are here by a different factor altogether, as parties are banned from this House, but there are individuals that subscribe to those parties. I do not know whether this information is from a historical perspective –(An hon. Member rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on the Floor and he is giving information to hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: I am giving information to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and I give this information because, this is an opportunity which should not be lost. We have a very high responsibility, and the problem that we have in the country is that – (Interruption) 

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I think what the hon. Member is giving me is more than information. Would you request him to make a substantive contribution after this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, he will, but I thought he was just giving a lot of information, which was relevant to the contributions.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that. I would like to take this opportunity to say that this very highly individually positioned Ugandans – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you want to make a contribution, that will be different, but if you have more information, give it. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: This is my contribution, in the sense that I asked for the Floor to really explain the background. And I believe, sincerely as a historian, that we, as leaders, should bare the factual history of our country particularly as it was. I hope this will be of some benefit to my very respected hon. friend, Cecilia Ogwal. Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Through you and through hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I would like to give information to the speaker who has been holding the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, if you do not have information for hon. Cecilia Ogwal, then speak to the House.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The information I have at hand is that when referring to the resolution that was said to have been passed in 1969 here in Parliament, it is not correct to say that among the parties which were represented in this Parliament was the Conservative Party, as implied by the speaker. The party that was in existence at that time was Kabaka Yekka.  Kabaka Yekka is quite distinct from the Conservative Party.  The Conservative Party was started in 1980, and this is the evidence on the ground. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and at least the House, that in order to really know whether UPC passed a resolution to ban parties and what that instrument said, it would have been more appropriate to have it actually in this House. But in the absence of the two documents, and I have had a privilege of looking at the two, let me inform this House that the resolution of UPC in 1969 was to move to the left and had nothing to do with banning parties. Number two, the statutory instrument, which was signed by Basil Bataringaya, who was Minister of Internal Affairs – (Mr. Karuhanga rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him complete.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege of seeing a statutory instrument. In fact, I have had the privilege of looking at the statutory instrument, which was signed by the then Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Basil Bataringaya. And sometime back, the Minister published the whole statutory instrument in their paper –(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker can you protect me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I am protecting you.  Proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: The statutory instrument, which was signed by the Minister of Internal Affairs at that time, hon. Basil Bataringaya, was under the provisions of the Penal Code, and it was banning societies that were deemed dangerous to the security of this country. It was not banning political parties as political parties, and it is important for us to know this. And especially following the shooting at the Head of State, at that time it was deemed that certain societies were indeed dangerous to the security of this country. None of them was banned under any law that was to ban parties. I think this is a very important difference. For example, UNC (Uganda National Congress) was never banned. So, parties continued, and you would even have formed parties after that.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have now heard, we did not know whether the instrument was there, but the hon. Omara Atubo, who read it, has given us the details. What he is saying is that the death of the parties then was by accident, it was not by sentencing of the court. So, that makes a difference. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am raising on a point of order, because hon. Omara Atubo is misleading the House. Is the hon. Member in order to mislead the House and say that the statutory instrument he read was about moving to the left, when in fact that was done at Nakivubo, which has nothing to do with the move? Is the hon. Member in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have had enough on this issue. The fact remains that political parties were banned, but using a different law, rather than through the resolution. This is what I have told you. He is saying that this was by accident, and it was not through sentencing by the court, but there was death of parties.  

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I just want to put the record straight. Hon. Omara Atubo is misleading the House. On May 1st 1969, the Nakivubo pronouncements did state very clearly that Uganda would move to the left. In actual fact, in the Common Man’s Charter, the then President, Obote, made this clear and even certain compulsory acquisition of property was made, to the effect that Gaphel Madhvani lost full monopoly of the shares of the company –(Mrs. Ogwal rose_).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is raising a point of order in respect to what hon. Omara Atubo has said. Let me hear him out and then I will rule on it.

MRS. OGWAL ATIM: Hon. Omara Atubo is not contributing, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you allowed him to give information. As a result of giving that information, the Member says he is misleading the House, and that is why he is raising a point of order.

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Omara Atubo to mislead this House about facts that are quite clear? And I would like to urge him to refresh his mind on the history of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, first of all, I think hon. Omara Atubo was aware that there was a declaration for the movement to the left, and at the same time he was also aware about the other issue, maybe what he forgot was the dates. So, that cannot really mean that he is out of order.  He just forgot the dates. Now let us proceed with hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MR. ETIANG:  Mr. Speaker, may I just take this opportunity to clarify?

MRS. OGWAL ATIM: Mr. Speaker, this is not an NRM caucus - (Laughter). Can I be allowed to make my contribution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you time. Let him just clarify that.

MR. ETIANG: It is for her benefit, Mr. Speaker, and for the House’s benefit. I am here as the Member of Parliament for Tororo County and not as a caucus member. Again, I would like to give this information for our own sake and for the sake of this country. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi said that there was no Conservative Party as of 1969 but there was Kabaka Yekka.  Kabaka Yekka has never been a party. In August 1961, when Kabaka Yekka was founded, it was founded, and always known, as a movement. Many members who subscribe Kabaka Yekka also claim to be part of the Conservative Party. The Conservative Party may not have been registered at that time. 

MRS. OGWAL ATIM: Mr. Speaker, that is why I was wondering whether you are presiding over an NRM caucus, because you were allowing certain personalities, who are known in the Movement, to make statements anytime they wanted. (Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, this is the Parliament of Uganda. We are here representing the interests of our people. We are following the procedures and the constitutional right to represent our people. Is it in order for hon. Cecilia Ogwal to refer to a national debate of this nature as a Movement caucus meeting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a member of the Movement caucus, but if she is, I believe this is not the right place where caucuses are held. This is the Parliament of Uganda.

MRS. OGWAL: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am happy that you have given me an opportunity to express my views on this very important Bill. I happen to have been a Member of Committee five, which discussed matters of political systems at length, and these were later entrenched in the Constitution. It is important that people know that there is no way you are going to continue to live on deception and hope it will sustain you in power. There is no way! Time will come when the truth will come out.  

At that time, we had felt that the people of Uganda had to agree together on the way forward and arrive at a system that would allow all political shades to participate in the politics of the country. We had expected the political parties to be allowed to participate in the politics. We had also expected the Movement to operate as a political organisation, if they so wished, provided they operated within the law and in competition with others, but all that was thrown overboard. Mr. Speaker, you were a member of the Constituent Assembly and you remember what happened. Some of us were forced to walk out because we did not want to be party to any provision in the Constitution that would prohibit members of this society to enjoy the rights and freedoms as enshrined under Article 29 of the Constitution.

I now want to ask the chairman of this Committee whether, by bringing us this report, he has actually retired Article 269 as is required by the Constitution. I want to ask the chairman whether Article 269 has been retired. In other words, whether political parties will now be allowed to operate normally, to run branches, to recruit new members, to hold delegates’ conferences, and to be able to renew leadership right from the grassroots up to the national level. I would like to know from the chairman whether this Bill –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, maybe I said this before you came in, but I told the Members that once the Political Organisations Bill is passed, Article 269 would be history. It will be there because we were not reprinting the Constitution, but it will not be effective. Once we pass this law, any restrictions we may have on parties will be formed under Article 73, in particular sub clause (2).  So, get it from me that the passage of this law is erasing Article 269, and we shall no longer refer you to Article 269, but we shall refer you to a law made under Article 73.

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I just want to draw your attention to page 4 of the report, which clearly states that this particular law will do everything necessary to prevent interference with the operations of the Movement political system. You know very well that the substance of Article 269 is preventing parties from operating their branches.  Now in this report, point 1.2 on page 4, we see that it continues to prevent parties from operating their branches and from functioning normally. So, I do not know whether we are here just changing the names and continuing with the provisions? That is my concern. I want to be assured that after we pass this Bill into law, I will be able to go outside there and recruit members and hold meetings and hold rallies and call delegates’ conferences without any interference from the Police or from any other state agencies.

It is important that we understand that if we continue to pretend that the Movement is not a political party, we are creating a problem of a bigger dimension that we will not be able to handle in future. Definitely, if we had agreed on this agenda in 1995, when we discussed the issue of the political systems, things would have been easier at that time. Now Ugandans are fragmented in many ways. We hope and believe that Members of this House are elected by people who are already crying for change, and there is no way we can give them meaningful change unless we can be allowed, as political parties, to mobilise our members and to effect this change institutionally. There is no way an individual is going to affect change in this country. 

I ask the drafters of this law and the Members of this Committee to give serious thought to the substance of Article 269, and remove all the elements of restrictions in that provision. It is not that Article 269 is going to disappear, what I am concerned about are the restrictions. I hope I will be assured that no policemen will chase me anywhere because there are restrictions on political party activities.

Finally, I want to voice my concern on the provision in the Movement Act, which ties up the local councils with the Movement structures. As long as the Movement Act remains in force, there is no way this law will be effective. There is no way we are going to operationalise this law, because the Movement Act requires that the chairman of the local council I is also the chairman of the Movement there. I cannot see how political parties are going to break through this law and operate as political parties when the two institutions, the Movement and the local councils, are going to be fused in the manner that I have expressed. 

So, I ask this House to give serious consideration to the two laws, the Local Government Act and the Movement Act. We should do this with a view to amend certain provisions that make it difficult for political parties to operate. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to support this Bill, and I believe that it is giving us a way forward. However, when we come to this House, we should not really dwell on giving information, which is not true. It is important for us as Members of Parliament to keep facts and records straight.  

I was forced to go and bring the statutory instrument no. 233 of 1969, so that I correct the impression given by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and others who said that the Government of UPC did not sign an instrument banning parties in 1969. This is statutory instrument 1969, no. 233. The penal law on unlawful societies is No. 2, order 1969. Just allow me to read it:
In exercise of the powers conferred upon the Minister by paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of section 54 of the Penal Code Act, this order is hereby made this 20th day of December 1969: 
“1. The societies specified in the schedule to this order are hereby declared dangerous to peace and order in Uganda    

2. This order may be cited as the Penal law on unlawful societies No. 2 order 1969.” 

Signed by Basil Bataringaya, Minister of Internal Affairs.

The Schedule:  
Societies to be banned:  
Democratic Party – (Laughter)
Uganda National Union 
Uganda Farmers’ Voice 
Uganda Conservative Party 
Uganda National Socialist Party 
Uganda Vietnam Solidarity Party

I think the records of Parliament should be corrected, and if we have no time to read in the library, we should not come here to say things, which are not true.  I thank you.

MAJ.JOHN KAZOORA (Kashaari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am here as a result of the National Resistance Movement struggle, and I am an officer of that revolution and a mobiliser of this struggle. I am very happy, when I see a number of senior Government officers like Her Excellency the Vice President, whom I started with at LC I, and now she is Vice President. I feel extremely gratified. But as a Movement, where are we heading? How do we plan to reach that destiny? How are we reading the signals in the country that should dictate now how we should behave?  

I started with history, and I am sorry hon. Kyaligonza walked out a while ago, but when we found these senior brothers and sisters of ours in the forests of Bulemezi, they were telling us certain things, and they continued telling us even after we had captured power. They were telling us that we were there because we had to teach ourselves the language of those who were in Government. Those in Government did not want them to discuss. They were stifling them, and therefore they had to find an alternative. That is what was being preached. So, where are we now as a Movement?  

Recently, a British Minister was here and he said that he had met one of the big people in Government and was assured that we shall return political parties by 2006. Recently, a historical member of the Movement, hon. Eriya Kategaya, was interviewed and he said that it is better for us to start thinking of opening up sooner than later. Also, recently, on his return from Jakarta, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, who I understand is now on the task force for campaigns and who was also a former chairperson of the Movement caucus, also almost gave the same views. Now, if we are moving in that direction, how should we behave?  

I believe it is dangerous to legislate depending on where you are seated at the moment or on what you hope tomorrow to be. This makes the entire situation misty. I really appeal for soberness and I hope that we shall make an objective law, because we do not know where we shall find ourselves tomorrow. 

I say this; let us wait. The Movement has done a lot of good things for this country, what about that? I still continue to support it. Kazoora, a supporter of Movement, if I can be defeated in Kashaari by a multi-partyist yet I am fronting for the Movement, then there must be a question mark. I have always asked my friend, hon. Kweronda, that with all his dynamism, if he can be defeated in Kajara by Yonah Kanyomozi, for instance, and hon. Amanya is defeated in Igara by Adonia Tiberondwa, and the dynamism of Karuhanga is defeated by somebody else, the dynamism of hon. Mukula is defeated by a multi-partist in Soroti, then that shows that there is a problem. It shows that we should no longer be claiming legitimacy to be in power on behalf of the people of Uganda. 

If we are confident that we can win, why are we being seen to be as if we fear competition? Why should we give unnecessary suspicions with all these wonderful achievements of the Movement?  This is not the first time.  You will remember that even one time all multi-partyists combined and they were defeated. So, what is the problem now? We have history to go by. There was this monster called apartheid, and from the way people behaved during apartheid, they thought that apartheid was irremovable.  Just one morning, Mzee Mandela was free. I am just cautioning us so that when it comes to moving amendments, we do not necessarily stifle the other voices. I thank you Sir.

MR. BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start my contribution with reference to Article 1 of the Constitution, which says: 
“All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.” 

Article 1(4) goes on to say:
“The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.”

Article 69 (1) of the Constitution says: 
“The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda”.

This debate is coming after the people of Uganda had exercised their constitutional right to determine how they should be governed, through a free and fair referendum, which was held on the 29th June 2000. The result of that referendum was that the Movement political system has been endorsed by the people of Uganda as the system under which they wish to be governed. And if we respect this Constitution, and we also respect the will of the people as expressed through the referendum, we must have a Political Organisations Bill, which conforms to the expressed will of the people on how they should be governed under the Movement political system. If there is need to open up or to change the political system, the appropriate Article under which the matter will be addressed, will be Article 74, which gives us methods and means of changing the political system.

Therefore, I would like to submit that those who are calling for the Political Organisations Bill to be the avenue for opening up for political parties are addressing the matter in a wrong context. The issue of whether political parties should open up or not, or whether the Movement system should open up to political parties or not, was addressed and concluded in the referendum. Now, what is being done is to address the issue of under what conditions or under what regulations political parties should exist, and that is the gist of Article 73, under which this Bill has been brought. I would like to read –(Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is a misconception from the past debates that we have had. The misconception was to the effect that if we make a law now restricting political parties, eventually when we accept political parties as a system of governance for Uganda, this law will apply to those parties. The truth is that, if the people of Uganda, through the methods provided for under Article 74, were to change and say that the multi-party political system should now operate, the law that would be required then would be to restrict the Movement, so that it does not make the operation of the multi-party political system inoperable.  

There is a fear that you are making laws that are going to catch you tomorrow if, in any case, you are to turn into a political party. No, the issue is, as hon. Baku has pointed out, the people have now chosen, through a referendum, to have the Movement system. So, under the Constitution, you then restrict parties. Should the people tomorrow say that you should have a multi-party political system, then the duty of Parliament will be to make laws restricting the operations of the Movement, so that it does not stop the multi-party system from operating. I thank you.

MR. BAKU: I thank the hon. Kutesa for that information.  Actually, that is why I was going to read Article 73(1), which says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 29 and article 43 of this Constitution, during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe”.  

Actually, the law does not talk about operation of political parties. It talks about existence. So, what we are supposed to do is to pass a law that can guarantee the existence of political parties and not their operations, not their functions, and at least not under this particular Article. We must make sure that we do not kill political parties, but we make a law that guarantees them existence.  That is all. When we delve now into activities, operations, functions, I think we are going beyond the scope of this particular Article of the Constitution.  

Article 73 (2) says: “Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate”.  

So, the yardstick should be; what is the objective of the restrictions or regulations? The regulations should be such that they enable the political system, which has been adopted, to operate, subject to the existence of the other organisations, which have not been adopted. (Interruption)

MR. NSAMBU: Thank you very much my brother for giving way.  I want you to clarify to me what you are talking about in respect of Article 75 of the Constitution.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with reference to Article 74, which the speaker holding the Floor has persistently referred to with authority, can he assure this House that a referendum similar to the one we have just concluded is possible after five years?

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, to start with hon. Nsambu’s clarification, Article 75 reads as follows:
“Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing a one-party state”.  
This is so far removed from the statement I was making. I think I should not make any further comments about it.  

Article 74 gives us the means of changing the political system. The first attempt was made to adopt a political system. Now we are at a stage where the Movement political system has been adopted. We are making laws to govern the existence of political parties while the Movement political system is in operation. So, as long as we are under the Movement political system, the parties may exist subject to regulations, which we are going to prescribe now, or how else do we go along with the debate? 

So, if hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Ogwal would like to see political parties registering, going to political rallies, and going to sponsor candidates for presidential campaigns, they should go via Article 74. They should make sure that the political system has been changed from the Movement system to multi-party system, so that the parties can register their membership, go out and campaign and address the rallies, and do whatever things they can imagine within the powers of the political parties. 

As long as this Article 74 has not been used to change the political system, they are going to exist with some restrictions while the Movement political system is in operation. I would like this to be very clear, because we might end up getting out of the scope of the law, which we are going to make. And if we exceed, it will end up being unconstitutional and we are going to undermine the referendum, which was recently held, and which adopted the Movement political system. (Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, we should speak about this issue seriously. My question has not been answered. I want to repeat what I said. With reference to Article 74, which you have ably quoted, is a referendum similar to the one we have just concluded possible in future? If it is not possible in future, why do we waste time? Why don’t you pave way for a dramatic change? The time has come and the time is now!

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of hon. Lukyamuzi, I am going to read the entire Article 74 - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, why should you read it, because Article 74 is intended for changing of a political system?  This debate is not about changing a political system. This debate is about making regulations under Article 73, so that Article 269 ceases to exist. The type of restrictions that you are going to bring is what you will agree upon as being necessary for the Movement to operate. Those are the restrictions, and they will be from you here. If you want to lift the restriction of holding rallies, you are the people here who will decide on that. So, why do we quarrel? If you have anything you want to bring up, you can do that at the committee stage. Bring any type of amendment you want to, and we shall consider it, and pronounce ourselves. But let us not go to Article 74, which is a different subject.

MR. BAKU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance and clarification for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I was very clear, and I would like to go to my second point. The Movement political system is not a coalition of political groups - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to remind the Member on the Floor, who has referred to the referendum so much, that the decision of the referendum was actually taken by less than half of the people who are registered to vote in this country. 

Secondly, I would also like to remind him that we have just read some statutory instruments, which were issued in 1969 and signed by a Minister who at that time strongly believed in the system he was operating under. Sorry that he passed away, let his soul rest in eternal peace, but sooner than later, that very thing caught up with him. So, I would like to remind him that we are not immune to that kind of thing. Thank you.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, the fact that less than half or a little more than half of the people voted in the referendum is not an issue. The law was very clear; people who voted would be counted. Those who voted more for one side would take the day, and that is the operation of law and the operation of politics. So, if anybody thought that he was going to influence the political direction of Uganda by boycotting elections on the referendum, the person should take a lesson from that. The other lesson, which he is talking about - (Interruption)

MS. BAKOKU BAKORU: Thank you for giving way, hon. Baku. I just wanted to inform you that the political temperature was read last weekend in Arua. Over 34 former U.P.C members and D.P members openly said that politics is not static. They are fed up, and they have crossed to the Movement. That is how they read the mood metre this time, and that is the voice of the people I represent from Arua District, specifically from Ayivu constituency. Thank you.

MR. WACHA: Can I seek clarification from the hon. Member for Arua as to which Movement these people crossed to?  Was it Kizza Besigye's or Museveni's Movement? - (Laughter)

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much. I will answer that. One, there is only one Movement and it is led by His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni.  Two, I want to tell you that one of the members who crossed over was a member of the national council of UPC, Absolom Kokwa and also John Godo. I think that is why one of the Members is in Arua now finding out what happened. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bakoko, if a Member is representing Arua, why should he not be there?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I want to inform the hon. Lady that the same people who crossed into the Movement are the same people whom the statute, which was read here, did not ban.  All the other parties were banned, but U.P.C remained until the present day, and it is living.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, if the people quoted or reported to have crossed from DP and UPC to the Movement can freely cross to the Movement, why don’t we also create a situation where other people can freely move from the Movement to the political parties?  

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, before those various pieces of information were given, I was making the point that what I did here was not stating my political position. What I did here was to interpret the law to say what our limits are in enacting this Political Organisation's Bill. Our limits are only to regulate the existence of political parties. That is the point I was making.  

The second point is on the Movement political system, as I understand it. It is not a coalition of political parties. It is not a coalition of political organisations. Therefore, you cannot have a fully functional Movement political system at the same time with a fully functional multi-party political system. A Movement system is a movement of individuals on the basis of individual merit, and they are moving together for a common purpose, on the basis of a common platform, and a minimum national programme.  

Therefore, it would be wrong for us to say that we can even contemplate allowing fully fledged political party activity at the same time operate under the Movement political system. I think these are two different political systems, which have even been recognised in the Constitution as alternative political systems. So, when we are debating this Bill, we must be aware of that. I, therefore, support this Bill as long it protects what the people of Uganda voted for in the referendum. (Interruption)

MRS. ATIM OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I would like to give hon. Baku some information. I want to confirm that the Movement political system can co-exist with the multi-party political system. In Lira District at the moment, we have a vibrant political environment because the chairman of the district, who is a very active member of the political party called the Uganda People's Congress, has a council that is made up of a majority of multi-partyists. 

Also in the municipality, we have a mayor who subscribes to multi-partyism with a big majority of multi-partyists in the council, but they are operating very peacefully and very well. That is why Lira Municipality has the highest rate of growth in Uganda at the moment. This is because we have adopted that system, and we have tried to co-exist with the Movement, but holding on to our principle of multi- partyism. So, what we are asking for is for the system to open up so that we can prove to you that when parties are in power, they will do much better than when they are just trying to co-exist. Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I am so impressed that the parties work better under the Movement system. That has been expounded just now by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Political parties are working peacefully in the Movement system, and they are developing. I think that the spirit. And if you read Article 70, it says that the Movement political system is broad-based, inclusive and non-partisan, and shall conform to the principles that are listed, and which hon. Ogwal has expounded on. I would like to thank her very much.

MR. BAKU:  Hon. Babu has responded to hon. Ogwal, but I would also like to say that the gist of my contribution is on a fully functional multi-party system, not a small nucleus of parties here and there. I know that there is a strong nucleus of multi-partism in Lira Municipality, in Lira District and in Kampala District, and that is it. So, with those small nuclei, there is no problem. But now if you talk of multi-partism opening up full scope in the entire country, and then the Movement also being a system under which it is operating, I find that ideologically incompatible. 

My caution is that, when we are enacting this Bill, we must act within the scope and mandate, which is given to this Parliament under Article 73. We must protect the choice of the people at the referendum, which was the Movement political system, so that we are able to run the Movement political system and restrict the existence of political parties so that they can co-exist at that level. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LOKERIS PETER (Chekwii County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have just a few questions to pose. One, what was the referendum for? The referendum was to ask the people of this country which way we should go, as enshrined in the Constitution. The people say Movement; ‘we are moving in the Movement manner’. The issue now is, how do we proceed if the people have this answer. 

The Constitution says that, during the time when what they have chosen is being adopted, all those others, which are being asked to hold on, should not disrupt the good governance of what has been chosen, the good governance of the Movement system. 

We shall go on to ask, to what extent should these others be allowed to operate so long as they are not disrupting?  This is now the area we are trying to look into. Most people think that having these people in the headquarters here is good and it will not be disruptive. Having them where Sister Ogwal is saying they are is nice. They are operating well and it is not disruptive. But going below, where people are murdered and they do not understand it, will obviously become disruptive. This is why we say we do not move there so that we do not antagonise the Constitution.  

Allowing political parties to operate freely tantamounts to abuse of the people who have spoken through a referendum.  I do not think we shall be party to becoming abusive to the peoples’ will and the peoples’ wishes! The peoples’ will prevails, and that is why we are here. I really support a Bill, which does not allow any of these organs to disrupt the good governance of the system chosen.  What we should do now is just to proceed with provisions that exist in the law, so that we move forward. 

For those who fear that the Movement system will entrench itself thereafter, I think the Constitution is so elaborate. It provides avenues on what to do after the next election. If this Parliament so wishes, it can provide an allowance for them to come here and we can stop here by the procedures that be. Therefore, there is no worry. There is nothing that says that we shall continue following the Movement type of system for time immemorial. It is not there! We are here with full mandate to come and legislate and tell people that this is now when the Constitution allows us to come. So, I implore you, when we are discussing, to allow the people’s voices prevail and not ours individually. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. MUKULA MIKE (Soroti Municipality,Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The political history of this country has been a very painful one. When I was in the first stages of my primary education, the Minister bringing this Bill before this House today was a very active politician. In my first civics lesson, which was my first encounter with political science at that time, hon. Mayanja Nkangi was a prominent name in this country. I am happy that today hon. Mayanja Nkangi is a living testimony as he presents a document determining the way forward for this country.  

This country has been characterised by political anarchy, abuse of power and turmoil. It will be futile for this country, and for us as the leaders of this country, to attempt to move without forward political calculation. Only a few months back, this country was at a political crossroad, to determine the way forward for Uganda, and that was during the referendum held under Article 74 of the Constitution. The people of Uganda spoke and voted for the Movement political system. I am happy that the Political Organisations Bill is being brought before this House in one way or the other, to examine the opening up of legal and effective space for political parties. (Interruption)  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mukula for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is in reference to Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda. If what he is talking about is realistic, it should have a bearing with Article 1. It is not enough to put in practice elections or voting exercises if those exercises do not tone up with people’s participation. Article 1 says: “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.”  

How can power be seen to belong to the people if the people cannot freely organise?

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Lukyamuzi, and I wish to give him some clarification. Under the Movement political system, Article 1 of the Constitution has been maximally exercised. 

From 1962 to 1971, there were no elections. On 25th January 1971, Uganda hardly held any elections. From 26th January 1971, when Amin was sworn in, to 1979, when the Tanzanians and the combined forces took over, we never held any elections. In 1980, we had elections. We never held any other elections until the National Resistance Movement came into power. I would like to inform you that basing on Article 1 of the Constitution and from the inception of legal notice No.1, the people of Uganda have exercised their right to choose their leaders, to choose the political system they wish, and to choose the local leaders that they wish to have. A number of elections have been held in that direction. 

With this Government, I am privileged and happy to say I am able to sit with a colleague with divergent views, like hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. We discuss with tolerance and we appreciate each other. I am very sure that this is in keeping with Article 1 of the Constitution. The people of Lubaga did exercise their right and brought in hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I am very sure that the people of Soroti did exercise their constitutional right to elect me, so that we can come in here and interface and cross-pollinate on issues of political importance to this country.  

In that direction, I would like to proceed and say that the opening up and the bringing into this Parliament of the Political Organisations Bill means that this system is trying to give water the direction it should take, using the rights of the people as seen in Article 73. It is important that the transition to any other system that we wish to have must be properly calculated. It is important that we inculcate the spirit of tolerance into our people.  This country was divided at one time. In Ankole, for example, religion was the centre of politics. Our people could not sit together. I know of people who lost their banana plantations and coffee gardens. I know of 500,000 people in Luwero who lost their lives. I know of my own brothers who lost their lives. 

I do not wish to have a repeat of the same. That is why, in providing for the political legal framework, the Movement system is exercising what the Bible says, when it says, “love thy neighbour”.  The Movement political system would like to co-exist with the multiparty political system so that political parties are given the opportunity now to learn to be democratic from within. It is also fortunate that history is judging for itself. The other day, when I saw that hon. Zachary Olum and hon. Ssemogerere were having a rift, I could now see that political maturity and internal intra-inspection is taking place in political parties. This is the kind of political revolution this country needs. (Interruption)

MRS. RAINER KAFIRE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that it was not only hon. Olum who had a rift, but also a retired colonel has a rift with His Excellency. Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: I would like to say that it is not a rift but it is a political revolution, and this is what I am talking about. The political revolution in this country is what we are talking about. We are talking about the ability of President Museveni to tolerate Colonel Kizza. The process of that political revolution sometimes entails political maturity. This is what I am talking about, and that is why I am urging hon. colleagues –(Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him wind up.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I would like, therefore, to support the Political Organisations Bill. I am very sure that once it is enacted, Article 269, which has been a very controversial one, will fall by the wayside. Once it falls by the wayside, the new Political Organisations Bill will now provide the rules of the game. It will now give us the benchmarks. It will give us the means in which political organisations can now be managed. In my view, we have never had such an organisation or such a system in a legal framework. 

I would like to say that we need to be patient with this country. We need to be conscious about the people that we lead, because the people of Uganda are supreme. We need to be sure that Uganda is not about to fall by the wayside. Uganda will live, and the people of Uganda look to us, the leaders, to give them direction. (Interruption)  

MR. BEN WACHA: My Brother, hon. Mike Mukula, has made a very important statement. He has said that once we pass this Bill, the controversial Article 269 will fall by the wayside. I want him to re-assure me that as that Article falls by the wayside, anything in the Bill, which remotely relates to Article 269, should also fall by the wayside.

MR. SAM KUTESA: I would like to inform hon. Mukula that it is very true that when we pass this Bill, Article 269 will fall by the wayside. It will fall by the wayside just like the Speaker told us, that is in terms of Article 73, particularly sub-clause (2).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. The information I want to give to hon. Mukula is with regard to the rift between Col. Besigye and President Museveni. The cause of the rift is not because the Movement delegates’ conference failed to take place, because it has just taken place recently. As for Dr. Ssemogerere and Olum, the rift was deliberately created by the reluctance of the arrangement to cause a delegates’ conference of political parties to take place, as enshrined in Article 269 of the Constitution.

CAPT. MUKULA: I thank hon. Kutesa for guiding hon. Ben Wacha, and in the same spirit, I would also like to say that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is speculating. Maybe that is his position and it may be different from the other side, but you have got a right to your own view. 

I must conclude now. We have said that once Article 269 falls by the way side, Article 73 (2) takes over because -(Interruption) 

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, hon. Mike Mukula. Would you, while concluding, relate that answer to the provisions of Article 29 of the Constitution?

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I have already said that Article 73 (2) will now be able to take over when we go into the committee stage. So, any other restrictions, which have been so rigid, will be provided for in the law that we are now going to take on at the committee stage. And I feel very confident about the report, in which hon. Ben Wacha has very clearly articulated those factors. 

However, Article 29 of the Constitution, in my view, does not conflict with the other restrictions that you have indicated in any way. The Constitution has provided for the rights for Ugandans to associate. However, what you are trying to look at here are the restrictions that we provided for under Article 269. As I said, I would like to make it very clear that what will be provided for when we go into the committee stage will be based on that. If anybody wants to make an amendment, and I am very sure that hon. Ben Wacha has a right to make amendments as a Member of Parliament, we will we be able to cross the bridge when we get there. At this stage, I would not want to speculate. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Tomorrow we shall listen to hon. Alleluia of Pallisa and hon. Okumu Ringa. After they have spoken, the chairperson and the Minister will wind up, and then we shall proceed to committee stage.  With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 5.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6th December, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)

