Thursday, 7 December 2006
 
Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. As you remember yesterday, I appealed to you to be conscious of time so that we always start on time. I do not know whether I should conclude from the attendance of today that members are exhausted and need a recess immediately. Otherwise having gone through a long recess we should be vigilant and attend to parliamentary work. 

Honourable members you have already received the Order Paper but I intend to adjust it to allow the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to make a statement about the weather so let us listen to it. After that I will also allow the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to also make a brief statement, then we shall go to the other items on the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF & DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Rt. honourable Speaker, I want to start by thanking you for allowing me to make two statements which as a ministry we consider to be extremely important for the information of this august House and the country in general.

The first statement, honourable Speaker, is to do with the rains and the consequences of these rains that have rocked the country in the last few weeks. Honourable Speaker and colleagues, the Office of the Prime Minister wishes to state the following on the current El Nino rains that the Department of Metrology predicts to continue up to the end of the year.

The excessive rains characterised by the El Nino phenomena have led to flooding in the areas of Butaleja, Tororo, Kotido, Adjumani, Dokolo, Kitgum and Kawempe Division in Kampala, among others. 

The El Nino phenomena has also led to the occurrence of landslides in highland areas where the excessive rains have destabilised the soil structures in areas like Bududa, Kasese, Mbale, Manafwa and Burkwa. 

Honourable Speaker and distinguished colleagues, the following interventions have been undertaken by the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. For the immediate short-term, the Department of Disaster and Refugees have already earmarked Ugshs 475 million for the purchase of food for relief as an emergency response to these disaster stricken areas. This will be immediately purchased and distributed to assist the affected population. 

Tomorrow on the 8 December 2006, the ministry, particularly my office, has called an inter-agency humanitarian meeting to mobilise for the provision of non-food items. However, non-Government organisations have already pledged to provide blankets, tents and clothes. We have also received some blankets and got pledges for tents and clothes for the affected population. 

In the long run the ministry has planned to institutionalise El Nino related interventions by establishing a permanent inter-agency platform. Already a taskforce is in place with an action plan on how to respond to this season. This has already attracted a funding of $ 45,000 from UNDP. This is being used by the Department of Meteorology to activate the agreed upon action plan.  

In the long term, the way forward is to provide for a permanent forum/taskforce that will coordinate all early warning, interventions and response mechanisms. The Office of the Prime Minister will chair this while the secretariat will be the Department of Metrology in the Ministry of Water and Environment.

Honourable Speaker, that is the statement that I thought I should make on the El Nino phenomena that has rocked the country. If you will allow me, I would like to make another statement on the influx of refugees into our country from the Democratic Republic of Congo.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker and honourable members, on Tuesday the 5 December 2006, there were clashes in Rutshuru Zone, North Kivu Province of the Democratic Republic of Congo. These clashes are believed to have been between Government forces and the rebels of the so-called Gen. Laurent Nkunda. 

The fighting started in a township of Runyoni, which is about 20 kilometres from the Uganda border of Bunagana. The clashes later stretched to Bunagana DRC border point with rebel forces taking control of the border point from the government forces from 10.00 a.m up to 3.00 p.m. when Government forces reinforced and took control of the border post again.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this situation has generated about 10,000 congolese who have crossed into Uganda as refugees through the Bunagana border and are scattered in the township and neighbouring villages. 

This is what the Office of the Prime Minister and particularly the department responsible for Refugees and Disaster Preparedness have done as a response. 

We, together with the District Disaster Management Committee have agreed that all refugees be mobilised to assemble at one reception centre. We have identified Nyakabande for this purpose. This is near Kisoro town about 16 kilometres from Bunagana border post. 

A reception centre with shelters and sanitary facilities is being put up temporarily to accommodate the arriving refugees. As we speak, by this morning over 500 people have reported to Nyakabande.

We have agreed together with development partners and humanitarian agencies particularly those responsible for refugees, and to be precise UNHCR, that two hot meals will be served to the arriving refugees. 

Furthermore, UNHCR in conjunction with other UN agencies have promised to handle all accruing needs of the refugees.  The Government will monitor the situation in the DRC, first with a view of ascertaining the conditions in the areas of flight before re-locating the refugees into the already established refugee settlements.  

The situation in DRC has been calm since yesterday and about 4000 refugees out of the 10,000 have indicated or at least have been reported crossing back. We hope more will be returning to their homes in a few days. 

The civilian character of the refugee population will be maintained and the relevant departments of Government are already handling this matter.

Rt honourable Prime Minister, I thought we should make this statement to this august House so that they can be informed and advise us accordingly. I thank you.

2.50
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the timely statement. At least he has not waited for us to put a question.  

On the refugees or displaced persons, we have families of people living in Queen Elizabeth National Park who are disorganising the ecological systems in that part of the country. They have lived there for the last four months and the minister is aware of this. The conditions under which they are living in Queen Elizabeth National Park is threatening. What arrangements do you have for these people so that they can also benefit out of this Ugshs 475 million?

The Minister of Defence is not in the House but these clashes in the Democratic Republic of Congo are threatening people on the border. I was reading in the newspapers that seven people died in Kisoro and when it gets to Kisoro then it is getting to Kasese very fast. You have given us the humanitarian situation. May be someone will help us, what is the security situation because when there are problems in Congo you know that these are problems which are likely to affect us. Those are my two questions.

2.54
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the first statement I would like to know from the minister what is happening to Lake Victoria with this long El Nino because the drop and the subsequent power problem was blamed on the long drought. We have now got a long El Nino, how much has the level of the lake risen and how will it impact on the power problem -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, sorry to interrupt but I think the statement of the minister on the Floor was about disaster and he came with that portfolio. Issues of levels of lake Victoria are within the portfolio of the minister in charge of Water and I think it would be unfair to ask minister who just came to manage disaster about lake Victoria, energy and so forth. You can keep that question for the minister concerned.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I was talking to the Prime Minister but all the same I will confine myself to the statement.

Mr Speaker, in the second statement 10,000 people are mentioned. These are very many. I believe some of them could have crossed with animals but the statement is confined to providing meals to human beings. I would like to know from the honourable minister, how many animals, if any, have crossed and what is being done to take care of them. This is because we have had a situation where a group reportedly crossed from Tanzania and rampaged almost the entire country with their animals. What measures are being taken to guard against such situations?  I thank you.    

2.56
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Mr Speaker, I am going to make a comment on the minister’s presentation, but I would also like to seek guidance whether I should also include what I had wanted to comment on earlier.  

I would like to have that clearance or guidance because I intend to comment on what the minister has presented as well as other issues. Should I combine them or first comment and be given an opportunity later?

THE SPEAKER: If they are connected yes, but if they are not then you will make the other one later.

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister concerned for coming out clearly to speak on time about a disaster. I welcome his move, but I would like to make a comment that Kitgum district which he has ably included among those for disaster I believe has been always a disaster area. Therefore, I am happy that when he is talking about disaster he is including Kitgum. I ask him to continuously put Kitgum among those facing disaster because it has continually remained a disaster area under many circumstances.

People had their roofs burnt recently and they virtually have no shelter. While I was moving in the district, people from Padibe, Ayamo and elsewhere made a passionate appeal to the government to help them with some tents as it is raining and they have no shelter.  

I would like him to take this in consideration and quickly come to the rescue of my people by supplying them with these tents as they attend to other issues. I believe if he gave us about 16,000 tents for all the four camps it would be of some help. Mr Speaker, this is a passionate appeal and I hope it is taken up. 

I would also like to draw the minister’s attention to the fact that when it rains so many other calamities come up.  Apart from the ones that are highlighted there is also the problem that diseases might come up immediately for example cholera, which is on the increase.  If we can network with the Minister of Health to help us in this area, we shall be grateful. We want him to attend to us so that we get that problem under control.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the Minister mentioned ably that virtually most parts of the country are flooding. I had earlier stood on this Floor and made a comment that we have a bridge, which is Aswa Bridge. This bridge is in a sorry state, as it has no protection on all sides. It is bare and the middle is starting to crack. There is only some timber that is supporting it. More so the river is threatening to flood it and once it is flooded without the sides being protected then there is a risk of people falling into the water. 

If I were given an opportunity to take you to this bridge, some members would not pass there due to its terrible situation. Therefore, I would like the minister concerned to network, as calamities are most likely to befall us as rains continue to flood Aswa Bridge. This is my submission and I thank you, honourable Speaker.  I hope that later I will be given time to articulate what I wanted.  Thank you.

3.02
MR HERBERT KAALE SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, honourable Speaker. I thank the Minister of Disaster Preparedness for the report that he has brought to the House this afternoon.

On the issue of El Nino, I have two issues to raise.  Kapchorwa lies in a mountainous area and when we talk of landslides, it is one district that occasionally gets them.  During El Nino this time round we have had storms that have removed roofs from primary schools and buildings in the district. In one particular case, we have a school in Kapchorwa town called Kapchorwa Primary School. All the roofs of the seven classes were blown off as I speak. Therefore, I request the honourable minister to look into this case in terms of rehabilitation.  

We also have Ngenge Sub-county that lies in the plains. This area has been flooded and the population in that area has been displaced. As the minister considers districts for humanitarian assistance, he should include us on the list. I was looking at the list that he has presented; Kapchorwa was not included yet he has included Bukwa.

We also have the Kapchorwa-Bukwa Road, which because of landslides has had huge masses of soil at the border between Kapchorwa and Bukwa districts. This mass of soil has completely blocked the already difficult road to Bukwa.  It is my request that the minister considers this.  I thank you.

3.05
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement he has presented to us.  I have a concern on the landslides in highland areas. Kabale is one of those districts which is in a highland area and which has been affected by rains and landslides time after time.  Schools have been affected, roads have been blocked and homesteads have been blown off. However, the minister’s statement does not include Kabale district. I wonder whether the minister first liased with the people of Kabale to get some information especially those in the sub-county of Muko.  

Furthermore, the Ugshs 450 million that has been earmarked for these kinds of catastrophe seems to be so little. How does the minister intend to cover all these areas with such little money?

My other concern is about these refugees in Nyakabande.  How does the Minister of Disaster Preparedness intend to reach people in Kisoro with the Kabale-Kisoro road that is impassable? Mr Speaker, I witnessed this actually last week when I was going home. As I was approaching my home, the road was blocked and I had to go back and sleep in Kabale because my vehicle could not cross the road. People are using short cuts. Has the minister liased with the Minister of Works to clear the road?  That road has been neglected for so long. We had thought that tarmac construction would begin last July to September but it did not and because of that the road is now almost impassable.  So how will relief supply reach the people of Kisoro and the refugees in Nyakabande if that road is not worked on?

Furthermore Mr Speaker, it is not the first time that this Nyakabande is being used as a temporary refugee camp and Nyakabande is in the airstrip. I think the ministry needs to think about reallocating these people immediately and not wait for so long because this place is prone to dysentery and cholera. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is happening on the Bunagana border is exactly what is happening in my constituency of Bufumbira South. I have been in touch with the people on the ground by telephone and the situation is in fact more serious than what the minister has said. 

The paper presented by the minister is only concentrating on the refugees who have crossed into Uganda but there are people in the border area who are affected. A number of people have actually died and this is not contained in the minister’s report. A number are also hospitalised in Motore and Kisoro Hospitals.  

Many have lost homes because of motor shells that were dropped into Uganda and especially in Bunagana area and houses have been destroyed. There are also a number of farmers who have lost crop especially potato and bean gardens through stampedes of people running away. Therefore, I wish to ask the minister to consider what Government can do for these people whom we could characterise as internally displaced as they are also suffering.  Thank you, Sir. 

3.08
MR JOHNSON TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for the statement he has made. I would like to remind him that Bukwo district has gone through two kinds of disaster this year. The first was the drought that affected the whole sub-county of Swamu. The ministry was informed but for six months now no food has been given to these people. Can the minister tell us how long it takes the ministry to react? How long does it take you to go and assess a situation?  

My colleague from Tingey has also reported on the issue of landslides and it is not only one spot of the Kapchorwa-Bukwo road that has been affected. There are about three other spots and movement is impossible now. Mr Speaker, we have said in this House a number of times that we the members of Parliament from Bukwo have a lot of difficulty moving to our constituencies. We have been moving through Kenya right from the time we came to Parliament. 

I expected the Minister of Disaster when they heard this in the media to liase with the Minister of Works and Transport so that somebody can go there and assess the situation.  These are the issues that I wanted to raise to the minister.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.10
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I thank the Minister of Disaster Preparedness for this very brief report. I want to approach this debate from the point of view of the lack of coordination between Government departments which ideally should work with ministries in decision making and mitigating catastrophes of the kind that we are experiencing today.  
 
As far as I am concerned, the Metrological Department announced to this country that citizens of this country and others living here should expect heavy rains. Actually they sounded the alarm around September and Government knew this prediction. I am, therefore, surprised that the Office of the Prime Minister seems to be just beginning to organise themselves to try and resolve the problems that the population is faced with.  

This is not only the case with the Prime Minister’s Office. All of you seated in this House will appreciate that in this country today there are no good roads; the roads are a disaster. I am happy that the minister in charge of roads is seated in this House and it is my hope that he will respond to some of the issues that I have raised.  Many bridges have been washed away, a number of roads have been blocked and in certain cases construction has caused flooding and therefore resulted in outbreaks of diseases and this is evident in Kampala as well as other parts of the country.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to challenge my friend the Minister in charge of disaster by saying that the report you have presented before this House this afternoon is not exhaustive to say the least. I will ask you kindly to refer to page 2 of the statement and you will realise how shallow the research made by the Office of the Prime Minister is. Many seated in this House will appreciate that it is not only the districts of Butaleja, Tororo, Kotido, Adjumani, Dokolo, Kitgum and Kawempe divisions that are affected by floods. I do not know why the minister selected these particular areas yet this is a report to Parliament that is meant to be informative and exhaustive.  

Parliament should be able to receive a report that is comprehensive especially coming from the government in power. I would like a more exhaustive report to be brought to the Floor of the House highlighting the districts that are affected. This thing of “among others” does not help us make decisions about how many are affected. We are meant to make decisions from an informed point of view. I would like to insist that it is extremely important when the minister comes to respond, or if he finds it fitting when he brings another report to this House that he tells us all the districts that are affected.  

I will tell you in your neighbourhood since you come from Teso that one whole sub-county in Kumi is under floods and this is Ongino.  Foodstuffs that were stored in houses are rotting and farmers are losing cotton that was stored in their houses because of floods. Therefore, whereas the Prime Minister’s Office is thinking in terms of relief food and blankets, they really need to consider the long-term effects of these floods. The farmer is going to have nothing to sell and we shall have a recurrent situation of famine. So, there is need for you, honourable Minister, and Members of the front bench to consider this seriously. In conclusion, Sir –(Interruption)

3.16
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much for giving way. I stand here in the place of the Leader of Government Business. The Prime Minister is unable to be here with us this afternoon. He had an emergency problem to deal with, but he has given me information to the effect that the current rains, which have been on for the last two weeks, have really been heavy and have caused certain developments that are disruptive to our normal life like the minister has reported. However, inter-Government and inter-ministerial meetings are being held on a very regular basis to appraise Government on what is happening in the various corners of the country.  

This will enable Government to take corrective measures in order to be in position to deal with the situation. So, the fears that you have like certain bridges have been washed away and have not been immediately attended to, the problems in regard to cotton and so forth, are going to be dealt with.  We shall be appraising Parliament continuously as we come up with solutions to the problems as they manifest themselves in the different parts of the country.  

Obviously, there is also the other good side to these heavy rains and that is that the Lake Victoria water level is likely to go up. I am sure when the Minister for Water and that of Energy come here to report on what is happening in their sectors, we shall be in a position to say something about the good side of the rains. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for the information given to me and to the House. Mr Speaker, what I am hearing from the minister is that Government is preparing a big report.  Really something very big and obviously on the opposition side, we welcome such a report and believe it will be able to solve the many problems that are caused by these rains.

I would also like to correct the minister a little bit. In that part of the country that I come from, we have had heavy rains for two months now and not two weeks.  This has been going on and I trust that the Kampala or Lake Victoria Basin receives more rain than the Teso sub-region. 

I would also like to inform the House and the minister who brought the report that special consideration has to be given to areas where crops have been washed away. The yield of cassava in Teso, which is a cassava growing area, is tending towards zero. My prediction is that next year there will be no flour for people to eat. And this definitely calls for the attention of the Minister of Agriculture.

Finally, Sir, in the minister’s report he said that there is a committee chaired by the Prime Minister that has been set up - a taskforce with its secretariat to be housed in the Metrological Department. I would like to know from the minister what this committee is going to do? What it was put in place to do, what its terms of reference are and whether as Parliament, shall we be privileged to get reports from this committee? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to talk about this matter. Although Kampala seems to have been covered, the issues might go beyond what the minister talked about. I wish also to thank the minister for his statement on the El Nino phenomenon. While I accept that there is a large extent to which the government of Uganda could do, nothing about the current disaster, not the entire effect of El Nino is due to natural causes.

In Kampala District, for instance, to a large extent, floods are a result of poor road workmanship. In the case of Kawaala and Namungona, which I have the honour to represent, there were no floods during the previous El Nino of 1999. The cause of the floods due to El Nino this time round is attributable to the state of the Northern Bypass whose completion schedule is not known.

I have two questions: First, how much of the disaster does the government of Uganda attribute to our own man made inefficiency and negligence? And for that matter, who will take responsibility when and how? It is time people started taking responsibility for their actions or non-actions.

Mr Speaker, the people of Namungona, Kawaala, and Kawempe are also in dire need of humanitarian intervention. But last week it was reported in one of the dailies that while on his visit to Kawempe, the President of Uganda told the people that their problems with Cholera arise out of their voting patterns. That statement has not been withdrawn by the President’s Office. So, since it is not yet withdrawn, I would like to know whether in the minister’s intervention plan, constituencies that voted unwisely are included or not included. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from my colleague under what circumstances does a person withdraw a statement. For instance, every newspaper has something to do with the President of this country. Could that mean that the Office of the President has to go on withdrawing everything said? What is withdrawing? Withdrawing to me implies that you are the author; you are withdrawing something that you are responsible for. Under what circumstances does one withdraw?  Would this amount to withdrawing that you have in mind or something?

MS KAMYA:  Thank you, hon. minister.  The press said that the President said the people of Kawempe are in trouble with Cholera because they voted FDC leadership into office.  Until that statement is refuted, or the newspaper is requested or forced through any way to withdraw their statement, we take it as standing because newspapers are the avenues through which we get information.  

As my colleague said, it is such a serious statement that is why I am raising it here and I am raising it because we are drawing a plan for intervention. If that plan for intervention will not include Kawempe, I would like to know that, and the people of Kawempe and Namungona sent us here to be able to ask this question because they all ask it.  So, I think the question is very relevant.  If the President’s Office asks the newspapers to withdraw it, I will take it as a lie and I will not refer to it again.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us end with the hon. Okumu Reagan and then the Prime Minister will conclude.  But what I would advise is that if you have a disaster of this nature in your area the best thing to do is to report it to the ministry so that action is taken.

3.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness for informing this House about the disaster caused by El Nino. However, as many of my colleagues have stated, the minister is a “Minister for Relief Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.”  I get disturbed to hear the minister who is supposed to head the Department of Disaster Preparedness coming up to inform us that in the long-term, the way forward is to provide the permanent forum task force which will coordinate the early warning.  

Honestly speaking, why weren’t they there in the first place? I thought you were put in place to be prepared, to guard against these early warning signals!  In this case, the El-Nino thing has not come as a surprise.  I thought it was predicted sometime back that there would be some form of abnormality in the rainfall season and definitely you knew.  When there is abnormality in the rainfall season, whether the rain is much or little, it will affect our farmers who are traditionally conditioned to relying on the rain seasons for cultivation. 

I really want to urge the Office of the Prime Minister to be a little serious.  I think this is not serious enough to come and inform the nation that you are putting up a task force. What is the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness, a whole ministry with two ministers, doing?  Really Ugandans should not always be taken for a ride all the time.  This statement should not just be for mere accountability that you are doing something. 

If there is some degree of incompetence, the authorities should redress it because disaster has got no boundary and there is no politics about it.  When it rains and it floods it does not choose whether this is Movement, FDC or DP, it affects everybody. I ask Government to take the ministry a little bit more seriously.

I know the budget is very thin, and if Government is really serious about preventing disaster or responding to disaster then the ministry should also be supported.  My appeal is basically to the Leader of Government Business being represented by the Minister for Energy who is excited about the rise in the level of water.  Not knowing that this is unsustainable because it has risen because of an abnormality. You cannot scientifically sustain it, this rain has been abnormal - it has not been a normal rain.  The water level yes has risen but how are you going to sustain that level. Let us not just get excited by natural disasters and also think that some positive elements come out of that.

The minister stated that he is going to come out with a detailed report of the disaster, but we would not wish to hear about this. These members of Parliament represent constituencies where they already know about this disaster.  It is not enough to come and repeat to them that this is taking place, rather we expect you to come back to this House and give us what you have done in response. Because about a month ago, Bwaise was almost impassable, it was flooded, but not even a grain of relief was sent there.  Now if in Kampala you cannot even send a bag of maize to the people of Kawempe and Bwaise here, within a month, what about people upcountry how do you respond to them? Really this is pathetic.  

For us who travel to the North were cut off, we had a big problem crossing.  But as we were driving through the water, everybody was in water and I really sympathised with the people who live in the city.  Mr Minister, at least I want to appeal to you that it is always easier for Government to mobilise a few resources to respond to some of these things.  I do not think it needs you to establish a task force to start fundraising and doing all this.  

It will only require you to invite NGOs to request some of the agencies to respond immediately and it cannot even take two or three days to respond to a situation like this one in Bwaise, which has been really very unfortunate.  

This El Nino was predicted long time ago.  I do not know at that time when it was predicted what you were preparing for, because you were informed that there would be El Nino, which is abnormal.  How did you prepare for it at that time?  Some two or three months ago, you knew about this though you did not know the magnitude of the disaster.  But we expect you as a ministry to prepare.  At least if today you had come to us and informed us that we had prepared with this capacity, but we have been overwhelmed, the situation is too much, we have done this much and now we are trying to appeal to do this much, we would have been grateful.  

I also want to inform you, Mr Minister, that this abnormal rain has affected many areas, leave alone the flooding.  Recently I moved with my colleagues in the Acholi sub-region; an area, which is returning to normality and people from June were able to reach out and cultivate.  All that they have produced is gone with this rain. Even the simsim is rotting because they traditionally relied on the prediction of the weather.  Now what are you going to do for our people who are first of all disaster prone? They have tried to do something but the rain has disrupted them; it has affected them badly. 

We have been meeting some donors, but they are now shifting from emergency relief supply.  What is Government going to do because we are almost reaching a phase of resettlement?  People are moving back to their homes and donors are also shifting from emergency relief supply.  What are you going to do in such a situation?  Because there are no emergency supplies and what our people have produced has been destroyed by rain.  What will you do?

I want to request other ministries to do the needful to safeguard disaster, especially the Ministry of Works.  Aswa River is big but the bridge between Gulu and Pader on the Aswa River has been neglected for many years.  When it rains, it worsens the situation because the floods come.  I know many of you have driven along that road and I really want to appeal to the government departments to help because we cannot say that there was a disaster.  At least if the bridge was strong, but with this heavy rainfall and what have you, it can easily be washed away. It is a big risk because the river is flooded, the bridge is flat, and you can easily slip in with your car or motorcycle.  

Lastly, about the refugees from Congo, the minister in his last statement said that the civilian character of the refugee population would be maintained.  How are you going to maintain the civilian character?  How do you know that that one is a civilian unless when he isn’t putting on army uniform? What criteria are you putting in place?  Are you using identification cards to know?  I am asking this one on a very serious note because for long we have had problems with our neighbours in the DR Congo.  

There have been a lot of accusations of Uganda harbouring rebels from the DR Congo, and I really want us to wash our hands clean.  You stated here that the civilian character of the refugees is going to be maintained, how are you going to maintain it?  Or, what criteria are you putting in place to determine that this is a civilian and the other is not?  Are there some people who are coming with arms, especially the combatants?  Because I know where there are clashes, there are those who will be defeated and they will also definitely take refuge.  Have you also received combatants in this situation and how have you handled them?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF & DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Rt honourable Speaker, maybe I will start from the last.  I want to assure this honourable House that when it comes to distinguishing between a civilian and a military person, I think I am an authority - second to none.

When I came to present this statement, there were two objectives:  One, I wanted to inform this honourable House about the state of affairs.  As of now I also wanted to solicit an input from the honourable members.  First of all, I want to thank the honourable members for making an input that I am sure it is going to enrich our interventions as we address this unfortunate development in our country.

I want to start with the question of the people living in the Queen Elizabeth National Park.  These are the Basongora herdsmen who had at one point crossed into the DR Congo and were evicted. This was either at the end of last year or the beginning of this year.  I am happy to report to the House that His Excellency directed that immediately an assessment be done and an inter-ministerial committee be established. 

Rt honourable Speaker, that inter-ministerial committee is in very advanced stages of preparing a report. That report is meant to provide a permanent home for these unfortunate Basongora who have been moved because of circumstances that were beyond their control.  So, the question of the park is being addressed and we shall continue as a department to package responses that will be in our minutes particularly those of humanitarian nature as the permanent home is being sought by Government.

What is the current security situation?  I am happy that the member recognised that the Minister for Defence and others are now here.  But I wanted to give this House particularly the angle of the humanitarian requirements of the people who have fled into our country.  I want to assure you the lot I know about my Government is that every effort is being made to critically analyse the security implications of this. If we find that it will need the intervention of this House, I am sure I will come so that we ask your opinion and support in order to make a response.  I am sure Government is on top of the situation particularly in as far as security is concerned in Kisoro along the DRC border.

What happened to the 10,000 people who are displaced if they had animals?  Honourable colleagues, as we talk now, an assessment team is already on the ground in Kisoro.  They are going to critically analyse all the aspects and implications of this displacement and we will respond if – for example these people happen to be herdsmen; we will also package the response that is appropriate to the category of people that we are talking about.  

So, there should not be any cause for alarm- if you look at my report critically, I am saying, we are also studying the situation and if we find that the conditions that caused their displacement are going to last then we are going to consider relocating these people to areas that are traditionally meant to host refuges.  So, this question of keeping them in the airstrip is an interim arrangement, which is really meant to respond to the emergency nature of the problem. 

 I have received among many other reports the one from the honourable members from Kitgum district - and I want to let the honourable member know that we have dispatched teams from the ministry to also make our own on spot assessment of what is happening.  We are going to package a response and among many other things that we might deliver to our people in Kitgum are tarpaulins and plastic sheeting to take care of the dilapidated huts that the people are now suffering from in the camps.  So, we have received your concern among many other concerns and I want to assure you that we are addressing it. 

Honourable members, tomorrow we are having an inter-agency meeting, which I will chair. I have invited colleagues from all the relevant ministries.  I want to assure you that we will package a response that is broad in a sense that even those aspects of health for example, will not only be addressed by departments from humanitarian organisations but by staff from the Ministry of Health coming to attend the meeting.  So, by the time we package our response, we want it to be extremely comprehensive.

As for the Aswa Bridge, I will leave that to my colleague, the Minister of Works.  Since he is here it would not be appropriate for me to make a response.  

Storms de-roofing houses and schools; it again comes back to – Mr Speaker, we have requested all departments to attend this inter-agency meeting. I am sure the Ministry of Education officers present will have their attention drawn to this particular problem that concerns their sector and a response will be given.

I want to conclude by saying particularly on the question of El Nino; we are on the top of the situation that one I can say with a lot of certainty.  Natural disasters certainly will continue to occur but I think what is critical is how are we able to respond and what magnitude of suffering can we allow our people to go through. We are doing everything possible to make sure that our people’s problems are gone.  

Colleagues, I am here to raise the question of Kumi. Of course, I feared that the honourable colleague was making a confession that he had failed to inform us.  Hon. Amuriat was like making a confession that as a leader, his own area is equally affected and he has not informed the office up to now.  He has just decided to inform us in this House.  But, I am happy that he made a humble confession –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have taken a long time on this subject.

MR ECWERU: As for the refuges, honourable Speaker, I want to assure the public and the honourable House that it will not constitute a problem that will get out of hand.  We are going to do everything possible.  Immediately after the inter-agency meeting tomorrow, we are travelling to Kisoro with a contingent of other departments and humanitarian agencies.  By the time we come back from Kisoro, we will have packaged the response and we will be able to brief this House on what we have done.  I thought I could end at that level, Mr speaker; I thank you for giving me this opportunity to respond to some of these things.  

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I came in a little bit late.  I did not capture a lot because I was in the field on Government duties and in particular on Kawempe/Lubigi floods. To respond to some of the issues, honourable Amuriat stated that there is no good road in the whole of this country. I want to disagree with him.  

We have quite a number of good roads both tarmac and marrum, but of course, disaster is disaster. Some of the roads have been cut off, but in the general picture our roads are good. When you take, for example, you have mentioned Tirinyi road because you come from there and I am happy about that.  Kafu-Arua road, it is fantastic. Kapchorwa and Ntungamo roads are equally fantastic.  There are some many roads, which are still in –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This issue of roads as far as we are concerned today should be tied in this issue of disaster and the other is a general subject which we shall have time to discuss.  Let us discuss roads, bridges, in respect of the El Nino as stated to us by the Minister.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, Mr Speaker, I was responding to what the honourable colleague raised.  True the metrological department mentioned about mild El Nino and as the Ministry of Works, we took that one very seriously. We called all our equipments back to the stations and actually we have been fighting very hard to open some of the roads, which have been blocked or cut off by floods. These include even Ishasha, Kadunguru and Bukwa roads, which they have mentioned.  

Our engineers are on the ground opening that road, and many roads as the minister stated, it is not only Butaleja or Tororo but it is countrywide. For instance, if you look at River Muzizi, this is between Kyenjojo and Hoima, that road is submerged and now they are using canoes to cross. But the bridge is okay although it has been submerged. Nkusi River in Hoima, same story. So, it is countrywide and we have moved really to see to it that the roads are passable. But disaster is disaster. 

Honourable members, you have to understand this, disaster is disaster.  We are fighting hard to see that the roads are in a usable condition and we should not mix a lot of politics in this. We are working hard to see to it that the roads are back to normality.

Honourable Kamya talked about the Northern Bypass. Well, the Northern Bypass is a little bit behind schedule. That one I know, but it is not the cause for the flooding in Kawempe, Kalerwe and other areas.  The Northern Bypass and River Lubigi, move parallel to each other and they both cross Bombo road almost at the same place where they are building the interchange. They are moving parallel and most of the rivers cross the Northern Bypass. There are streams and we have culverts which are there. But I want to tell you the scientific reason why there is a lot of flooding in Kawempe, Kalerwe and Nansana. I am talking as an engineer now. 

There is a very big river called Lubigi. Lubigi is almost the same size as Nakivubo Channel. This channel drains most of the water from Kampala Central. The Mayor in his wisdom used his youth brigades to open all the channels in Kampala, which was fantastic, and I praise him for that. All the water collected at a high speed and went down into Lubigi. To reach in Lubigi, there are bottlenecks: 

One, Kampala City Council has taken long without taming this river; and this river is a low speed-moving river, which is prone to silting quickly now and then because it moves slowly. And it has silted and as I talk of now people can cross even on foot. I have been there, then plus garbage. There are some people whom they contracted as private contractors to remove garbage from Kampala City Council. Instead of taking it to Kitezi, some of them have damped it in the river –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Guidance, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. I am yet to present a petition. I do not know whether I can be allowed to respond or seek clarification or inform the honourable member? I do not know because part of the petition- much of the issues he is talking about are included in the petition, which I am about to present before this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is responding to an issue, which was raised when we were dealing with the statement of the Minister for disaster. But this without prejudice to the way your petition will be handled when it is presented. Definitely the minister will appear in respect of that petition, but he is responding to what was raised on the Floor about River Lubigi. 

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not privy to the contents of the petition of hon. Mutumba and I was only responding to the issues, which were raised by hon. Kamya.

As I stated, the private contractors have caused this dumping because they want to save some money on fuel. I am happy that yesterday I had a meeting with the Mayor about this issue and he acknowledged the problem. He is trying his level best to see how these people can be brought to book. 

Then the swamp has grown on top of that river. Virtually the water is not moving. I will give the measures, which we are going to take immediately after listening to hon. Mutumba’s petition. But there are measures, which we are putting in place and that is the reason why we have been there.

Mr Speaker, I once again want to thank the people of Butaleja and Tororo. I have got a reason to thank them because we are not on the ground, our engineers are on the ground and they cannot be everywhere. But the local leaders in these areas were swift. Immediately such calamities happen, they are supposed to inform our station engineers, who in turn relay the message to the ministry and immediate action is taken. But these are people- I have seen Wakiso, Butaleja and Hoima are the only districts, which I have seen in my ministry, all the reports which I have seen. Really I need to thank them for doing their duties as they are supposed to do them. 

Honourable members, it is also our duty that we should keep our ear on the ground to know what is happening out there. Like in my mountains there, I cannot know what is happening unless the local leaders give me the information. I think that is enough, I wait for the petition.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the government side, I would like to assure Parliament that we shall do what a responsible Government is supposed to do and that is to continuously appraise Parliament of developments of this nature and others so that we can remain accountable, but also receive pertinent input from Members of Parliament. 

Lastly, I just want to make a small comment on an issue raised by hon. Beti Kamya as regards to the remarks of His Excellency, the President. The issue of serving an area taking into account their voting tendencies, Mr Speaker and honourable members, all of us know the President’s record and that of the NRM in regard to serving everybody in this country. Many none NRM members have received a lot of attention from the leadership of this Government and it was exactly in that regard that His Excellency the President visited Kalerwe so that he could be in position to see the plight of his people in order to suggest remedial measures to avoid a Cholera epidemic. 

And in his remarks he made a general appeal to the leadership of that area and everywhere to take on such measures that can help the people within our constituencies to eliminate hazards that are associated with too much rain such as cholera, by ensuring that we have pit latrines that will maintain hygienic practices. 

I do not think that when His Excellency makes such a genuine appeal on such matters, he is targeting anyone on grounds of political affiliation. Nevertheless, we call upon even those who do not belong to NRM to take on the good ideas and programmes of the NRM that we have been pursuing to eliminate diseases in our midst particularly at such a time when we have a lot of rain and could easily have cholera in our areas.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes I had allowed you to table what you wanted to table because you are going away.

4.03
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Mr Speaker Sir, some three weeks ago, you requested me as the Chairman of the Budget Committee to attend the Congress Parliament Association seminar on the Role of Parliaments in the Budget Process. And per the requirement of this House, I am supposed to report back that I attended this conference and we have a document, which actually describes the whole content of this conference, which I wanted to table for the benefit of the members to read. We shall have to refer you to the library because we did not get enough copies to circulate to all members. 

So, I wish to table that document and I thank you very much for the opportunity to attend that conference.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

MR OKECHO: Secondly, Mr Speaker, I had wanted to alert the House that at a meeting of the budget committee yesterday, I got a little concerned that the process of starting the budget season for this year has not commenced and the Ministry of Finance is going to be requested to come to us to explain what they are doing about this. I think it is going to be sometime on the 20th when we shall meet them.

Finally, Mr Speaker, as I mentioned to you this morning, I had wanted to make a statement thanking the office of the Prime Minister, and especially, the Department of Disaster Preparedness for responding so fast to the disaster in my district.  Unfortunately the minister in charge has actually pre-empted my statement and he has explained what they are trying to do. 

I concur with you, Mr Speaker, when you say that we should be able to monitor what is happening in our districts - in our constituencies in respect to this problem of disaster and rain, because it is important that we get in touch with our people; we know their plight almost on a daily basis. Immediately this problem arose, my LCV chairman alerted us and I wrote a letter to the Prime Minister’s office and they took action. They mobilised various people: Red Cross, International Committee of Red Cross, the Ministry of Health the Ministry of Works and everybody else who was concerned in providing relief. 

So, I am pleased to inform you and the whole House that definitely there is something going on. We have received a consignment of medicines from the Ministry of Health, and this is going to help a lot in alleviating the problems of floods and water. I mean to take care of diseases like Malaria, Cholera - which may actually crop up.  

The Ministry of Education advised us in the morning of that day, when I wrote a letter on 23rd, that we should close some primary schools and we did close 9 primary schools. We also closed a technical school and a senior secondary school. These, they say are going to be handled in their own professional way to ensure that disaster does not increase. 

I have to really thank the Office of the Prime Minister for being so helpful at a short notice. Of course, you know very well that this has been a disaster and we all knew that it was a disaster and nobody could be prepared to handle such at the speed that we wanted, but all the same, we were lucky that we managed to get their response and it is really great this has happened.  

The response mechanism should be faster so that people do not wait for too long. We expected so many things and we asked for so many things to be sent. I am supposed to gather these items from various places and try to see if they can be delivered. So, I thank you very much. I also thank the minister for making a statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, but apparently you have taken what you have tabled -(Laughter)

MR OKECHO: Definitely the report is here, it is not a disaster report, it is a report – actually it is entitled the “Role of Parliaments in the Budget Process” and I request you members to go to the library and try to see if you can share this before we can do anything.  Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KAWEMPE DIVISION KAMPALA DISTRICT, CONCERNING THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NORTHERN BY-PASS AND ITS DISASTROUS EFFECTS

THE SPEAKER: I want to inform members that while this petition is being presented, there is a delegation from Kawempe division headed by the chairman of that division who is in the distinguished member’s gallery.

4.09
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you Mr Speaker for allowing me to table this petition, to present it before the Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, my constituency has had a terrible turn of events. Recently, we had a strike in the university and our roads were closed. The university was closed - now it is El-nino floods and businesses have come to a stand still. That is why the community has come up with this petition and I am here, Mr Speaker, to present it on their behalf.

Mr Speaker, pursuant to Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a petition concerning the construction of the Kampala Northern By-pass.  

Mr Speaker, the humble petition of the residents of Kawempe division Kampala district, petitioners of P.O Box 7010 Kampala presented by me, stresses that:

1.	The subject matter of this petition is the construction of the Northern By–Pass between Kawala and Gayaza road and the negative impact that it has had so far on the lives of the people residing and conducting business in the surrounding areas.

2.	Petitioners are people residing and or conducting business in areas surrounding the Northern By-pass, that is Kalimali, Bukasa, Katogo, St. Francis, Kibe, Mayinja, Dobbi, Kiggundu and Ssebiina Zone among other zones of Kawempe Division, Kampala Division.

3.	The areas referred to are situated in low lands along Nsoba drainage and Lubigi basin areas and serve as a drainage basin for the water from the water shades of Makerere, Kiwunya, Kawempe, Mbogo, and Kyebando Hills.

4.	The persons represented by your humble petitioners have been living in reasonably comfortable conditions until the commencement of the Northern By-pass, which has resulted into the blockage of access roads, detours and drainage systems.

5.	As a result of the interference, today these areas are experiencing serious floods, disruption of traffic, increased traffic jams and dumbness leading to collapse of building and increase in incidents of disease such as Cholera, Dysentery, Malaria, Pneumonia and Tuberculosis.

6.	KCC’s desire to harmonise and improve drainages has been the subject of correspondence between the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) and KCC, which was copied to the Chairman Kawempe Division and referred to in the correspondence from the Mayor of Kawempe Municipality to the area Members of Parliament dated 1 November 2006 and copies of the correspondence are attached and marked, annexed as (a)(i).

7.	The residents have made numerous attempts to communicate with the Road Agency Formation Unit, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Works and the minister responsible for works to address the matter and copies of correspondence are also attached and annexed as (b) and (c) respectively

8.	The residents are concerned that to date, the situation remains unattended to and with the delays in the implementation of the Northern By-pass projection in addition to the El-nino phenomenon, there is apprehension that the negative effects and impact cited therein will be aggravated. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, your petitioners pray that: 
1.	The Eighth Parliament sets up a select committee immediately to discuss and consider the issues of our utter most concern to the satisfaction of the concerned public, taking into account the negative impact of the implementation of the Northern By-pass construction project.

2.	That the select committee probes and studies in depth all aspects surrounding the project namely the issue of environmental impact, project supervision, technical management, fund flow and delays in implementation.

3.	That Parliament urges Government to declare the situation concerning this petition to be a disaster and take the necessary action to address the health infrastructure, transport/traffic and other environmental concerns. 

4.	That Parliament urges Government to review the work on-going on the Northern By-pass and address the Environment Impact Assessment, if any and mitigation measures proposed therein.

5.	That Parliament recommends Government that the plans for the Northern By-pass construction be compared with those of Kampala City Council (KCC), illustrated in the blue print, with a view of ensuring that the project is implemented in line with KCC plans made for the area, including the Kampala Drainage Master Plan.

And your petitioners, Mr Speaker, as duty bound have appended their signatures and appendices of documents regarding correspondents to RAFU, KCC, and to the Ministry of Works. I beg to table this petition.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much. As you have heard, Honourable members, a petition has been presented seeking that a select committee considers the matters of the Northern By-pass affecting the Division of Kawempe. The process of setting up a select committee is detailed in the Rules: it should be by the business committee. 

But as you may realise, this is an urgent matter requiring to be addressed immediately. So, don’t you think that the committee in charge of this sector of roads should be the appropriate committee to consider this petition and expeditiously report, because, it has all the know-how about roads, instead of the other process? Otherwise, the select committee will have to call the business committee and when it is called, then there will be a question of the whips, because the composition of the select committee will have to take into account the strength of these several things. 

But it is up to you because you are the one presenting this petition, but if you are to ask me, I would have sent it to the appropriate committee dealing with works. 

MR MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. First, as you mentioned, the gist here is the timeframe. So, I would not object to your guidance if it can be referred to the committee concerned with this affair, so long as the timeframe is spelt out clearly. 

I am much obliged so long as it is given the necessary attention in so short a time, because the situation is getting totally out of hand.

4.18
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Infrastructure Committee of this Parliament, and just this morning, the question of the Northern By-pass came into our discussion. And we were proposing that we should be able to visit and assess the work going on this road.

So, now that this petition has come, I actually see that the committee would easily incorporate the concerns of this Member of Parliament. I would also –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, many people seem to agree with this. So what we should do is to send this petition to the Committee of Works to expeditiously deal with it and then report appropriately to this House. So since there is no motion to reject this petition, it means that it is acceptable, and therefore I send it to that committee.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But I humbly request for a timeframe, since you have already hinted on the fact that it is expeditiously needed. I would suggest one week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one week.

4.19
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this. I respect your ruling; we have got a committee on infrastructure, and it can do that job. But the petition has raised serious issues, some of which indicate that really Kampala Division and Kampala City Council, the Mayor and the Chairman – I do not know whether they are called chairpersons – they do not seem to be working in harmony, and –(Interruption)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
THE SPEAKER: No we are not discussing the merits of this petition. Our Rules are that if a petition is presented , it is sent to the committee; anybody who has any input to support or blame this division, the institution, should do so in the committee. I know the committee will definitely summon you to brief them. So, you will make those presentations there.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I accept your ruling, Mr Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION BILL, 2006

4.20
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Equal Opportunities Commission Bill, 2006” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded, please proceed.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill is for an Act to make provision in relation to the Equal Opportunities Commission pursuant to Article 32(3) and (4) and other relevant provisions of the Constitution. To provide for the composition and functions of the commission; to give effect to the state’s constitutional mandate; to eliminate discrimination and inequalities against any individual or group of persons on the ground of sex, age, race, colour, ethnical origin, tribe, birth, religion, health status, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability, and take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalized on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, traditional custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances, which exist against them and to provide for other related matters.  

Mr Speaker, a number of commissions and institutions have been set up to handle bits of marginalisation and discrimination. However, a number of these institutions do not have policy framework and powers to enforce compliance with non-discriminations and equal opportunity requirements.  

Mr Speaker, some of the existing institutions have specific mandates that do not stretch to adequately address the equal opportunities issues and concerns. Each of these only addresses a miniature of the equal opportunities challenges and does not adequately and effectively address the equal opportunity challenges. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has put in place the National Equal Opportunity Policy to regulate the necessary interventions. It has also been observed that some of the existing policies and laws are either deficient or fragmented to handle discrimination and marginalisation. 

Mr Speaker, as opposed to the current reactive approach used by some of the institutions like the Uganda Human Rights Commission, IGG and the Industrial Court, in addressing their challenge, the Equal Opportunities Commission will use the pro-active approach that is more encompassing. For instance, it will review policies, plans and laws so as to orient them to cater for vulnerable groups. 

This is preventative rather than reactive, thus in this way the Equal Opportunities Commission will use a pro-active approach to redress or prevent the occurrence of discriminations and through constructive engagement with stakeholders will integrate good policies.

The Constitution of Uganda Article 21, 32(3) and (9), Article 33, Article 80, and the Local Government Act clearly stipulate affirmative action in favour of the marginalized groups. There is no particular government unit, agency or department, which is mandated to evaluate this deliberate policy apart from the Equal Opportunities Commission, which is being proposed.  

The Equal Opportunities Commission review and recommend as to whether affirmative action is benefiting the intended targeted groups. Such will include the education quota or 1.5 points to girls entering university, political representation of the marginalized groups as well as equitable distribution of grants for local governments. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission will also enhance effective targeting of the vulnerable groups by ensuring that these people actually access resources and services, by carrying out accessibility audits of the government including local governments, and in so doing, they will realize effective changes in the livelihood of these people. This in essence is accountability and effective delivery of resources and services to the targeted vulnerable groups. 

Mr Speaker, the Equal Opportunities Commission mandate include things like equal pay for equal work of equal value and freedom from discrimination based on any attribute and affirmative action.  

In summary, the mandate of the Equal Opportunities Commission includes the commission being the national custodian of equal opportunity matters, playing a preventive role against occurrence or real occurrence of inequalities, redressing imbalances or inequalities and being a national custodian of affirmative action and equity.  Through this affirmative action, we shall be able to develop, evaluate and monitor implementation.

Mr Speaker, I beg this House to support this motion.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

4.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Jalia Bintu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to present the report of the Committee on the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Article 32(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates Parliament to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission by an Act of Parliament. It is in this regard that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development tabled in this House the Equal Opportunities Commission Bill, 2006 for first reading on 21 September 2006, together with the certificate of financial implications as provided under Section 10 of the Budget Act 2001. 

The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee of Equal Opportunities for scrutiny in accordance with Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, the Committees of Equal Opportunities and that of Gender, Labour and Social Development examined the Bill and believe that if well resourced, it will go along way together with the Uganda Human Rights Commission and other institutions in place to contribute in the protection of most of the vulnerable population and communities of Uganda. 

Background to the Equal Opportunities Commission:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, during the constitutional review process in 1994, the then Ministry of Women in Development together with the Odoki Constitutional Commission, carried out research and consultations in issues concerning women. It was revealed that some sections of the society in the country were discriminated or marginalized by certain practices, customs and traditions and legislations including history. Consequently, the matter was debated and upheld by the Constituent Assembly delegates. Finally, there was consensus that an all-embracing equal opportunities commission institution be established in the country.

With consensus, the Constitution of Uganda promulgated in 1995 in Article 32 provides: “…the state shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalized….” And further provided that “Parliament shall make relevant laws, including laws of the establishment of an equal opportunities commission….” The 1995 Constitution as amended in 2005, further emphasized the need for the commission and set the period in which it should be put in place.

Methodology:

Mr Speaker, in considering the Bill, the committees studied and analysed the National Equal Opportunities Policy 2006; held a consultative workshop on the Bill with civil society organizations that was organized by Action for Development (ACFORD) and present in that consultative meeting were FIDA, UWONET, HURINET, Media for Peace, Hope After Rape and the Bahai faith representative. 

The committees held discussions with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The committees also met and discussed with the Uganda Human Rights Commission and they also held discussions with the National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU) and the Confederation of Free Trade Unions.

The committees’ observations:

Mr Speaker, on the national equal opportunities policy, the committees noted that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in July 2006 adapted the equal opportunities policy that will guide the operations of the commission once established. 

The equal opportunities policy aims at promoting equality of opportunities between all persons in Uganda irrespective of gender, sex, age, physical ability, health status or geographical location in all activities, programmes, plans and policies of government, private sector and non-governmental organizations in all spheres of social, economic, political and civil life. It also aims at promoting equal opportunities in the structure of the family, institutions and government practices.

Mr Speaker, this Bill, if passed into law, will give legal effect to the national equal opportunities policy and establish the commission and guide its operations. The provision of the legal framework is crucial for the promotion of equal opportunities.

The committees’ observation on situation analysis: 

Despite the legal framework entrenched in the 1995 Constitution, discrimination, inequality, marginalisation and violation of rights among marginalised groups manifest themselves in practice and in some of the existing legislations. Discriminatory laws still exist on our statute books and glaring gaps on protection of marginalised groups still do exist and in certain instances there are no laws to provide for their protection, for instance, the issue of gender-based violence.

There is, therefore, need for a law to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission to address the issues and challenges faced by the marginalized groups in accessing services and justice.

The committees’ observation on composition and appointments of the Equal Opportunities Commission: 

The Bill provides that the commission shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. The committees observed that this is the normal practice with all the commissions. However, given the unique nature of this commission, the committees wish to propose that the youths be represented on this commission, but not varying the numbers of members on the commission. 

Mr Speaker, given the nature and the functions of the Equal Opportunities Commission, the committees observed the need for the chairperson to be a person qualified to be a judge. The composition of the equal opportunities commission should take into account the youths who are the majority in this country, as I had earlier on stated.

The observations on the commencement of the Equal Opportunities Commission:

The committees noted that Clause 1 of the Bill states: “This Act shall come into force on the date appointed by the minister by statutory instruments.” However, the committee observed that this clause is in contradiction of Article 32(4) of the Constitution which states: “The Equal Opportunities Commission shall be established within one year after coming into force of our Constitutional Amendment Act 2005.” Therefore, the committees propose that the Bill should be implemented once passed by Parliament and accented to by the President.

Another observation by the committees is a certificate of the equal opportunities compliance. The committee noted the need for the implementation of this law in all sectors of government. It is hereby proposed by the committees that all Bills coming to Parliament should have a certificate of equal opportunities compliance issued by the commission.

The committees’ recommendations:

The committees recommend that the Equal Opportunities Commission be established without further delay as soon as Parliament passes the law. This Bill has come along way to reach this stage and rights of the marginalised groups need to be given due consideration in the planning process of this country. 

Secondly, the certificate of financial implications was laid before Parliament implying that the funds were available to operationalise this law. The committees, therefore, recommend that the funding of the commission be direct from the Consolidated Fund.

Thirdly, the committees recommend the inclusion of the youth on the composition of the Equal Opportunities Commission. It is the considered view and proposal of the committees that this being equal opportunities commission, the composition of members should reflect the expectations and objectives of the Bill.

Fourthly, Members of the committee were of a strong view that in such an oversight commission or institution, the appointment of the members should be through interview and merit. However, because of the rules and procedures in place, this was not found to work and in future the committee recommends that commissions like for equal opportunities and human rights should be contested for favourably.  

Appreciation:

The committee would like to register its appreciation to the following: The Offices of the Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament, for re-calling the Members of the Committees on Equal Opportunities and on Gender, Labour and Social Development from recess to come and handle this Bill. To the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and her technical team for the cooperation rendered to the committees. To ACFODE that organised a stakeholders’ workshop of civil society to deliberate on the Bill and their valuable comments and concerns were incorporated and enhanced the content and quality of the amendments.

Lastly, the Bill was considered jointly by the committees on Equal Opportunities and that on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am grateful to the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and her committee Members for their valuable input into this Bill. Mr Speaker, Sir, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I want to thank you and the committee for the good job done. Now, honourable members, the motion for the second reading is open for debate.

4.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister and the chairperson for the report and I want to welcome this committee, which in the Seventh Parliament we tried very much to have established. We are grateful that now it has been brought to Parliament and that the process will be finalised. 

I want to start with page 3 of the report which says, “The aim of the commission will be to promote equality of opportunities between all persons in Uganda irrespective of gender, sex, age, physical ability” and so on. Therefore, like the minister said, this commission will not only deal with women issues or gender issues but also with issues beyond: issues to do with equitable distribution of resources and balanced development. 

The establishment of this commission is in line with the Constitution. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy XII, “Balanced and equitable development” (ii) states: “The state shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and the urban areas.

(iii) The state shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.”

I want to also talk about the status quo. I would have loved the committee to have told me what the status of inequalities is in Uganda today, which this commission can address. According to Uganda Bureau of Statistics report, 2003, the situational analysis patterns and trends of poverty are very worrying for certain regions in this country. The national average as of 2003 was 39 per cent. The regional distribution of poverty is: western 33 per cent, central 22 per cent, eastern 46 per cent and northern 63 per cent. In 2005, western had 28.8 per cent, central 19.0 per cent, eastern 48.2 per cent and northern 64 per cent. Rural poverty pattern is 43 per cent, the urban 39 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, the pattern, therefore, is that in 1992 poverty stood at 56 per cent; in 2000 it was at 34 per cent national average; 2003, 39 per cent; 2004 43 per cent. Therefore, between 2003 to-date poverty has been rising. But if you look at the pattern, it has been rising in the eastern and Northern region.

If I go to another study, which is the Uganda National Household Survey in their survey entitled, “Who are the poor”, in their report of 2000/03, poverty increased among households involved in agriculture growing from 39 per cent to 49 per cent. That means the majority of us here represent the majority of the poor. The percentage of those involved in crop agriculture increased from 39 per cent to 50 per cent. These are the inequalities we are talking about: inequalities in region, inequalities between the rural and the urban, inequalities between those involved in industrialisation and those involved in agriculture.

These are the issues that this committee and commission should be engaged in. I want to see, if this commission is established in the next five years, where will the North be, where will the east be in regards to these patterns of poverty growth?  I want to see, in five years after the establishment of this commission, where will my people who are in a dominant agricultural production be in terms of poverty. Where will those in the urban and the rural the most poor be? 

So, policies should investigate why these patterns are mostly dominant in the North and in the east? Why the patterns are more dominant in the rural and not in the urban? Why the patterns are more dominant among the agricultural producers and not among those in the area of urbanisation. These are the issues I want this commission to investigate and give alternative policies to it so that in the next five years, I will know that we have an equal opportunity commission that can redress the regional imbalances, that can redress the imbalances in the rural and the urban sector.

Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the issue of women inequality. Uganda is a signatory to the UN Charter, which actually had estimated that by this time, women’s representation should be about a minimum of 30 per cent. Rwanda now, which is a young democracy, is at 50 per cent representation of women. If you go to the same poverty trend I have been talking about, the report of Uganda National Household Survey and UBOS still indicate that poverty increased more among the women from 33.4 to 48 per cent. Therefore, I want also this commission to think about how we redress the economic imbalances between the women and the men. 

If you look at Article 32 of the Constitution, the Article within which the commission is to be established, it is more focussed on redressing the imbalances among the women. So, I would like this commission to focus on investigating why after all these years - because if we did not have the affirmative action, the representation of women would be still very low in this Parliament. If we were to take away women who came on affirmative action and examine whether the cultures are favourable for women to contest and come without affirmative action, we would still be having less than may be 20 per cent representation of women. Actually, it would be below 15 per cent. 

So, we need this commission to establish why are these cultures not changing, if they are not changing? If they are changing slowly, what are the factors that are making the cultures not change quickly to allow women participate in all the opportunities: the economic, the social and the political. These are the issues that this commission should investigate; give us alternative policies and answers so that we can see the way forward.  

Mr Speaker, I welcome this, I support this and I beg honourable members to support the establishment of this commission. I thank you.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LUWEERO TRIANGLE) (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good and precise report.  However, I have just one observation in recommendation 4 on Page 7. The last part of this recommendation sounds a bit speculative and I would like a clarification from the chairperson of the committee, how do you operationalise this recommendation where commissions like equal opportunities, human rights, should be contested for favourably?  That is the clarification I want, but I support the report. Thank you.

4.51
MR RONALD REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the committee and the minister. I just seek a few clarifications and I will make a few comments. When the committee talked about youth, I wish they were specific. In most cases, youth representation has been at the apex and within few months, those who are appointed or elected to represent youth expire and in the long run they do not represent the youth. I wish the committee could give an age limit that the youth who should be on the commission should be within and not at the apex. If you get somebody at 29 years, within a year that person will no longer be a youth and his or her interests will not be the interests of the youth. So, I am begging the chairperson to take consideration of this.

THE SPEAKER: But would you not think the appointing authority should take into account that fact and take into account the mandate of the commission if it is three or five years, that in appointing a person they should not become disqualified after one year. I do not know whether you see my point here.  

MR OKUMU: I get it, Mr Speaker, but I thought if it is spelt out, it would help the appointing authority.  

Mr Speaker, I also want the committee to look at the most vulnerable groups from vulnerable groups and identify them and give them priorities. I always see a lot of emphasis given to some vulnerable groups, for example, women at the expense of other vulnerable groups. At this stage, given our experience in this country, within the vulnerable groups, women are not the most vulnerable.  

MS WONEKHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Okumu, for giving way. First of all, when we look at the composition of the population in this country, women constitute 51 per cent and above. When you look at people with disabilities, women are most disadvantaged within that group of people with disabilities. When you look at the youth, the female youth are more vulnerable within the youth bracket. So, I hope you get it, hon. Okumu?  

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Wonekha for giving me the opportunity to pass on this information. When you say that you are 50 and above per cent in a democratic society like ours, then you do not know what it means by marginalisation. The point is that, you have not yet discovered your strength. The moment you know that you are 50 and above, the whole of this Parliament would be you; you would even produce a president; you would even produce the Speaker! That cannot be marginalisation. Maybe it is psychological marginalisation of your own and nobody else’s.  Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I thank my two colleagues who have given me information. I really do not want to engage them in debate. But for emphasis, within the women, there is inequality and I do not want us to hide this. There is inequality between the urban and the rural women; there is inequality between the educated and uneducated women and we should be able to spell out this. In most cases, the educated women even do not represent the interests of the uneducated women and these are the facts of the matter. The urban women in most cases also do not represent the interests of the rural woman and these are the actual inequalities within the women bracket and I wish that my colleague, the chairperson, would take this into consideration. 

I also wish to note that there are elements of inequality within institutions of government. One aspect I would take is employment where there are lots of problems and I wish we could really come out with something to guide how our people get jobs into government institutions. In some cases, you find that one institution is over flooded by one region at the expense of other regions. I think this is unfair to a country like ours. 

I also wish that when it comes to the commission, we clearly spelt it out that the opposition should also be represented on the commission because if we do not mention it, the opposition will also be marginalised. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.58
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also just want to make a short observation on page 3 of this report. It is saying the equal opportunities policy aims at promoting equal opportunities between all persons in Uganda irrespective of gender, sex, age, physical ability, health status and so on and so forth. It also aims at promoting equal opportunities in the structure of the family, institutions and government practices. 

My concern was that if equal opportunities are promoted in the family structure, meaning between both male and female, that is good. But if it also means between the parents and the children, I hope we are not going to take away the rights of the parents to govern their children. Because we may find that at some stage, if all children have the same opportunities as their parents, everybody is at par in the family and nobody governs the other. 

Then on page 5 it says, “However, given the unique nature of this commission, the committee wishes to propose that the youth be represented on the commission.” My question is, why only the youth? How about the disabled people? How about the women? If we are concerned about all people who are marginalised, why only the youth? Thank you.

5.01
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This commission in my understanding is going to operate as a kind of court, where if you have your grievances about some element of non-adherence to affirmative action, you can go to these people. I am wondering why it should be necessary for that type of court to have the very person, if he was marginalized, represented. 

I think this element of having the youth, the women or the very group we think is marginalised being represented is kind of politicising a court. It would be like if I am going to court, I need to find there a youth. If I interpret it on the basis of it being a court, I think this need for youth representation may not arise. That is my humble submission.

5.03
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill that has been timely and will help us to address a number of issues. I have always been disturbed by a problem where you find that as young people, we have been facing problems of inequality and we do not have anywhere to address such problems. 

For example, a requirement of experience before somebody accesses a job; I feel is irrelevant because as long as somebody has got the necessary academic credentials, somebody can be trained on job. It has been greatly affecting the young people especially that we do not have anywhere to go and raise this concern. 

That is why you find that Uganda has become into one and everything has been concentrated in Kampala because we do not have anywhere else we can analyse and plan for a country from. You find that the administration is in Kampala, Parliament is in Kampala, everything is concentrated here and so we cannot even manage time in town due to congestion.  I greatly support this Bill and I suggest that all the Members give great consideration to this Bill for the benefit of our country such that we can have development in all areas of the country. 

As one speaker said, more poverty patterns are dominant in some areas while other areas are improving and reducing on the problem. Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I highly appeal to you to give special consideration to this Bill to help our country develop equally.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.05
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of my committee. You know very well that discrimination is a common problem in Uganda. Much as the Constitution states that all people are equal under and before the law – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for an honourable member of the very committee to debate her own report?

THE SPEAKER: I think you come later.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I did not sign. Women in Uganda –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nampijja, as far as we are concerned, you are the one who prepared this report for the House and because you did, then you do not debate. You leave others who were not there to debate the report.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I was supporting the Bill because since I am a Member of the committee, I was involved in reviewing and evaluating everything –(Interjection)

MR SPEAKER: I think let me make her appreciate since that is only fair. It is not fair for you to debate your report. Let other people access the report and comment on it. Then later, you can come in to answer the queries. I think that is the point. 

MS NAMPIJJA: I accept the Speaker’s ruling.

5.07
MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I stand up to support the motion and I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of the committee. I want to start by first allaying the fear of a Member who stood up to say parents should not be granted equal opportunities with children. We actually have a children’s statute where parents have a responsibility to guide the children. That does not mean that the children do not have equal opportunities with us. First of all, we must know that in developed countries children have a lot of opportunities and even then when we talk of opportunities for children, we should actually consider male and female children. We should give them equal opportunities.

All of us know what our society is like. One Member actually said women have not discovered their strength. We have societal norms; women cannot do it alone. We cannot fight it alone. Society has always put women completely down in very many ways and this must be brought to an end. We need to be together here. If it were not for affirmative action, I am sure women in this Parliament would be less than 30. It is only because of affirmative action that we are 100 in this Parliament. We want this to stop and my appeal to men is that, you have women all around you; you have your mothers, your sisters and your daughters. And if you think your wives must always be under you, think about your daughters; if you think your wives must be under you, think about your mothers. Support the women even in education. Why are women not highly educated like you the men? It is because of the societal norms. 

I am a mother and I would prefer to take my son to school instead of giving opportunity to my daughter also if I have limited resources. This is the time and we want those kinds of things to stop. (Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform my colleague that actually there are some men who are under women.

MS OCAN: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the colleague that when we address this as an issue, we take stock. We do not take those peculiar cases; you can find a peculiar case or maybe two in 100. Can we take that as something very substantial? We need equality for all classes of people here. We need to develop and grow and if men think that they can be up on their own, then you try and see. But I think that the best thing to do is for our men to stand by the women. You should stand side by side with us and support us so that maybe tomorrow or in 2011, we find that if you are 200 men, then let the women also be about 180. And maybe next time we should also have a woman vice-president or president. I think all of us will be very proud if we reach that level. 

Let us all fight these societal norms. When you hear about unequal opportunities, it is because of the socially constructed roles, which have actually put women completely down. We need women, youth, people with disabilities to be up. The moment that is done, you will find that we are all happy. Do not let your women kneel very much. Let the women also have resources so that we talk at par. Sit at table together, not the woman down and the man up on the chair. All of us need to be sitting on the chair. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.13
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development. Before I make my observation, I want to agree with the proposal by the Member for Ruhaama that much as we talk of giving equal opportunity, there must be some degree of limitation regarding children and parents because if we take equal opportunities, who will take the disciplinary measure on the other? 

I want to make one observation on page 6 on the recommendations, bullet three. The committee recommends the inclusion of youth on the composition of Equal Opportunities Commission. When we talk of vulnerability, I feel we should look at persons with disabilities with more keen interest because they are more vulnerable. I think in the composition of the Equal Opportunities Commission, they need to be included. I do not know whether it was an oversight by the committee or they assume that it is an obvious case. I would even not mind seeing persons with disabilities represented at the expense of youth though I still belong to that bracket. I feel the youth representation has some limitation as my colleague, the MP for Aswa, has put it. Persons with disabilities have a wider and unlimited -(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, honourable member. I want to refer you to Clause 4: Composition and appointment of members of the commission in the Bill. Sub-clause (1) talks about the composition and persons with disabilities are well catered for plus the women. We are just adding a youth who will be among the five. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is being stated here is that, the original text of the Bill included other groups but the one, which is presented here in Parliament, the youth were missing. I think this is sort of an amendment to improve on the provision.

MR OYET: I thank you, Mr Speaker. In the composition, there is still one aspect left out and that is the elderly. Where do we put them? I think it should be a considered decision to include the elderly by this august House. They are also more vulnerable compared to our age bracket. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Who are the elderly?

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, allow me to cite examples beginning from you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues Okello-Okello and many others. (Laughter) Thank you. 

5.19
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin from what the honourable Member for Ruhama brought out. When the committee said there should be equal opportunities in the family, I thought they meant rights put together with responsibility, respect and dialogue in the family. If that is what was meant, I go by what the committee has proposed. We should put a clause to mitigate what my colleague has fear of.

Mr Speaker, I am worried about the orphans and vulnerable children. I wanted them specifically mentioned somewhere amongst the people who should be catered for. The number of orphans and vulnerable children by 2010 is likely to be above seven million in this country. And if we do not get a specific clause to cater for them, I fear it may go out of hand.

I also would like to look at the area of the appointment by the President. I suggest we put a weigh somewhere, for control purposes. Sometimes when people are appointed, they do not measure up to our expectations. We should have a clause where somebody could be put off if he doesn’t perform to our expectations. 

In addition, I propose that if it were possible, probably the time frame for the impact assessment be put so that we know how far we are moving after putting this commission in place. This is because sometimes we put structures, which do not perform. I don’t want this to be one of those structures but a structure with an impact. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a problem on page 3. The equal opportunities aims at promoting equality of opportunities between all persons in Uganda irrespective of gender, age, physical ability and so forth. What explanation would be given, for instance, if there is an exercise of recruiting people to join UPDF, and somebody who does not want to continue school presents himself, or someone below the age of 18, say 12. Maybe he was fed well and therefore he is well built -(Laughter)- what explanation will you give for not taking him on? Because it says, irrespective of age, what explanation are you going to give for rejecting him?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, we have a number of laws regarding employment. Minors are not supposed to be employed. So, when it comes to applying to join UPDF, it will be those who are qualified according the laws who will be recruited.

THE SPEAKER: Then it should be, subject to other laws. Otherwise, if you read it this way, you may have that scenario and you have a problem. But as you explained, I think you subject it to other laws.

5.23
MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion. In fact, Members should not only look at the gender issue and women but also equal opportunities in all aspects of life and in all institutions of this country. I support this motion because it will open up the doors to all institutions of this country for people, as the honourable colleague said. If you are qualified, according to the set standards either for UPDF or any other job, then you get employment without any discrimination. I thank the mover for this. Some members in our society have always been discriminated against because they profess or have a different ideology from that of the ruling government.

On page 4, the composition of the Equal Opportunities Commission includes the youth. I suggest that we add that all political shades represented in this Parliament be included on the commission. (Interruption) 

MS WONEKHA: The Bill specifies the number of people to be on the commission to be five. So, supposing we have 10 or 20 parties in this House, what happens? Thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, I think this composition of the youth, women, and people with disability should be left out. Let us have eminent Ugandans who can handle this task. This is an Equal Opportunities Commission and the reason we are putting women, youth, and people with disability is that those are the groups, which are largely marginalised. But in this country, we have some small societies which are marginalised, like the Basongora –(Laughter)- the Banyabindi, the Bakonzo who have even been denied the chance to have Obusinga. We are also about to demand that you put us on the commission. You will find that you have a commission of the size of this Parliament. Why don’t we have eminent Ugandans of proven integrity to be members of this commission so that they could do a good job?

MAJ. (RTD) JAMES KINOBE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The only clarification I would like from you is, when you talk of eminent Ugandans and you say we should not mention disabled, youth, do you want to say that there are no disabled people or youth who are eminent Ugandans?

MR KIBANZANGA:  What I am saying, Mr Speaker, is, if he is disabled and an eminent Ugandan let him go to the commission. Not because he is disabled but because he can do good work. He should be able to relate to a Mukonzo, to a Munyabindi, to a Musongora just as all other Ugandans who should be treated as equal. If he is a youth and he is eminent with proven integrity, let him go to the commission. If she is a woman, she should go to the commission. That is what I am saying. But if you say we include marginalised groups, we shall demand that one of them should be a Mukonzo. We are also marginalised.

MS BETTY ACAN: I would like to seek this clarification. When we talk about women, it is not only in Uganda. It cuts across the whole world. And when we talk about the youth, we are talking internationally. When we talk about people with disability, it is also internationally. And I see that this is what equal opportunities is actually trying to address. Could my honourable colleague clarify on those marginalised? Are these clans, tribes, what are they? Can you actually make us know better? Otherwise, all the tribes and clans in Uganda will claim marginalisation. Even we in Acholi are greatly marginalised. 

MR KIBANZANGA:  Mr Speaker, I have not understood the question first of all. (Laughter) But I got some -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we will come to the committee stage where these things will come out. Let us complete the general debate. Please, wind up -(Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: As I was expressing my concern regarding the political shades, the honourable member said that the Bill specifies only five members on the commission. I suggest that all political shades in this House be represented on this commission, even if it means increasing the number of the people who will be on that commission. You see, today you are on the other side where there are very many but tomorrow things might be different. That is why I am saying that in order for this Equal Opportunities Commission to have meaning and to foster the purpose for which it was intended, we should have all political shades represented in this House on the commission. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I would like to inform you that there is no need for us even to increase on the number. You can have among the commissioners a person who is a woman, disabled, of DP with in the five. You could have someone who combines all those within this number.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA:  As long as it can be done, I have no problem with that. Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page 6 of the appendix, the powers and functions of this commission are to monitor, evaluate and ensure that policies, laws, plans, programmes, activities, practices, traditions, cultures, usages and customs of -
(a) organs of state at all levels, (b)statutory bodies and agencies, (c)public bodies and authorities - up to (f). This is where I want to support the Member for Ruhaama. We should also consider the culture and customs of our regions because if we are just going to - as she said, we don’t want to pass this Bill blindly and tomorrow we find our children saying, “But we have equal opportunities Daddy, which you signed.” I cannot direct as a father in my house. So as we go on, this thing must be thoroughly rectified so that we know what we are passing.

I have also seen that this commission will have powers equal to those of the High Court, to summon individuals, to ask for any documents and I think that they go further than that. In some institutions or organisations where we think that there is a lot of discrimination, they will be able to investigate and take action as per their powers. That is why I thank the mover of this motion. We should mean business and put in practice what we are going to pass other than letting this law be overloaded by other powers. I thank the mover and ask all honourable members to support the motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.33
MR GERALD SIMON MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): As I support this motion, Mr Speaker, I wish to re-echo the words of the previous speaker in relation to page 6 of the appendix in regard to the operationalisation and practability of this Bill. He noted that one of the primary functions of this Bill will be to monitor and supervise the activities of the commission at all levels. I am cognisant of the fact that this commission is within a ministry, which is grossly under-funded. 

We have on a number of occasions participated in workshops and seminars and the biggest problem that the ministry faces is under-funding. This week we were in a workshop about child labour and Members of Parliament were informed that the department of children in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is operating on a budget of only Shs 26 million for the whole of this country. The issue whether the ministry will have the capacity to fund this Bill is very important. This ministry is grossly under-funded. How will the honourable minister handle this problem? 

5.35
MS JESSICA ERIYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister on this Bill and thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I would like to say that the marginalised groups in this country should be happy. This government has put in place a number of policies that address the issues of marginalisation and a number of programmes including UPE, affirmative action, privatisation and many others. However, there are still a number of challenges and issues that contribute to discrimination. 

In this country, for instance, 64 per cent of our economy is in the hands of the private sector. I, therefore, think this commission should also address the issues related to the private sector investments seriously because there are some parts of the country that may not be favourable to private investors.

Discrimination still exists due to various individual interests, opportunities, vulnerabilities, geographical locations, conditionalities of donors and NGOs and political conflicts. Even men play a bigger role in the women’s elections, in the youth elections, in the elections of people with disabilities because they have different interests. They would like to, for instance, support women who would support their own interests and this has brought conflicts amongst the women. I think this commission should go deeper into such areas. 

Regarding women’s rights and gender concerns, I should say the debate on the Land Act was violated by a number of men, including the ones in this House. Women often stood up and raised their issues but men would shut them down because they had bigger numbers than the women. I would like to recommend strongly that this commission helps us to do a lot of research and make analysis of findings which are available especially from NGOs and other government departments. They should also encourage equitable research say by academic institutions and NGOs so that social and economic issues are equitably represented.

Sensitisation on the rights of all citizens should also be spearheaded by this commission. This is because discrimination is an economic cost since it results into more social problems. Where there is discrimination, there are economic refugees, IDPs and street children. Therefore, this commission would facilitate government to give concrete research reports and recommendations to address these issues. I support the creation of the commission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUSEVENI: I just want to talk about the scenario you used for age on page 3. We should also look at the health status. If a mentally unstable person turned up for UPDF recruitment, how would you disqualify him? Here we are talking about equal opportunities, irrespective of health status. That also should be looked at in addition to age. I believe that many of us are happy with this Bill and we support it, but we are just pointing out these issues so that they are also scrutinised. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I would like to seek some clarification. It appears to me that we are mixing up affirmative action with equal opportunities. For example, in a parliamentary election in a constituency, there are seven candidates. Two of them are women, five are men and then the woman wins, having beaten members of the non-marginalised group. Then you move to another constituency with five candidates: one being a youth, who beats candidates who are from a non-marginalised group. But we are trying to cater for the marginalised groups while the others are busy being beaten by the same marginalised groups. How do we handle a situation like this?

Secondly, we have regions. Once a region or district is marginalised, many people are affected. I would have liked to see in this Bill equal treatment of regions and districts so that we do not restrict it to human beings. Once you marginalise a region, you have marginalised a great number of human beings. I thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I just want to clarify some small point because in my view, equal opportunities do not mean equal benefits. The former means you are subjected to a particular set of standard of criteria regardless of your background. You may be demented, but you should have a chance to compete. Let the criteria throw you out. You may not have the required qualifications but the criteria will throw you out. You are eligible to compete. So, it is something else that will throw you out but the right to compete should be guaranteed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.
 
5.44
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee on Equal Opportunities and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the anatomy on the draft Bill, which we presented to them. I thank my colleagues for the overwhelming support. The concerns and reasons you have given are justification for the creation of the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

Hon. Betty Amongi narrated the number of studies giving numerical evidence of marginalisation and yet there was no whistle blower, there was no one stop centre where this marginalisation concern could be taken. Now the Equal Opportunities Commission is the one stop centre where these concerns can be taken. 

When we talk about equal opportunities, we are referring to access to all who qualify. In a family, parents are at a different level. If you are promoting equal opportunities starting at the family level, the two parents should access equal opportunities first of all. And the children at their level as children, should also access equal opportunities. We have seen cases when resources are scarce, where girls are withdrawn from schools in favour of educating boys, where girls are married off at a tender age to raise money to take boys to school. This is the equal opportunities we are talking about. If there is no money, let there be collective suffering between the girls and the boys without discrimination. If there is money, let all of them enjoy it equally.

Mr Speaker, one Member suggested that there should be prioritisation according to vulnerability. This is going to be the work of the commission. It will be up to them to rate the vulnerability rather than us stating it in the law. Vulnerability is a situation, which keeps changing. You may find a region today with a lot of vulnerable people, for instance, children, or widows tomorrow being a different income category. So, I would suggest that we leave that out of the law.

Hon. Betty Ocan suggested that there should be performance indicators and provisions for removal of people who are not performers. Under Clause 6, this is provided for. There are stated reasons for vacating office. One of them is non-performance. 

On the age limit for the youth and inclusion of the elderly, I think we should leave some room for the appointing authority. I am sure he will also be mindful. He is not going to appoint some body who is 29 and a half and before he takes the oath, the 30th birthday falls. I am sure he is going to be very mindful of that, as he has always been.

Mr Speaker, one of the things this commission is going to address are the historical imbalances. What caused this marginalisation is the unfortunate history. It was the retrogressive cultures and mistakes of past governments, which never took the trouble to promote the marginalised people. Not until the advent of the NRM –(Interjections)- did the marginalised people have a voice? 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS BBUMBA: They had no seats in this Parliament! There was no single person who was elected on the basis of his disability to come to this Parliament, on the basis of gender to come to this parliament, on the basis of age to come to this parliament. So, this commission is going to examine all that and ensure that these imbalances are corrected. 

Under Clause 14, the modalities of how these people are going to use the commission to carry out their functions is well spelt out and this involves investigating and inquiring into certain areas on their own or based on information given, examining laws like it has been proposed. There will also be a clean certificate to all draft laws, policies to ensure that what happened in the past does not re-occur.

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the guidance. This Act, in areas where it seems to be open-ended, it will be subjected to the existing laws. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I once again beg that you support the Bill throughout the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Equal Opportunities Commission Bill, 2006” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION BILL, 2006 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the Bill has reached committee stage, but I think we deal with this next week. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m. when we shall sit as a committee to consider the Bill.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 December 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)
