Wednesday, 7 December 2011

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members. I would like to inform you that Busoga University fundraising will be held tomorrow Thursday, 8 December 2011. You are invited to come and participate in this fundraising. Among the dignitaries expected include: His Excellency the President, who will be the Chief host. We shall also have foreign dignitaries, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister of Kenya, Mr Raila Odinga, and many others will be coming to join the people of Busoga in this fundraising. Please come and support Busoga University in this effort.

Honourable members, I would like to tell you that the Parliamentary health week started on Monday, 5 December 2011, and will end on Thursday, 8 December 2011; that is tomorrow. You are urged to come and participate with your families. The activities are many and this is the second that Parliament is hosting. It is a matter of significance for Members, their families and the whole country. So, please take advantage of the remaining time to go and see what can be done.

This afternoon in the gallery, I have pupils from Lweza Primary School in Mukono Municipality. Please join me in welcoming them; they have come to observe and witness our proceedings.

Today, we have a heavy business load to finish and I crave your indulgence that we observe time strictly so that we can cover the magnitude of the business that we have. I will use my prerogative to make some adjustments on the Order Paper which was circulated. Immediately after item No.3, I will allow presentation of a petition of the farmers of Bugisu Cooperative Union; that petition will be presented by the hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai of Mbale Municipality, and of course the normal proceedings will go on.

First, let me thank the ministers for responding to questions that have been sent to them. I do not know when they were sent, but a response however late is good enough. So, I am moving forward to two other questions; the one for constitutional affairs on the issue of UPA, NRA, LRA wars and the issues resulting from that, which was asked by hon. Alice Alaso to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I will move that forward. 

I will also move another question to the Minister for Karamoja on the issue of inputs and other issues that are related to Karamoja. All these responses are ready and I do not see why we should defer them to another day. We should see how we can process all of them today. This is the way that we should do business; once questions are asked the ministers should respond promptly to them so that they become relevant and contribute to the whole process of Parliament performing its responsibilities.

2.44
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I am sure the House is aware of the findings of the Police about equipment that was found in some areas. On behalf of the Government, I would like to say that this matter was already being investigated even before it was made public. 

MR WADRI: I rise on a matter of procedure to what the Deputy Prime Minister is addressing us. The Prime Minister is talking in parables, which the Hansard may not be able to capture adequately. Since the parables that he is talking about seem to direct that the matter of such a grave nature needs to be captured and understood by us, the Deputy Prime Minister should be elaborate so that we know what he is talking about. He is talking about equipment and some places; we want the record of this House to be put right. What equipment is it and in what place has it been put? I see that procedural guidance.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I wish my colleagues allow me to complete my submission. I am talking about the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation equipment found on Kigulubya Hill in Masindi on the 5th of this Month. This issue has become contentious and I want, as a Government representative, to inform you that Government is aware and investigations have started. The fact that findings came from an investigation instituted by Government, we want the country to know, including Members of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Under our Rules of Procedure, it is prohibited for any Member of Parliament to refer to a matter in anticipation. This Parliament has not officially received any news of what is being prepared to be done. So, the Deputy Prime Minister is anticipating that something is coming; we have not seen that something coming. What are you talking about? Is it in order for you to focus on a matter which has not yet been officially tabled? Why don’t you give up on what you are talking about? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Leader of Government Business rose on matter of urgent public importance; that is how it comes before the subject matters provided for on the Order the Paper. I suppose he rose on that point, let me ask him: On what point do you rise? The honourable member is in the process of doing that; can we allow him to do that?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was going to say that Government has taken action and that is why this report has come out, but the investigation on the matter is still continuing and I am promising the House that we shall come with a comprehensive report next week.
I am talking on behalf of Government and I would appeal to colleagues to hold on until next week. I have said it here; if you did not hear then it is up to you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This honourable House should be taken seriously; people should not come here to report on what they dreamt about the previous night. Parliament has not yet received anything substantive on what you are articulating. Before the Deputy Prime Minister proceeds at all in any meaningful sense, can we know what you are talking about.  Do not report to us in parables; state the matter on the Floor of the House so that we know where to begin and where to end.

MR WADRI: Having heard from the Leader of Government Business, I believe he was addressing us on what we have personally and collectively seen in the print and electronic media relating to our own, the honourable Princess Kabakumba Matsiko, in whose radio station, it is alleged equipment purported to be property of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation was found.

According to the stories that we have seen in the print media, Police is said to have gone a step further with investigations and right now, the Prime Minister is telling us that investigations are continuing. There is prima-facie evidence as adduced by the Police.  Won’t it be proper like it is the case with a person who is holding a public office under investigation that the person steps aside such that investigating authorities can carry out their work without undue interference? Should that not be the procedure? This is the clarification I want to get from the Leader of Government Business.

Procedurally, would it be right to continue to have this type of investigation when the person being investigated is in office and can contact other Government agencies to kill evidence. Can he please clarify me on that?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I do not see any involvement or interference by the minister because the investigation has already started. The fact that this information has come out, that means that the investigation that I told you about earlier had started. So, there is no need to fear. I was saying that we are going to come up with a very comprehensive report after the investigations are over next week. I beg to report.

2.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I think there was no need for the Leader of Government Business to tell us about something which is urgent and he says that it needs one more week. That means that it ceases to be urgent. He would have waited until next week to come. So, I do not think that it was necessary. 

But if what he is saying is true and what we have seen in the papers is true, and you are aware that the minister they are talking about was the minister in charge of information and national guidance, she was guiding people. Maybe she was guiding them to steal; it would have been prudent for her, for national guidance purposes, to step aside. 

The Leader of Government Business should advise the minister, who was in charge of guidance, to step aside so that they can guide her better in the process. This is because the issue of theft of Government equipment while in office, is a very dangerous thing, and you have seen that the station manager has been arrested, yet the minister is busy walking around when she should have been arrested because she is the owner. Are we really fair to this country? A whole minister in charge of Kampala; how sure are we that tarmac is not going to be stolen? 

So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for a minister of the Presidency to be sitting in office with stolen property, and this property belongs to the people of Uganda. She is also called a princess. Don’t you think that it would be procedurally right to ask the princess to step aside for this one week as issues are dealt with, because the matter that we are dealing with is very serious?

MR KAGWERA: We are going in circles, because what the Deputy Leader of Government Business has given is not very clear about what Government is doing in the short-run; he is telling us what they are going to do in the medium and long terms. May we know as Parliament, what Government is doing right now, because out there the situation is bad; people are concerned. So, you cannot bring this issue here. I know that for some of us, it can cost us when we speak, but we are really going to speak on this matter.

MR MAGYEZI: The Deputy Prime Minister said that this was a matter of national importance and very urgent; we have taken it in that manner; that it is urgent. We have read what is in the papers. I would like to be straight on this matter. Mr Speaker, the minister concerned is here; would it not be fair to give her a minute or two to say something to this Parliament rather than keeping us waiting until next week or the other week. Can’t she be allowed to say something on this matter?
 
3.01
MR ROLAND MUGUME (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In this country, and even outside this country, people are crying with regard to what is happening on the issue of corruption. (Interjection) It is theft. Thank you very much. Of course, we have institutions in charge of curbing corruption, but I think they have been delaying and that is why the Deputy Prime Minister cannot tell us what exactly he wanted to tell this Parliament. So, I think right now as I speak, God is in charge. Our motto is “For God And My Country”. God is in charge and that is why we should not wait any longer because the issues of theft in this country are many and we are adding on more. Why should we add, is it business? 

We should discuss these issues, and I don’t think the honourable minister is in position to defend herself. We are still investigating. We want people who have information to give us this information so that we forge a way forward. 

But this matter of bringing an issue and you want somebody to defend it and tomorrow it is nowhere, to me, causes delay. Everybody wants to know what is happening, especially with regard to these issues of theft.

Our colleagues are in these portfolios not to serve themselves, but to serve Ugandans. But we are seeing that these people are not serving Ugandans; they are serving themselves. This is a whole minister in charge of information, now in charge of the Presidency; this is a minister who is now in KCCA to curb corruption. And now we are here – everybody is not talking – I think it is high time we got these people – and on top of that some people working for the radio station are already in. That means in Uganda we have the big fish and the small fish. This is the time that even the big fish go in so that we can start from there. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I’d been asked to rule on a procedural point. As long as you are still raising procedural matters, I will allow you, but if you want to make a contribution to a debate, then maybe you give me sometime so that I rule first. 
 
MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is about – first of all, the background to the problem –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the procedural point you would like to raise.

MR FUNGAROO: Is it not procedurally desired that the Leader of Government Business presents to us on paper what he is talking about so that in this statement we have the background and also the specific type of equipment and where it was taken from, and so that we can measure the progress of the investigation. What I am talking about is presenting to us on paper the background and the type of equipment. Is that not procedurally desired? Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To our leader of Government Business, for us in the party – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just raise the procedural point you would like to make.

MR RUHUNDA: From a procedural point of view - because we are being guided by the party and we are becoming extremely impatient about this delay. It is extremely urgent and that is why we think it is extremely important at this point in time, for you to pronounce yourself on this matter and of course to get our honourable minister to step aside as soon as immediately. (Applause)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Frontbench is supposed to be a bench of integrity, but there are allegations of theft. Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right to have a suspect on the Frontbench. (Laughter) I think it is important for us to make sure that the Frontbench is a bench of integrity. The suspect should come behind. I thank you. (Applause)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you. On a point of procedure, I thought the Leader of Government Business would come with a Police report and tell us that maybe there is no case against the minister or there is a prima facie case and he informs us of the actions the government has taken. At this point in time, I don’t think there was an urgent – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ruling on the matter? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUGABA: Is it procedurally right for him to make it an urgent issue when he has no facts at hand or facts to base on. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. While aware that I am new in Parliament, I am particular on the point that issues of theft are of an individual nature. In a situation like this, where the culprits are clearly mentioned, would it be procedurally right for the Leader of Government Business to come and present this as if it is an issue of Government? Wouldn’t it be very necessary that he implores the person mentioned, who is within his docket, to come and explain to this House now and here. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also rising on a procedural matter. Indeed, there is evidence, because these gadgets are already with the Police. But my procedural argument is about the Leader of Government Business. We have already received information that the registration certificate of this radio and documents associated with it are being tampered with. The Leader of Government Business is telling us to give him a week to see that the former Minister of Guidance can – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is raising a procedural point.

MR SSEWUNGU: I welcome it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are raising a procedural point, how can you take information. (Laughter) Let’s be orderly. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I want to be serious on this matter. We know how smart the honourable minister we are talking about is. And when you know that she was a minister of information, and the machines and gadgets we are talking about were for Radio Uganda or UBC, where she was working - she has all the capacity as a minister to play around with the documents which registered the radio station. More so, I want to tell the Prime Minister that there is a person I know of in life who – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, these are procedural matters, please.

MR SSEWUNGU: Actually, they are procedural matters. I have to make my point -(Laughter)- I am saying this because at one time, a thief was caught, but he did not have his hands on his shoulders because they had been cut off because of stealing. But the incident was that he stole a drum –(Interjection)– so, is it procedurally right to allow the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to take a week, when the investigations and the research about the theft are complete? 

MR YAGUMA: In our Rules of Procedure, if some allegations have been made against a Member, that Member must be given a fair hearing. I received a message on my phone from my Chief Whip that we should wait and it was not clear. Now that we have Members here and the allegations are being made against one of our colleagues who is here, we should not waste time. Let us give her a chance to tell us the truth. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me allow hon. Nambooze and I will rule on this matter and then we move forward. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Article 117 of our Constitution provides that ministers shall be individually accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries, and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet. For the hon. Leader of Government Business to stand here and start briefing us about the theft which occurred in Masindi, the impression I get is that he is trying to address us on a matter for which they are collectively responsible as ministers and that matter was decided upon in Cabinet. Would it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for people to come here and hold our Government collectively responsible for the actions of individuals? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have listened carefully to the procedural matters you have raised and our procedural issues are all contained in our Rules of Procedure. Let me state as follows, with honourable members listening carefully. 

The Leader of Government Business brought this matter under what, in our Rules of Procedure, is called urgent matters of public importance. It is within the right of any Member of Parliament, Government, Opposition, single Member or anybody to raise such a matter and the qualification for that - I stated this last week and let me state it again for the record - is that the matter is urgent and its state of urgency is understandable by the circumstances. 

The other qualification is that it is important and the third is that it is national. That is what qualifies a Member to bring matters under this particular procedure of our Rules of Procedure, and that is where the Leader of Government Business has come in at this time. 

As far as I remember, he said there have been press reports about things that have happened, which honourable members are privy to. They have read the press; they have listened to the radios and they know exactly what the honourable Deputy Leader of Government Business was stating. What he said is that this matter is urgent and that the government is concerned and there are even investigations going on. That is what he said and I am just trying to reflect so that we can move forward because some Members were not here. 

He said Government is carrying out investigations and he has asked – this is important - he has asked that as Government, they will be able to give a comprehensive report on this matter next week. If it were within my authority, I would say Tuesday, when Parliament resumes next week, so that they can give a comprehensive report on what has happened. 

He says investigations are still going on. So, is the Prime Minister in order, is he procedurally correct to present it the way he has presented it up to now and the discussions we have had so far? I think within the proceedings of our rules here, the honourable Leader of Government Business is perfectly in order to bring it the way he has brought it.

The second leg of the other matter that has been raised, can a Member who has been mentioned then be under duty to respond to some of the issues that have been mentioned? Yes, it is perfectly in order. I have always talked about the five fundamental rules of parliamentary procedure. The last one is that a Member of Parliament is not alone in terms of Parliament. 

The conduct of the Member reflects on the conduct of the House. So, should any issue be raised that affects the integrity of the Member, it puts the entire Assembly in disrepute. That is why the rules provide for statements of personal explanation because should there be negative press; should there be negative statements made against any honourable Member of Parliament, that statement is made against the whole House and the honourable member owes it to the House to give an explanation. 

We have not reached that stage yet, because if a Member felt that it was necessary at this time to make a statement, they would have come to Parliament and said, “Mr Speaker or the clerk that is responsible for drafting Order Papers, there have been matters in the press that I have put the reputation of Parliament through my conduct or lack of it, and I owe an explanation to the Members…” then the Member would be given an opportunity to do that, but we have not reached that stage. 

The stage we are at is whether the matter is important and urgent, for us to be addressed on it and briefed on what Government is doing, so that we can have a comprehensive discussion on the subject matter. I thought that is where we were. If this is where we are, is the request of the honourable Leader of Government Business acceptable to the House? Will it be proper for this House to be briefed because I am sure it involves people of internal affairs, who are representing the Police, and it involves the entire Government infrastructure. Would it be proper for this House to be given an opportunity and have access to a comprehensive report stating clearly what has happened for the benefit of this House, rather than this House receiving information that is not even there and then we debate on that basis? I am just trying to – the Speaker is still speaking. That is where we are. 

So, if the request of the Leader of Government Business is in order, then we could agree on a timeframe, but if the House thinks it is not in order, then we could move to the next step. As you said, the honourable minister is here; will she be comfortable to make a statement right now?  We would than qualify it to be under the Rules of Procedure because a Member’s statement is not subject to debate? That is why as the Speaker - I was not very eager as the Speaker, to take Parliament through a line, where debate would be blocked, because if a Member should rise and make a personal statement here, the rules bar us from debating the statement. Isn’t that correct? - I do not know - wait. 

Let me make this clear. I want to understand so that we can move collectively. If you allow the minister to make a statement - in which case I would use my prerogative under rule 22 to amend the Order Paper to allow for a statement from a Member of Parliament, he will not be making a statement as a minister - he will be making a statement as a Member of Parliament because that is a personal statement, and then we do not debate it because that will be the rule. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have elaborately guided us to make an informed decision. Right from the onset, the Leader of Government Business was clear. He said investigations have been going on for some time, in which case, therefore, the little that we have seen through the electronic and print media is as a result of the long time investigations. Yes. In which case, therefore, with Government machinery of operations, having everything at its finger tips and all institutions at its hand, any time, I believe Government is in possession of the full story, since this investigation has been going on for some time. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Information.”] Let me just finish this. 


Since this is an investigation that has been going on for some time I will imagine that even as we talk, the Leader of Government Business is in possession of the whole story. I want to believe so because this is something that has been investigated for some time. Now, for the Leader of Government Business to come here and say the matter is important and urgent, it has been under investigation for some time and he is asking for another additional one week, negates the urgency. It negates the urgency. (Applause)

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I propose the following. We have received the Prime Minister’s concern over this matter, and as a country, we do appreciate that this is a very important matter, which touches the soul and the skin of all the 34 million Ugandans in this country, because it involves us collectively. 

Therefore, through you, Mr Speaker, I will wish to request the Prime Minister - he is a well-facilitated institution; yes, he has all the secretaries, all the research assistants and the CID, and even if he rings them now, they will come to him running with all the data - that tomorrow he comes with a comprehensive report so that we can be able to be engaged in a detailed debate -(Interjections)- if there is no -(Interjections)- wait. I am saying this because I know Parliament sits from Tuesday to Thursday and if there is a change and tomorrow is not Thursday and it is a Friday, that will be a different matter - that the next time Parliament sits should be the day -(Interjections)– Okay, if it is again going to extend to a week, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has a lot of those facilities at his finger tips. He can even access those materials and we will not want to go into the technicalities of saying you should have elaborately come with such a thing. We would have understood his position so that we can engage ourselves in a detailed debate on this matter.

On the second point; we as a Parliament will be doing a disservice if we requested the honourable minister, who is at the centre of these allegations, to come up with a statement of personal explanation. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear. We will not get anything out of it. She will come and read and sit down and the Speaker will say, “Next item.” So, we will not be able to benefit.

Based on that, we would rather request the Leader of Government Business, who in his capacity as a Prime Minister, is the overall prefect of these ministers on the front bench, to come and give us that statement so that we can be able to proceed. And this should be done today. We are prepared to be here up to midnight tonight. (Applause) We are prepared. We want nothing but the truth. We want justice and truth and - not that the saying of DP comes into play, but that is the issue. We want nothing but the truth to be laid on Table. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think we should move forward? Hon. Fungaroo, please let us move forward on this issues. Now, a matter has been proposed. The issue is, let me ask the government side. Can you make a statement within today?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not asked you hon. Wadri. I have asked the honourable -(Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I have said here already in this House that it is unfair to make people act in panic -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No, I think my colleagues will not put me on pressure to act in panic and as such - last time I said I am a general and a general will not be made to panic. (Laughter) They do not like to hear that. So, what I want to propose now, is the idea of coming back with a comprehensive report from the government, which means that we shall come back with all the information you will be asking for. It was our initiative anyway as I said, and the little you have heard is also because of our investigations and, therefore, we ask you to bear with us so that next week, we give you a comprehensive report. We are making this statement because, if we keep quiet, the same honourables will say, “This Government; don’t you see?” The public will also not know what the position of the government is in as far as this matter is concerned. Hence, this information -(Mr Mpuuga rose_)- let me finish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says you let him finish, then you raise it, so that he is coordinated.

 LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Let me finish then you can clarify, because this is not the end of the world. We are not ending today. What I am saying is that Government must make its position clear and this is what I am doing. The government must make people -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members!      

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The public must know what our position is. By standing here, I am not defending anybody or any possible victim. I am not; I am stating the position of the government; that we are aware and we are investigating. The law will take its course after investigation. Tuesday is not far. So, Mr Speaker, I appeal to my colleagues that I am comfortable coming back with a comprehensive report on Tuesday and not today. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a clarification issue from the honourable member from Masaka.

MR MPUUGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Leader of Government Business is very simple. He is promising the House that he is going to come up with an explanation and I am only trying to seek from him the depth of the explanation he is going to make because there are two issues at hand -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said a report. 

MR MPUUGA: Yes, a report. There are two issues at hand. There is the issue of theft in which an individual has been implicated. 

Two, the additional theft of UBC equipment, other than the mentioned, including land, analogue studios, archive material - are you going to give us all that detail or just simply on this one single matter? Because if you say you are going to come up with a report, what is the extent or depth of your report, well aware that our Committee on the Presidency is under mandate to report on these matters? Unfortunately, my chairman had for some time played a disappearing act and we had not really looked into these matters? So, I am seeking clarification on the depth of the nature of the report. (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague is that as far as I understand this matter that is before us, an individual is alleged or accused in this matter in which Government actually has an interest. They are accusing a person before Government for having taken property, which belongs to Government. 

So, I do not seem to understand how Government is going to give clarification or an explanation on an individual in which it has conflict of interest as well. In my view, the information I want to give that honourable colleague is that we need Government to be very clear. We need an explanation from an individual, but also Government, in this instance, is trying to claim responsibility and this is very bad for us as a government. Why are you taking responsibility for an individual’s issue?

MR MPUUGA: I thank you, honourable colleague, for the information and I believe it is very clear to the honourable Prime Minister that it is going to be very difficult for you to come here and purport to be giving a report about the theft in UBC without necessarily engaging in conflict of interest as Government. You need to clearly indicate the boundary of your report before this House. I thank you.

3.33
MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to invite all the honourable members to realise that whether it is this sitting or the coming sitting of Parliament, the person or the honourable member on whom allegations are being levied, will have to present a personal statement. That is why I wanted us to agree with the Speaker that in any jurisdiction of carrying out the principles of natural justice, the issue of a fair hearing is important.

That is why I also still agree with the Speaker that in this matter, let hon. Kabakumba Masiko come out and give - you could make an amendment on the Order Paper and she presents her personal statement so that she is heard. The decision to debate, whether today or in the next sitting, will arise and we shall debate this issue soberly. But I want to state clearly that whatever the hon. Kabakumba Masiko is alleged to have done was within her individual capacity as a person or as a minister, and it has never been Government position - I think the government position has been clear that they are carrying out investigations. 

That means that Government is investigating one of its citizens, who was the minister in charge, and who is a minister now, on allegations of illegally possessing or theft of property of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. But the guiding principle of natural justice should be like you said. It is a matter of urgency that we should also give her chance, as urgent means, to present her side of the story to the public, because it is within national interest for the entire public to know her side of the story, then we can go on with the debate, whether it is in this sitting or the next one, because it will not affect our side.

3.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am trying to contextualise the response of Government so that when the Leader of Government Business comes up next week or tomorrow morning, I will probably understand the context. This is what I am trying to figure out. 

When an individual is suspected or alleged to have done something wrong, does it mean that every time, Government has to come on this Floor and defend? That they have to come and defend the head teacher who steals money in my village? Is that the position that Government is adopting? Is it, therefore, the policy of Government, because they have a collective obligation when it comes to implementation of Government policy? 

I want to understand that now they have a collective responsibility in defending thieves. Is it going to be collective responsibility? The Member is here. Last time when we discussed issues of oil, the hon. Amama Mbabazi was taken to task as an individual to get up and tell us what his position was. Hon. Kuteesa did the same and the rest of the people. The minister is here. Why does Government want to begin a policy of collectively defending individuals? It is wrong and not acceptable. 

The allegations and the fears we have are fears of abuse of office. When we approve these ministers, we give them responsibility for certain offices. When they abuse them, we tackle them as individuals. Therefore, Government must stop shielding suspects, otherwise then the entire Government becomes suspicious. So, the sooner you come out of it, the better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sat and pondered within myself what the honourable Deputy Prime Minister said about investigations having been ongoing for a long time. If it is true that this investigation was on for quite some time and the honourable minister was also in the office, don’t you think that it is a problem to those investigating the honourable minister?

Secondly, when the station manager is right now behind bars and the real owner of the radio station is just free, are we being fair to Ugandans when we allow this to continue? In the Eighth Parliament, censorship of a minister was completely impossible. Even in the Ninth Parliament, I see that trend. One time a minister told me that in the Sixth Parliament, when they censured three ministers, it was a mistake they had made and that they should have defended and protected those ministers. 

Is it really true that we forget about the people who sent us here to work for them and work for our stomachs instead? Was the guidance for the country or was it for the honourable minister to steal from public resources? 

In school, if you steal, you are not given a chance to defend yourself, but you are dismissed. It is only through suspension that you can actually be allowed to defend yourself or put your name in the black book; to forgive you or you go for suspension. But when you steal, you are dismissed immediately. So, right now, for the honourable minister to have stolen from the ministry where she was in charge, is a shame. And it is a shame for us women when our women are really suffering at the grassroots without a lot of facilities and we encourage this to go on. Go to the health centres, you will find that we have no facilities -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member -

MS AOL: So, we must really be ashamed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I stated earlier within our Rules of Procedure how we needed to proceed. There are two issues now. One, is what we do with the request of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; and two, what we do with the request of the Members that the hon. Kabakumba makes a personal statement. Those are two issues and we need to resolve the issue of the Prime Minister then I will see how to handle the statement of hon. Kabakumba. I am moving to resolve that issue.

3.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I think the government is serious; it does not condone corruption or theft - zero tolerance. And I saw how the Prime Minister was talking. He was under pains, wanting to take collective responsibility, but he discovered he was making a mistake.

Mr Speaker, we want to help Government. In the PAC report of 2007, it is clearly reported that UBC equipment was stolen. In the report of 2005/2006, it was reported that radios worth $60 million, which were imported for the programme for AIDS under the World Bank health project were stolen under UBC. They were transferred to UBC and stolen. You remember? You go and look at those reports. It is true and that is why I want to give that information.

The minister - by then there was the UBC board and .............he was chased by the minister for misappropriation of properties of UBC. In fact, the minister forgot to chase herself at that time because that was an appropriate time when she herself got involved and she should have chased herself. In Mbale, the transmitter which was there was also stolen and I know this very well.

Mr Speaker, you are aware nowadays that if you walk to work, you will be charged with treason. Shortly and because of walking to work, you are charged and you are in Luzira just on the suspicion that you are going to commit a crime. In this case, there is evidence that UBC equipment was stolen and we are still looking for them. That was under the time of the minister in charge. The minister of the day has been found with stolen property. The moment you are got with stolen property, you are a thief, unless you can confirm -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I was trying to - I thought you were going to help me on the two issues I raised. Please help me on those two issues and then we move forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is where I am coming from and I am going to help you to resolve -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving me this opportunity to give you this very important information.

The information I want to give to the LOP is that here I hold a certified copy of a resolution from the Kings Broadcasting Services, Voice of Bunyoro, which was filed with the Registrar of Companies. This resolution, if I may read it - it is a brief one. It says that a meeting -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, please. I stated two issues that we needed guidance on. Information will come in the course of - What I requested and it was clear - two issues. What do we do with the Prime Minister’s request? And two, I see how to handle the request that the honourable member makes a statement of personal explanation. I thought you were helping me along those lines. That information is not helping me to make this decision. 

Hon. Alaso, the information you are giving hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not helpful to me, to make my decision. Please, let hon. Nandala-Mafabi help me if he is going to because if he is not going to, then I am going to make the decision as Speaker, as simple as that. Please, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, help me on this issue. What do we do with the Prime Minister’s request? Because that is what is before us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the government is crying that their equipment is lost and I know that they would not want to wait any further, and that is why they have instituted Police and they are going to work. We believe Police can continue with the investigations. Whether it takes years, you follow up with Police. That is what we want the Prime Minister to do. You go and follow up with the Police that they conclude quickly.

In this matter, we have identified according to the reports, the so-called culprits. If it was hon. Migereko - and because he was not in charge of information - I would have kept quiet; that we can wait. But this was a minister in charge of the sector of guidance and information. 

So, Mr Prime Minister, you can take a year to bring your report. For now, what we want is to allow the honourable minister, who is here, to come and make her personal statement. After that, maybe she can tell us that she has resigned. She could even be willing to help us move because the matter is very serious; somebody stealing radio equipment for HIV/AIDS for a $60 million project? How can we be quiet here and when we approved it in Parliament? 

So, Mr Speaker, that can be done. For the Prime Minister, you are free; you can wait for your report. Let the minister report, but for us we believe that from there, we can take it to the next level.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the situation seems to be like this. That on the request of the Leader of Government Business, that he presents a comprehensive report on this subject on Tuesday; it does not seem that that House is interested in that. The House is not interested in a statement from the Prime Minister. It is not. Well, the House is not interested, but it will be - if the House is not interested, it will still be incumbent - Order! If the House is not interested then it will still be up to the government, if it feels it is necessary, to make that report; to make a request to come and make that report. Is that clear? That is clear. 

So, the House seems to say that they are not going to wait for your report. If you feel like you want to give a report to this House, then you can come when you are ready. Even next week on Tuesday, you can come and give that report. So, that resolves that matter.

The issue that is now outstanding is the issue of requiring the minister and honourable member to make a statement as a Member making a statement for personal explanation, which now brings me under my prerogative to move under rule 22 to alter the Order Paper to allow the honourable member make a statement of personal explanation under rule 22(j) of our Rules of Procedure. Hon. Kabakumba Princess Masiko, you have the Floor to make your statement of personal explanation, which by our rules does not attract debate. Proceed.

3.50
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I was equally shocked and dismayed by the allegations of theft of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation property, specifically a mast and a transmitter, which were made against me in my absence. It has been reported in various media that several Uganda Broadcasting Corporation properties were recovered from Kings Broadcasting Services (KBS) radio station. I wish to respond to the above mentioned allegations as follows: 

There was no UBC mast that I stole for use by KBS as alleged. Stealing a mast, for those who know, would involve dismantling, transportation and installation. All these cannot go unnoticed. I would like to disassociate myself from the propaganda of stealing a mast or any UBC property. To the contrary, KBS was authorised by UBC to access the UBC mast at Kigulya Hill in Masindi District and install its equipment there. This was way back before I became Minister of Information and National Guidance. 

Mr Speaker, I have a letter which I want to lay on Table, that was written to the district information officer and reference was, “Access to UBC – Kigulya Station”. It reads: 

“M/s Kings Broadcasting Services applied for use of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation technical facilities at Kigulya Transmitting Station in Masindi. Please allow them to access the station to enable them carry out the installation while we process the application. 

Mr James Lubowa, UBC PF No.1005, is to carry out the installations on behalf of UBC and Kings Broadcasting Services will pay UBC for the installation works.” This is dated 7 August 2007. It continues: “Please note: (i) Installation of KBS transmitter is to be carried out in the generator room and not in the room where the UBC transmitters are accommodated. (ii) Installation of the KBS antennae system should be on the taller tower but below the UBC FM antennae.” It was signed by Godfrey N. Luggya, the Operations Manager, and I lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it again, honourable minister?

MS KABAKUMBA: It is 7 August 2007.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And what is the subject matter?

MS KABAKUMBA: It is: “Access to UBC – Kigulya Station”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that as such. Is it a photocopy? 

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker. It is not illegal for UBC to carry other radio stations. Indeed, it has on various instances carried many private radios and televisions.

Allegations that Police recovered UBC equipment from Kings Broadcasting Services studio cannot be true. What is true is that Police picked equipment including a transmitter, a generator and a studio transmission link from a UBC house on Kigulya Hill. The transmitter was and is still in the custody of UBC and Police. Kigulya Hill is more than 10 kilometres from Masindi Town where Kings Broadcasting Services studios are located. I wish to state that Kings Broadcasting Services studios are located on Percee Street in Masindi Town in a building privately owned and independent of UBC. Police and any lawful organisations are free to go and search the studios. There is nothing to hide completely. 

Mr Speaker, some time back, I was approached by the directors of KBS – that was about 2008 - to acquire interest in the radio station, long before I was or even knew I would be Minister of Information and National Guidance. I, therefore, wish to clarify that I have not been involved in the day-to-day running of KBS because we agreed with the directors that I should not be involved. Actually, when I was appointed a minister, I wanted to withdraw my directorship from KBS, but after consultations I was told that if I declared my interests, I did not have to. 

It should be noted that the law makes a distinction between the shareholders, the management of a company and the company itself. There seems to be a deliberate attempt to fuse the company, shareholders and management into the person of Princess Kabakumba Masiko, which is wrong. Indeed, the Kings Broadcasting Services manager, who runs this radio station, has been at the CID headquarters and Special Investigations Unit at Naguru to record statements with Police. Let us give Police the opportunity to conclude their investigations. 

It is unfortunate that my hands-off involvement has led to the challenges that I find myself in now, and a radio I am associated with found itself in this mess. I have never used my office for any personal gain. The radios and equipment that hon. Nandala is referring to were there even before I joined that ministry. Moreover, they have been a subject of investigation both by PAC and IGG. It would be interesting - because hon. Nandala was chairing that committee at that time – for him to bring a report concerning the radios that had been imported by the Ministry of Health and the different aspects that have been missing. 

It is true that we have had challenges with UBC and that is why the President in May this year instituted an investigation, which is still on-going. I am here and ready to cooperate with all agencies of Government because I am extremely interested in getting to the bottom of this issue. Thank you. For God and my country! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF THE TOBACCO FARMERS IN BUGANGAIZI WEST CONSTITUENCY IN KIBAALE DISTRICT

4.01
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I beg to move under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. I beg to present a petition on behalf of the tobacco farmers in Bugangaizi West, who sold their tobacco leaf to a company called Continental Tobacco Uganda in the months of July, August and September, and since then, they have made several demands to the company but the company has failed to pay for their tobacco leaf.

Because of this failure to pay them, the farmers are failing to raise money for fees and other basic needs, and also to service loans they acquired from the micro-finance organisations. They pray that this Parliament helps them to recover their money from Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited. I beg to lay this petition on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the petition be captured as such. Honourable member, did you state the prayer? Thank you very much. The petition is hereby referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling within the framework of our Rules of Procedure, and report back to Parliament so that we can take a decision on this matter.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF THE FARMERS OF BUGISU COOPERATIVE UNION

4.04
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I take the Floor to present a petition on behalf of the farmers of Bugisu Cooperative Union.

Background

The Bagisu have been producing coffee since 1900, but have been subjected to a policy of control, coercion and exploitation for many years. This exploitation has been echoed by many scholars; one of them is an American called Steven Banker in a book called Peasants against the State: The politics of market control in Bugisu, Uganda 1900-1983. 

This book details how at every stage, both the colonial and post-colonial state tries to control the production, marketing and management of Bugisu Cooperative Union.

The law

The laws governing cooperative unions have been amended from time to time. They were amended in 1946 and in 1992 when the current Cooperative Act was enacted. The last legislation, which was passed in 1992, was under the NRM Government, but has some basic colonial objectives to control peasants from producing and marketing the crop on easy access for the revenues of Bugisu Cooperative Union. This has been the centre piece of conflict between the government and the farmers of Bugisu. This interference is done regardless of the liberalisation and privatisation policies pursued since the 1980s.

Elders’ Forum

When a number of elders, who are members of the Bugisu Cooperative Union, saw that the Bugisu Cooperative Union was being mismanaged, they formed what they called Elders’ Forum. The purpose of the Elders’ Forum was to look at how Bugisu Cooperative Union was being handled. When they found out that the management was mishandling the assets of Bugisu Cooperative Union - they sold off most of the assets, sold off the land and embezzled the funds - the elders decided to vote out the management of that time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when I allowed this petition to be presented, I did not look at the text and it has a huge background. Normally, petitions have preambles, which are recitals about the situations existing.

You state the prayer, what you want Parliament to do, and then it is forwarded to the committee so that the committee handles the details and comes back to Parliament with a more comprehensive coverage of the subject. The way you are going honourable member, I might have to ask you to give a summary of what would be the background and then state the prayer. What do you want Parliament to do about this situation so that we can move forward from there?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bugisu Cooperative Union is a very important organ and it is the only surviving cooperative union in Uganda. All cooperative unions, including Banyankole Kweterena, East Mengo, West Mengo, West Nile, are not functioning. This is the only union that is surviving and that is why members of Bugisu Cooperative Union made this petition against Government, and are asking Government to come to their rescue.

The leadership in this country have misunderstood what Bugisu Cooperative Union does and they have a view that it is used by the Opposition to fight Government. This is one of the main reasons why Bugisu Cooperative Union has been closed and the Minister of Cooperatives has failed up to now to call a meeting – moreover, the Umukuka of the Bamasaba agreed with His Excellency the President, that there would be an international forensic audit carried out by an international firm. This was agreed on but to-date, the minister has failed, through the commissioner for cooperatives, to cause this audit and call for an annual general meeting. 

Therefore, the farmers have come to this Parliament to appeal in a prayer, which I am going to read: 

•	That this House prevails against the minister to re-instate the board and management that was duly chosen by the farmers in 2008.

•	To set up a special committee of Parliament to review the Cooperative Societies Act of 1992 as amended, to enable cooperative societies to operate efficiently. The law should be brought before Parliament for re-legislation. 

•	To hold public hearings on the state of cooperatives in the country in order to restore the cooperative unions that were closed. That will help in rejuvenating the economy of this country. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the Hansard capture it as such and it is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling within the framework of our Rules of Procedure, and the committee should report to this House within that framework so that the House can take a decision on that petition to help the people of Bugisu Cooperative Union. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I	THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS GUIDELINES

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, you are aware that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act was passed by this Parliament and it has been assented to by His Excellency the President and gazetted. But Section 52 of the Amended Act enjoins the minister on recommendation of the authority and approval of Parliament, to issue regulations for better carrying out of the objectives and functions of this Act. 

In accordance with that command of the law, I am pleased to present on the Table of Parliament, the PPDA regulations 2011, in line with Section 52 of the PPDA amended Act, and seek approval of Parliament to issue the PPDA amended regulations 2011, for better carrying out of the objectives and functions of the Act. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Let the Hansard capture it as such. 


II	KASESE DISTRICT POVERTY REDUCTION PROGRAM (KDPRP) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER, 2010

4.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor to lay Kasese District Poverty Reduction Program (KDPRP) Financial Statement for the year ended 31 December 2010, in accordance with Article 163(4) of the Constitution and here with audited financial statements of the above mentioned project with a report and opinion of the Auditor General. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Let the Hansard capture it as such.

III	CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN UGANDA (EMCAB UGANDA) UGA/085 PROJECT, FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 48 MONTH PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2009

4.16
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report on Capacity Building for Environmental Management in Uganda (EMCAB Uganda) UGA/085 project, financial statements for the 48 months period ended 31 December, 2009. 

In accordance with Article 163(4) of the Constitution, here with audited financial statements of capacity building for the Environmental Management in Uganda (EMCAB Uganda) project financial statements for the 48 months period ended 31 December, 2009 together with the report of the Auditor General and his opinion thereon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you; let the Hansard capture it as such. 

PRESENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY CALENDAR FOR THE 1ST SESSION OF THE 9TH PARLIAMENT

MR BAKKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson has been around and he was prepared to present the calendar. So, I propose that we proceed as I look around for him. He can come in after – (Interjections)– he was around and he came in prepared.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We stand over that item. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

4.19
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor to present the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic Uganda –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I understood from our rules that the Government side sits over there and all those not on Government side sit on this side. May I know how it comes that the Chairman of the Committee on Rules is across on the other side? I would like to invite the chairman to come and use the microphone on this side because this is where he belongs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the honourable chairman needed to use the dispatch box where he can deliver properly. He has chosen where he can conveniently do it from -(Applause)– proceed, honourable Chairman. 

MR ODOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. From the onset, I would wish to state that the report has a number of mistakes for which we apologise as a committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking of typographical mistakes or –

MR ODOI: I mean typographical mistakes. Mr Speaker, allow me to present to this august House the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the review of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Article 94(1) of the Constitution – Mr Speaker, the phrase of the Constitution is missing – gives Parliament the power to make Rules of Procedure to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees. 

It was in accordance with the above Article that Parliament made its Rules of Procedure wherein the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline was created under Rule 149. The committee is mandated to review the rules from time to time.

Rule 149(1) provides: “It shall be the duty of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline by the order of the House to”- and in particular we make reference to 

“(c) to review these rules from time to time and make such recommendations to the House for amendment as the committee considers necessary for the satisfactory functioning and efficient transactions of the business of the House and its committees;

(d) to examine and advise the House on amendments proposed to these rules, by Members or other committees of the House; and  

(e) to carry out such other functions as are conferred by these rules or as the House may assign it.”

It is on the basis of the foregoing that the committee wishes to proceed and report. 

The methodology used in this research

In coming up with the report, the committee:

(1)	 Scrutinised and made reference to the 	 relevant laws, the current Rules of Procedure, the relevant court rulings on this matter, and practices in other parliaments, mainly in the Commonwealth jurisdictions.

(2) Considered:

i. 	Proposals from the Rt Hon. Speaker;
ii. 	Report on the rules from the commissioners; 
iii. 	Report on the proposed amendments in the rules by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline of the Eighth Parliament;
iv. 	Extracts of Members’ proposals on the rules from the Hansard; and
v) 	Proposals from the Clerk and staff of Parliament.

(3) 	Met and received memoranda from Members of Parliament and stakeholders including: 

i. 	Leader of the Opposition;
ii. 	UPDF representative;
iii. 	Representatives of Independent Members of Parliament;
iv. 	Chairperson of PAC;
v. 	Chairperson of COSASE;
vi. 	Chairperson, Committee on Government Assurances; 
vii. 	Chairperson, Committee on ICT;
viii. 	UWOPA;
ix. 	UPC Whip; 
x 	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya;
xi. 	Hon. David Bahati;
xii. 	Hon. Alex Ndeezi;
xii. 	Hon. Mathias Kasamba;
xiv. 	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba;
xv. 	Uganda Law Society; and
xvi. 	Parliamentary Press Association. 

The committee also undertook a benchmarking exercise to the National Assembly of Kenya.

Consideration of the proposals, observations and recommendations 

The committee critically considered a number of proposals that were brought to our attention and made observations and recommendations on them. There are a number of amendments the committee proposes to the rules. The proposed amendments have been deeply-thought through by the committee and are intended to achieve the following:

i. Efficiency and effectiveness 

The new proposals are aimed at making this House more efficient and effective in the use of available time and resources.

ii. Transparency

In the new proposals, the committee attempts to put in place measures to make Parliament more transparent. The proposals in this direction include, among others, making all committee meetings open to the public and press, and subjecting all political offices within Parliament to elections. 

iii. Accountability 

The committee’s proposed amendments will also have the effect of making Members, the leadership of the House and its committees, parliamentary delegations, Members of EALA and PAP, more accountable to Parliament. In this regard, the committee proposes to provide for regular reporting. 

iii. Autonomy of the House 

A number of amendments proposed are intended to enhance the autonomy of the House and nurture the principle of separation of powers. Along this line, the committee proposes that determination of Members and leadership to serve in elective offices reverts to the House and/or the House committees. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to report in detail the proposals that the committee received, the committee’s observations and recommendations on the same.

Speakers’ Panel 

The committee received and considered a proposal to establish a Speakers’ Panel in the rules. The purpose of the panel is to have a set of Members in this House to preside over the House in the absence of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, and to represent the Speaker and Deputy Speaker whenever required to.

The committee carried out research on this issue and found that similar panels exist in some parliaments like Kenya, Malawi, Zambia and the Philippines.

In the National Assembly of Kenya, the Constitution and Standing Orders provide for the Speakers’ Panel. The Speaker, at the start of every Parliament, nominates a panel of not less than four Members as Assistant Speakers. Any of the Assistant Speakers may, upon the request of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, chair the House or the Committee of the Whole House and Committee of Supply. 

The alternative view on this matter is that the existing Parliamentary Commission dissolves itself into a Speakers’ Panel to serve the purpose. The four backbench Members of the Commission can constitute themselves into a Speakers’ Panel. If this proposal is accepted, then Rule 6(1) will have to be amended to provide for chairing by a Member of the panel. Consequential amendments will also have to be made to Rule 6. There will also be need to provide for a prescribed oath of a Member of the panel. 

The committee recommends that the House approves the first option of nomination from among the backbench Members other than the Commissioners, with the approval of the House, to constitute a Speakers’ Panel.

Deputy Leader of the Opposition 

The committee received and considered a proposal to create the Office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. The committee was informed that business in Parliament should not stop as a result of the absence of the Leader of the Opposition. The committee recommends that the rules be amended to provide for the office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.

Designation to serve on the Parliamentary Commission 

The committee received and considered a proposal regarding designation of Members to serve on the Parliamentary Commission. It was brought to the committee’s attention that under the current rules, there was a danger of the party with superior numerical strength in the Opposition, taking up all the slots reserved for the Opposition on the Commission, in total disregard of other parties in the Opposition.

A remedy was proposed that at least one Member of the Commission be from a party in the Opposition other than the one with the greatest numerical strength. The party with the greatest numerical strength in the Opposition would automatically be represented on the Commission by the Leader of the Opposition. It was strongly argued that this was necessary to curtail the Leader of the Opposition from designating a Member of his or her own party to the Commission. This also checks the possibility of a single party in the Opposition from dominating representation to the Commission. 

In the spirit of fair distribution of the available positions to various parties/organisations represented in the House, the committee finds logic in this submission.

The committee recommends amendment to Rule 10 to provide for fair distribution of the available positions to the Opposition parties/organisations represented in the House.    

Election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) - Rule 11

The committee took note of the concerns that were raised by the Constitutional Court in Jacob Oulanya - not the Speaker then - v.  Attorney General, Constitutional Petition No.28 of 2006 wherein Rule 11(1), Appendix B (3), (10), and (11) were declared inconsistent with Articles 29(1)(e), 21(1) and (2), and 72 (4) and (5) of the Constitution, and to that extent declared null and void.

Justice Mpagi Bahigeine in the lead judgment thus stated: “Rule 11(1) Part II, rule 3 provides that: ‘Elected members of the EALA representing Uganda shall be nominated by the parties or organizations represented in the House on the basis of proportional party membership, taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties or organisations and gender.” This clearly leaves out the ‘other shades of opinions….’ The argument of numerical strength is also anomalous and prejudicial against the Independents, who numbered 37 in the House like FDC, which similarly numbered 37, and was qualified to elect, whereas Independents could not. The direct and inevitable consequence of Appendix B, Rule 11(1) is to impose a restriction on the exercise by the Independents of their right to participate in and contest for any elective office as guaranteed under Article 72(4) and (5).

This situation is tantamount to unequivocal discrimination against the Independents. They are undoubtedly denied equal protection of the law, which contravenes Article 21.”

Mr Speaker, Article 50 of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community provides thus: “The National Assembly of each partner state shall elect, not from amongst its members of the Assembly, members who shall represent as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the national assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in the partner states, in accordance with such procedure as a national assembly of each partner state may determine.”

The committee recommends that Rule 11 and Appendix B be amended to conform to Articles 29(1)(e), 21(1) and (2), and 72 (4) and (5) of the Constitution of Uganda, the Constitutional Court Ruling and Article 50 of the Treaty establishing the East African Community.

Relationship between national parliaments and East African Legislative Assembly (EALA)

The committee received a proposal to establish a reporting mechanism between EALA and Parliament in the rules. This proposal was scrutinised, but in the opinion of the committee, the current provision is adequate, and only needs to be enforced and/or implemented. 

In addition to the provisions of Rule 11(2) and Appendix C, Article 49(2)(a) of the Treaty establishing the East African Community provides that the East African Legislative Assembly shall liaise with the national assemblies of the partner states on matters relating to the community.  

Indeed, there exists a working framework between EALA and the national parliaments through the Inter-parliamentary Relations Seminars also known as the Nanyuki Series, which take place on an annual basis, to discuss a wide range of affairs concerning the community. 

The Nanyuki Series brings together a substantial number of Members of Parliament from partner states, and our Parliament sends up to 40 Members to attend them every year. Our delegations to Nanyuki are obliged to report back to this House, the proceedings and outcomes of these series. By so doing, the House is kept up-to-date with the progress of the EAC integration. 

The committee recommends that the rules and the treaty be implemented and/or enforced as they are.

Provision for deputy chief whip, deputy opposition whip and assistant whips under Rule 13

The committee received and considered the proposal to provide for deputy chief whip, deputy opposition whip and assistant whips under the rules. The deputy chief whip will deputize the chief whip as and when the need arises.  

For efficient mobilization of Members, it is further proposed that the rules should provide for assistant whips for every 50 Members of Parliament. The whips will ensure attendance of Members and their participation in the debates, which will greatly improve the performance of the House and the attainment of quorum.  

The committee recommends that the deputy chief whip, deputy opposition whip and assistant whips be provided for in the rules for every 50 Members of the House or such numbers as the House deems necessary.

Presentation of papers by the Leader of the Opposition and shadow ministers

The committee received a proposal to provide for presentation of papers by, among others, the Leader of the Opposition and shadow ministers. The committee critically considered this proposal and has the following observations to make:

i)	The papers envisaged in rules 22(1) and 28, are those that are required to be laid by law or by command of the House. Such papers include: The Report of the Auditor-General; Report from the Human Rights Commission; the Report of the Inspector General of Government; Preliminary Draft Estimates; Draft Estimates and Regulations.

ii)	The other papers are by a way of command of the House where instructions are given that certain documents be laid before the House, or when the Executive undertakes to avail certain information in the House.

The committee does not find it necessary to amend the rules to provide for laying of papers by the Leader of the Opposition or the shadow ministers under rules 22(1) and 28.

Contempt of Parliament or breach of privileges

The committee received and considered a proposal to define Contempt of Parliament and/or breach of privilege of Parliament.  The committee also received proposals to particularize the ingredients of contempt of Parliament and breach of privileges of Parliament and to provide sanctions for the same.

The committee noted that the provisions in the rules in regard to contempt of Parliament and/or breach of privilege of Parliament are inadequate and recommends that offences or omissions, which constitute contempt or breach of privileges of Parliament, be provided for in the rules.

The Subjudice Rule under Rule 60:

The committee considered the Subjudice principle and noted that Rule 60 does not provide the extent and limits of what amounts to Subjudice. The committee observed that the rule does not provide an exhaustive definition of what Subjudice is, in regard to criminal and civil matters.  It is important that the rules provide, in a very unequivocal manner, for the rule on Subjudice to avoid actions that would offend or breach the Constitution. The committee recommends that the rules should provide for when the question of Subjudice should arise in criminal and civil proceedings.

Votes of censure and removal from office

The committee considered rules 90, 91, 92, 93, 94 and95, which provide for removal of the President, Speaker and Deputy Speaker, ministers and commissioners, respectively. But the committee observes that under these rules, no mention is made of the removal of the Vice President and Prime Minister.

The Committee recommends that the procedure for the removal of the Vice President and Prime Minister from office be provided for in the rules.

Certificate of Financial Implications under Rule 102

The committee received and considered a proposal that Rule 102 be amended to remove the requirement for a certificate of financial implications on Private Members’ Bills. It was also proposed that discretion be given to the Speaker to determine whether or not a Private Members’ Bill offends the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution.

The rationale of the proposal was that Article 94(4) enjoins Parliament to make provisions that include the right for Members to introduce private Bills.

The committee found merit in the proposal, and recommends that the rule be amended.

Committee on Appointments under Rules 139 and 144

The committee received submissions in respect to rules 139(2) and 144. It was argued that the process of approving appointments of persons into public offices should not be hidden from the public and Parliament. The practice in democratically elected parliaments is that, parliamentary business both in the House and committees is open to the public and is not done in camera. 

The need for the public to follow the scrutiny of persons intending to occupy public offices cannot be overemphasised. It can only be in circumstances where the security of the state may be compromised that committees may sit in camera. 

Secondly, Rule 144, in its current form, erodes the powers of Parliament to express itself on appointments that require parliamentary approval. The rule provides: 

“144. Committee on Appointments to report to the House - The Chairperson of the Committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.”

The powers to approve appointments are provided for, among others, Mr Speaker, in Article 113 of the Constitution. There is also a well laid out procedure on how Parliament pronounces itself on matters before it, and this should be upheld and applied uniformly all the time, for all appointments that require parliamentary approval.

The Office of the Vice President and that of the Prime Minister are a subject of debate by the House and the House pronounces itself on these appointments. There is, therefore, no rationale in taking the approval process of lower offices, like ministers and other appointees, out of the realm of the whole House.

The committee recommends that rules 139(2) and 144 be accordingly amended to allow the proceedings of the Appointments Committee to be open to the public and to allow debate on the report of the committee by the whole House.

Functions of the Appointments Committee

The committee received proposals that the Appointments Committee be given additional functions to include:

i.	Examine the extent to which presidential appointments comply with Objective II(iv) of the Constitution, which provides that: “The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country” and Objective VI which provides that, “The state shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of the marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies.”

ii.	Generate recommendations for the attention of the appointing authority to address any imbalances identified in (i) above.

This proposal stems from the observation that despite Government’s stated commitment to address regional imbalance in appointments, allegations of imbalances and marginalisation continue to surface. This calls for an institutional framework within which Parliament can examine such allegations and recommend to the appointing authority how best to address these concerns, if any, and if at all they occur.
 
It was further observed that the appointing authority has not been able to satisfactorily operationalise Objective VI in respect to certain groups mentioned in the Constitution. Parliament’s input in the report on appointments by way of recommendations would help in putting across the proposals of Parliament, to address some of these issues.

The committee finds this proposal justifiable and recommends that these functions be added to the Committee on Appointments, to ensure that appointments conform to the standard envisaged by our Constitution.

It was also proposed that the committee be mandated to assess the performance of appointees approved by Parliament. Under this added mandate, the committee would be required to deliver to Parliament a report providing the performance assessments with recommendations to His Excellency the President for further action. This would empower Parliament to carry out the oversight function of competences of the human resources.

The committee considered this proposal, but is reluctant to provide for this in the rules because it would be difficult for Parliament to assess the performance of persons appointed and approved to occupy public offices, since most of them do not report directly to Parliament, and are not supervised by Parliament on a day-to-day performance of their duties. Additionally, there exists sufficient legal framework to monitor the performance of such appointees.

Deletion of Rule 146

If the proposal to have the report of the Appointments Committee presented and debated by the House is accepted, Rule 146 will be redundant and or inapplicable. The rule provides for appeal to the House where a nominee is rejected by the Appointments Committee. This would become redundant if the nominees are to be approved by the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, the report is fairly big and Members are going to have opportunity to go through them so that they can comprehend. Is it possible for you to do a summary and just highlight the recommendations that you are making to the House. Because if you are to go through the report, I am sure by that time you will also need -  

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I will try to go through the headings, sub titles and recommendations only. 

Committee on HIV and AIDS and Other Related Matters, Rule 157

The submissions are contained in the report. The committee made a number of observations. The recommendations of the committee are contained on page 14. 

Arising from the above observations, the committee recommends:

i.	That the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters be renamed the “Committee on HIV and AIDS”.

ii.	That Rule 157(2) be deleted. 

iii.	That the management of HIV and AIDS be provided for in the rules as an additional function of the committee.

The mandate of the Committee on Government Assurances, Rule 153

There were proposals that the mandate of the Government Assurances Committee be diminished and restricted to only assurances made on the Floor of the House and undertakings contained in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. 

The proposals also included a requirement to provide for:

i.	The presentation of the status reports of the assurances made by Government; 

ii.	The allotment of time for Members to raise specific assurances made in their constituencies. 

iii.	Withdrawal of assurances; and

iv.	Presentation of part of the manifesto to be implemented as assurances.

The committee recommends that these proposals be accommodated in the rules. 

Creation of new committees

The committee considered the need to create new committees to provide for mandates that are not clearly provided for in the current rules, and to split committees whose mandates are too large. 

We recommend the creation of the following committees:

The creation of a committee on subsidiary legislation, and the rationale is given.

The creation of a standing committee on human rights. The rationale is also given.

The committee recommends the split of the social services committee into two committees. 

The creation of a new committee on health. The committee recommends the renaming of the current Committee on Social Services, as the Committee on Education and Sports.

Mr Speaker, you will permit me to read through 3.17.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The Committee on Implementation of Government Loans/Agreements and Programmes. The committee considered the proposal to create a committee on implementation of Government loans/agreements and programmes. This arises from concerns that monitoring the implementation of loans and projects and reporting to the House is lacking. It has also come to the attention of the House that some of the projects/loans are non-performing, but this has not been addressed by the committees in this House. 

Arising from this, it was proposed that a committee be established to specifically monitor the implementation of Government loans and agreements. The committee considered this proposal and declined to recommend to the House the creation of this committee on the following grounds:  

One, that the failure of the House to keep close watch on the performance of loans and projects has been due to laxity in carrying out oversight duties by the relevant sector committees. The remedy to this laxity is not to create a new committee, but the committees should be enduring to perform their functions. 

Secondly, loans are increasingly becoming more of budget support than off-budget expenditure. Such funds form part of the resource envelope available to Government departments to implement their programmes and plans, and are embedded within the annual ministerial policy statements for scrutiny. 

There are four reasons, but the summary is that the committee declined to recommend to the House the creation of this committee. 

There was a proposal to create a committee for East African Community Affairs. Starting from page 1, the rationale is given and the recommendation of the committee is contained on page 19. Due consideration was made to this proposal and the committee found merit in the proposal to create a separate committee for East African Community Affairs. 

Backbench Business Committee
There was also a proposal to create a backbench business committee. The rationale is given on page 19. The committee considered this proposal but found no merit in it. The establishment of such a committee would not reverse the effect that Government business takes precedence. Secondly, the House Business Committee is mandated to determine the order of business in the House, be it Government or private business. 

Opposition Business

The committee received a proposal to provide for Opposition business in Parliament to read as follows: 

“i)	Save as provided for in the rules, Government business shall have precedence at every sitting. 

ii) 	Twenty days shall be allotted in each session for proceedings on Opposition business, 15 of which shall be at the disposal of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and five of which shall be at the disposal of other Opposition parties; and matters selected on those days shall take precedence over Government business.” 

The committee considered this proposal but is of the view that business in the House is divided into Government business and private members’ business. Business which is not Government business is private members business, which is inclusive of the Opposition business. 

Membership to committees and designation of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons 

Mr Speaker, you will also permit me to read this; it is of great interest. The committee received the following submissions on Rule 134: 

There was a proposal to amend Rule 134 to provide for the leader of teh Independents to be designated a title, preferably dean, and to perform functions similar to those of the whips. In this particular case, the dean will designate Independent Members to committees in addition to other functions. 

The second proposal is to change the selection criteria of Members to committees and the designation of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons. It is a considered view that Members should be allowed to belong to committees of their own choice in as far as is practical. A procedure will be provided, which allows Members to express their wish to serve on committees, through the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. Committees, once constituted, should be mandated to elect their own leaders. 

The committee considered the above proposal and recommends as follows: In conducting their business, the rules that apply to the House as far as practical apply to committees. Therefore, just as the House elects its own Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the chair and deputy chairs of the committees should be elected by the members of the committee.

Two, due recognition should be given to the fact that this House has Independent Members and Members representing the UPDF, who do not belong to political parties and cannot be designated to committees by the whips. 

The recommendations of the committee, in detail, include recommendations that: 

i.	Members express their interests to serve on committees of Parliament through the Office of the Clerk;

ii.	The approval of membership should be done by the House; and

iii. Election of chairs and deputy chairs by the 	    respective committees. 

Chairing of committees reserved for the Opposition

The same concerns were expressed in respect to this matter, as were expressed in respect to representation on the Parliamentary Commission, and we have already covered that. The committee recommends that the rules provide, among others, that no single party will hold the office of chair and deputy chair of any one given committee at any one given time. If this is provided for, instances where a single party dominates the leadership of committees will be avoided. This rule only applies to committees reserved for the Opposition. 

Gender consideration in the leadership of the committee

Mr Speaker, the committee received a proposal that leadership positions in the House should be reserved on a percentage of 50/50 for both chairs and deputy chairs for the male and female gender. The committee recommends that in electing the leadership of the committees, the Commission and in constituting parliamentary delegations, gender parity should be given due regard in as far as is practicable. 

Staff of the committees

The committee recommends that the rules be amended to provide for core staffing in the committees in as far as is practicable. 

Reports presented to the House

The committee recommends that amendments be made to the rules to provide for the standardisation and consent of the reports of committees and delegations. 

Consideration of Independents and UPDF to elective offices 

Mr Speaker, we make reference to a number of authorities. In the case of Brig. Henry Tumukunde v. the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission, which is quoted in detail, the committee recommends that the relevant rules be amended to provide for Independent Members and the UPDF representatives to be eligible to occupy elective offices and leadership positions available in Parliament. 

Sitting Arrangement for Independents and UPDF Members

Mr Speaker, there is a correction to make in respect to this. By error, we quoted Article 29 in the third line of the first paragraph. The correct Article is 72(4). 

The committee also made reference to the Malawian case of, In Re: The question of crossing the Floor by Members of Parliament (Presidential Referral No.2 of 2005). The recommendations of the committee are contained on page 25. The committee recommends that Rule 8 be amended to provide for the Speaker to designate the sitting area for UPDF representatives and Independent Members of Parliament. 

The Budget Process

The rules do not provide for the consideration of preliminary budget estimates. Parliament has been using the procedures laid down in the Budget Act of 2001. It is important that this process is governed by our rules so that the House and its committees are guided during the process of handling the preliminary estimates. We recommend that we make provisions for this in the rules. The recommendation is on page 26. 

Provision for consideration of the Finance Bills

The committee considers the proposal to provide for consideration of the Finance Bills prior to the Committee of Supply. The House is often handicapped in making amendments to the Finance Bills after supplying. The House should supply after determining the sources of revenue and having an idea of how much is likely to be generated. 

The committee recommends that Bills related to generation of revenue be considered by the House and passed before proceeding to the Committee of Supply.

Mr Speaker, we make a number of recommendations in respect to interruption of debate. 

Rule 65

The committee scrutinised the rule and observed that the precedence of the matters under which a Member may interrupt debate is not properly sequenced and we propose to sequence the matters as follows: The matter of privilege suddenly arising, a point of procedure, a point of order, a point of clarification, information, and lastly, elucidation.

Secondly, the committee observed that there is a tendency to abuse the rule relating to interruption of debate by Members rising on a given point and proceeding under another; for example, rising on a point of order and instead giving information. The committee recommends providing that it will be out of order for a Member to rise on a given point and proceed on a point other than the one he or she rose on.

Use of electronic gadgets in the House

Mr Speaker, the committee took cognisance of the fact that we live in an e-age and we recommend that gadgets that permit and facilitate the Members in research like iPhones, iPads etc. be permitted in the House. 

Two, the Parliamentary Press Association made proposals that the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure be amended to remove institutional obstacles and other measures that impede the work of the Press. The committee recommends that the rules be amended to admit the Press in the Press gallery with electronic and recording devices and transmitting devices.  

Removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner

We make recommendations on page 29, first, that we must provide for an amendment of the rules to make the concerns raised clear. Two, the committee recommends that the number of Members required to remove a commissioner be reduced from one half of the Members of the House eligible to vote, to a simple majority of Members voting at any sitting to facilitate our expression of displeasure.

Timeframe for Bills in the committees

Mr Speaker, legislation is the principle business of Parliament and there is need for measures that facilitate the House to carry out this primary duty without impediment arising from failure on the part of a committee to examine the Bills referred to it. The committee recommends that a new sub-rule be inserted to provide that if a committee to which a Bill has been referred fails to report within 45 days, the House will proceed to the second reading of the Bill so referred without a committee report, save for the days when the House is in recess.      

Institutionalisation of the Forum of Chairpersons

The committee received proposals that we provide an institutional framework for the forum of chairpersons. The committee declined to recommend this to the House. The recommendation of the committee is contained in the second last paragraph on page 30. 

Overlaps between the roles of PAC and COSASE

Mr Speaker, there were concerns that the roles of COSASE and PAC overlap and we were asked specifically to streamline the roles of PAC and COSASE. The committee did not find any overlap.

That brings us to the end of this long report. Mr Speaker, I beg to report and to move that this report be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, would you like to lay a copy of the full report on the Table so that we capture it as such.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

Honourable members, this is not simple work and I congratulate the chairman and the members of the committee -(Applause)- for very thorough work indeed. I have been part of these rules for a while and I know what you have gone through. What you have produced, from the summary you have provided, certainly shows off good work. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, we will not do any justice to this report or the proposed amendments if we must proceed to debate it now. We will not be doing any justice to it. The report has just been brought; it is big; and it runs into many pages; it will only be fair that Members internalise this and we schedule a specific date when we will go through this report and examine the amendments proposed properly, so that we can take decisions in a more informed way. If we agree to this, I would say that we allow some period to pass to allow Members look through this properly and then we come back and have serious debate on the matters proposed by the committee and other matters that Members might want to propose in relation to all rules. If this is acceptable, I, therefore, take it as such and I call the next item. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

PRESENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY CALENDAR FOR THE FIRST SEESSION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT

5.08
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, when you were elected with your senior colleague, the Speaker of Parliament, you promised a number of measures in which you wanted the efficiency of Parliament to be improved. One of the measures that you proposed was to have a clear roadmap to guide the proceedings and meetings of Parliament. I am happy to present the proposed calendar which was presented by the Speaker of Parliament to the Business Committee of Parliament and was passed by the Business Committee. It is my pleasure to present it before this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the first meeting of the first session of the Ninth Parliament was scheduled to start from 7 June 2011 to Thursday, 13 October 2011. I do not have to go through this because this is part of the work that we have done in this House, which has a number of businesses right from the State of the Nation Address delivered by His Excellency the President up to the time we broke for recess on 14 October 2011. 

We then started the second meeting of the first session of the Ninth Parliament from Tuesday, 8 November 2011 which, it is proposed, will last up to 16 December 2011. The businesses to be handled include: the Public Order Management Bill, 2011; all Bills saved from the Eighth Parliament, and those are: 
i) 	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009     
ii) 	The Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007
iii) 	The Regional Governments Bill, 2009 
iv) 	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007
v) 	The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008
vi) 	The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008
vii) 	The Industrial Property Bill, 2009
viii)	The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009
ix) 	The Chattels Securities Bill, 2009
x) 	The Companies Bill, 2009
xi) 	The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009
xii) 	The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010
xiii) 	The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010
xiv) 	The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010
xv) 	The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010
xvi) 	The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010
xvii) 	The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006
xviii) 	The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010
xix) 	The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010
xx) 	The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010
xxi) 	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010
xxii) 	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011
xxiii) 	The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2011

Mr Speaker, the available businesses from honourable members and backbenchers for consideration, that is, Bills and motions, will be considered. It is proposed that recess of the second meeting will start on Friday, 16 December 2011 and end on Monday, 6 February 2012. 

The third meeting of the first session of the Ninth Parliament is expected to run from Tuesday, 7 February 2012 to Thursday, 17 May 2012. In that third meeting, the following business is expected to be handled:

(i)	Laying on the Table, not later than the 1st day of April 2012, a three-year macro-economic plan and programme for economic and social development in accordance with sections 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act.
 
(ii) 	Laying on the Table, not later than the 1st day of April 2012, the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next financial year in accordance with section 4(3) of the Budget Act.  

(iii) 	Sessional committees shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to them and submit their reports to the Budget Committee not later than the 25th day of April in accordance with section 7(2) of the Budget Act.

(iv) 	The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and reports of the sessional committees and submit recommendations to the Speaker who shall send them to the President by the 15th day of May 2012.

It is expected that Parliament shall consider available business that will be presented by the ministers and backbenchers, that is, Bills and motions, including business that spilled over from the second meeting of the first session of the Ninth Parliament. It is expected that we shall have recess on Friday, 18 May 2012 to Wednesday, 6 June 2012. 

Mr Speaker, in summary, if this calendar is followed, it is expected that we shall have proposed sittings during the first session amounting to 119 and it is also expected that we shall have 98 days of recess. This is a departure from the ad hoc manner in which we were handling our business, and I would like to congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker and you, Sir, for coming up with this proposal that should enable and guide the way Parliament runs and is managed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. That has been a very good report, which gives us projections so that we can plan as to when to be in the constituencies and when to be back here and also what business to expect. Certainly, the provision relating to the budget process is very critical. We do not want to go through the troubles we went through during the last budget process. We would like this one to be smarter.  

Honourable members, I do not think this one attracts comments; it is clear. It is a proposal which has mostly been executed. What is left now is for this particular meeting and then the next meeting, which will conclude this session of Parliament, and then the proposed calendar will kick off in the next session of Parliament. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and your committee, for that excellent work and for answering the proposals that have been put forward -(Ms Kamateka rose_)- I do not think these matters are discussable, hon. Kamateka, unless it is really a serious matter. There is a lot of business to handle and I would like to proceed to that business. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXPEDITIOUSLY INTERVENE BY ASSISTING COTTON FARMERS

5.17
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.  This motion is moved under Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Cabinet approved in September 2001 the strategic Government intervention for promoting, production, processing and marketing of selected export commodities with the main aim of the intervention being to increase cotton production from 100,000 bales to one million bales annually; 

AWARE that cotton processing provides several value chains and AGOA would provide a market for wholly made Ugandan garments;

AND WHEREAS the Cotton Development Act established the Cotton Development Organisation, which was to play the lead role in the strategic intervention in the cotton sub-sector;

NOTING THAT cotton production between 2001 and now has fluctuated from 200,000 bales in 2004 to 60,000 bales in 2007 and 2009;

RECOGNISING that through the cooperative movement and the second five-year development plan, entitled: ‘Work for Progress’, set and achieved a target of increasing cotton production by one third from 1966 to 1971 to reach a peak of 465,000 bales or 86,000 metric tonnes; 

FURTHER RECOGNISING and appreciating the contribution cotton production has made to the national economy and in supporting family livelihoods; 

APPRECIATING that cotton production has relied on the hard work and sweat of small-scale farmers; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 

(1)Parliament urges Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives; 
(2) Government reviews the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation; 
(3) Future Government interventions ensure that farmers are protected from external shocks and receive not less than 75 percent of the world market prices.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The motion is seconded by hon. Ayena, hon. Alaso and hon. Joy Atim. The motion is, therefore, properly before the House.  Hon. Akena, would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this motion is brought at a time when many of our farmers are going through a lot of hardship. Cotton has played a very important role in the development of this economy and has provided for families throughout our history. Over the years, cotton production or the importance of cotton seems to have been neglected by Government.  

I do not bring this motion in any way to try and embarrass Government or to bring embarrassment against the Cotton Development Organisation. I feel it is critical that we look seriously at what is happening in the cotton sector. Much has been said about what we can do with cotton, how we can develop the cotton industry, but it remains words and the farmers who are the primary producers do not benefit from this value chain. 

The African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) gave us an opportunity to export Ugandan garments, but as of now, our production line is not very effective. What has happened in recent times to the cotton world market price is that last year when China and India, who are major producers of cotton, suffered some deficits, there was a spike in the cotton prices and farmers were able to get up to Shs 3000 per kilo. At that time, the Cotton Development Organisation tried to encourage farmers and gave some indications that they would receive something similar in this year’s planting season. However, almost at the point of harvest, the Cotton Development Organisation gave an indication that the farmers were not going to receive anything less than Shs 1600 per kilo. At this moment, the farm gate prices are hovering around Shs 1000 to 1200 per kilo. The ginners have justified the buying of cotton at this price counting the overheads, but we are not considering the overheads, which the farmers also have to endure. 

I mentioned the issue of the cooperatives because the cooperatives have proven a clear methodology of how we can increase the amount of cotton, how we are able to buy and how we can support the farmers in being able to produce more cotton.  However, since the inception of the Cotton Development Organisation, production figures do not give us a clear indication that it is actually succeeding.  The Cabinet position was that in five years, cotton production would to increase to one million bales. As of now, those figures have not been met; one year we get rises and the next year we get decreases. As of now, unless the farmers’ plight is addressed, we are going to see a shrinking growth of cotton because there is no incentive for a farmer to be able to produce cotton, which is also not going to be able to be marketed. I am, therefore, seriously urging Government to look carefully into this situation. 

There are millions of farmers and millions of families who rely on cotton as a cash crop to earn an income.  At this moment they are not going to be able to enjoy their Christmas or whatever is going to lie ahead. They are not even going to break even on the costs because although Cotton Development Organisation was supposed to assist the farmers, the farmers ended up purchasing the seeds themselves and almost all the inputs were left to them. If the organisation does not support the farmers and only at the time of buying gives an indicative price, which does not meet the need, unless we work to support the farmers, the whole industry and the value chain across the board is going to be destroyed.  

Although there have been shocks in the world market, the price of yarn has not dropped more than eight percent over this period, which essentially means that if we process our cotton, we are going to get better value. In the past we had an institution which was designed to process cotton into yarn. From yarn, we would weave and then be able to export. Much as we talk about AGOA, we are not going through the process. So, I am seriously urging Government to really look into the plight of the farmers. Unless there is some intervention, we are looking at a very serious problem among the farmers. 

Throughout the history of Uganda, the only time when the common man has really been assisted is, honestly, through the cooperatives. We must review and look at what worked. How can we do our duty in improving the livelihoods of the common man?  In some cases, we must revisit what has worked and really look at what is not working with a view of how to address it.  

All the years we have had the Cotton Development Organisation, it has not worked. At this moment, some the executives within the Cotton Development Organisation seem to have an interest in the whole trading around the cotton industry. There are those who have kept positions longer than is stipulated in the Cotton Development Act, and the reasons for this are also not clear because surely, the Act had put in place a mechanism which allowed the executive to be renewed for only one term. If we keep renewing the same people who are not performing, then there is something which is seriously amiss. Unless such matters are addressed, we are not going to be able to benefit the people of Uganda and the cotton industry, and also be able to develop.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to share a small experience I had while in Zambia. His Excellency President Museveni came to open an agricultural show and he made a statement, which all my friends in Zambia thought was a wonderful statement by a president. He lamented that Africans are the actual donors in the world because when we grow our cotton, we sell our seed cotton for about one dollar per kilo. However, when you gin it, the price increases - although he quoted five dollars, the current market price is slightly under two dollars. If you spin it into yarn, you get more value addition; if you weave it into fabric, there is a greater value addition; if you make the final product, you may end up getting somewhere in the range of $50 per kilo.  He said, “Unless Africans start dealing with the processing of cotton, we are donors to the world.”  This was said some time in the 1990s when I was still in Zambia.  

When I returned to Uganda, the biggest industry in my constituency, the spinning mill which was supposed to make yarn, had been derelict. For years the budget kept on mentioning, “We are lacking US$ 100,000 to roof” and yet the previous Government had imported, on loan, equipment worth US$ 4 million to be able to spin Ugandan cotton. Eventually, the spinning mill was basically given away under the privatisation programme and all that equipment was sold off as scrap.  

As it is now, how do we really honestly expect to trade under the terms given under AGOA? We are literally exporting lint cotton, which is just one process, and yet according to the Cabinet Memorandum and according to the President, we are supposed to look at this industry as something which is supposed to help develop our industrial base, our agro processing, but there is total neglect. 

Right now, our farmers are under a very difficult situation where they cannot even get Shs 1000 per kilo. Christmas would have been a time when they would possibly be buying their children new clothes or buying them something, but at the moment, the Ugandan farmer would be lucky if they could afford second hand clothes, which are still made from cotton. If we examine our past, there was a time when Ugandan garments were being sold abroad. We supplied Marks and Spencer –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I give you two more minutes to wind up.

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At this moment, although we claim that we are moving forward, we have regressed. If we had maintained our production per capita, we would have now been perhaps the 18th largest cotton producer in the world. Our production figures of 1970, even in today’s production figures, would be around the 30th biggest. 

Over the years, we have not dealt with cotton; we have not seen the value of cotton. Most of all, we are ignoring the plight of the farmer. Eighty three percent of Ugandans live directly off the land. Unless it makes sense for them to produce and to earn from their hard work, we will not be able to develop the country because most of our farmers rely on land for a living. So, I am urging Government to look at the plight of the farmers because we cannot talk about development if our farmers cannot make their ends meet. 

At this time, there is a critical moment. The prices have dropped very low. Unless we look at the whole industry with a long-term view of developing – some of these shocks in the markets are temporary, but at the moment, there is no institution with the capacity to absorb the shocks. In the past, it was the cooperatives which could do that. Even the stabilisation fund which was factored in to the Cotton Development Organisation is not playing its role. So, I urge Government to do what is best for our farmers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Akena. May I have the seconders of the motion. Hon. Atim, you have five minutes as the seconder of the motion.

5.33
MRS JOY ONGOM: (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion. We all realise that agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy and cotton is one of the products that the country relies on for its economic growth. You will realise that previously, cotton used to help a lot of people in sustaining their livelihood, most especially in the cotton growing areas. 

In their objectives, CDO says they want to increase cotton production and to contribute to poverty reduction through increased household income. I know this Government tries a lot to plan, budget and release funds for the production of cotton, but to our surprise, as much as these funds are released for the purchase of ox-ploughs, pesticides, pumps and some extension services, you will never see our farmers benefitting. 

Maybe the Minister of Agriculture will have to inform this House which regions benefited in the last financial year because in my district, people struggle on their own. Last year, they bought the seeds, ox-ploughs and oxen on their own. It was promised during the planting season that they would earn to the tune of Shs 3,000 per kilogramme, but to our surprise, now that they are harvesting, cotton is bought for only Shs 1,000. This kind of thing cannot reduce poverty and neither will it increase household income. What it does is to frustrate the farmers’ efforts. 

Mr Speaker, in the Maputo Protocol, every African country is required to dedicate at least 10 percent of their budget to agriculture; Uganda has attained only five percent. How can we promote agriculture in this country if the farmers are frustrated day-in and day-out? I think it is the mandate of this august House, especially the Minister of Agriculture, to see to it that the efforts of our farmers - the people of my Lango sub-region are crying because they are frustrated. They do not even want to take their cotton for sale because what they are earning does not give any profit, given that they bought everything in form of seeds and implements. That is why I am seconding this motion. If we budget for funds and release the funds, please let the local people benefit so that they can be encouraged to do agriculture, especially cotton production. Thank you.

5.38
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have much to add, but only add my voice to that of the motion proposer. As fate would have it, it so happens that the cotton belt actually lies in the region which was perilously affected by the 20-year-old war. The plight of those people cannot be overemphasised. The only cash crop in the whole of Lango sub-region, most of West Nile, up to Bukedea, is cotton. I wonder what would happen to those who encouraged people to stray away from what would otherwise have been an alternative source of income. 

At the beginning of the crop season, the people in the cotton producing areas were told that they were going to earn Shs 3,000, but all of a sudden, it has been reduced to only Shs 1,200. I think that is even an exaggeration because I have evidence to the effect that cotton is now being bought for only Shs 800 per kilogramme.

Mr Speaker, you will remember that this is a region which has children who should go to school and the main cash crop is cotton. We have lost all our cattle, and we have no coffee and no oil at the moment. This calls for serious Government intervention, and we propose that Government should expeditiously find a way of getting some stabilising fund in order to cushion the farmers from the shocks of this fall in price from the expected Shs 3000 per kilogramme to only now, Shs 800 per kilogramme. 

The people are crying and I think in view of the fact that this government, the Government of the National Resistance Movement, has been talking so well about poverty alleviation - when you talk about poverty alleviation in respect to people whose main stay is cotton, then you must find a way of helping them to earn money out of their cotton. This is the time when this government should rise up and show in practical terms that they are fighting to help in the process of poverty alleviation.

In the past you will remember, Mr Speaker, that we had the cooperative societies and we had the cooperative unions through which the government would make available crop financing and stabilisation funds. This would help to cushion the farmers from the shocks of nose-diving prices. We do not have this anymore. This, therefore, calls for the government to seriously review the issue of the cooperative movement in this country, to make sure that the cooperative unions are revised, the cooperative societies are revised and the farmers are helped to come together in order to bargain against the marauding traders who come and buy their crops from individuals at giveaway prices.

This is not a matter that should be actually over emphasised because I think there is a way that the northern and eastern parts of this country should be brought into the domain of the advancing economy of this country. If there is one thing that can be done to help the people of northern and eastern Uganda, who are arguably most marginalised at the moment, it is to intervene in the cotton industry. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I propose the question for your debate; the question for debate is for a resolution of Parliament to urge the government to intervene in the cotton buying price and further urge Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives, review the performance in the Cotton Development Organisation, and that future Government intervention ensures that farmers are protected from external shocks and receive not less than 75 percent of world market prices.

That is the motion before this House. I now propose it for debate. I invite Members to make their contributions in a short time. This is a very direct subject. I will give you two minutes each and we see how far we go with the matter.

5.44
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, it is difficult to make an intervention in two minutes, but I will attempt. Teso College Aloet, where the Rt Hon. Moses Ali went, was built out of cotton. Many of us actually got an education through cotton. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “You borrowed from BCU.”] We borrowed money actually from BCU, I am reminded, but we paid back using cotton money. The cooperatives used to be strong. The economy of Teso, the North and North-Eastern parts of this country and Kasese, were based on cotton. Today, what do we see, Mr Speaker? The cotton prices have nose-dived.

Last year, cotton went for Shs 3000. This excited the people in the cotton growing areas. Today, we see cotton being bought at Shs 800 and even Shs 600. This is extremely frustrating. I would like to challenge the NRM Government to demonstrate to the people in the cotton growing areas that they are not being targeted. Remember that the Opposition enjoyed support in the cotton growing areas in the North, the North East and Kasese. Whether this is a coincidence or not, - I would like to believe it is just a bad coincidence - you need to persuade the people of these cotton growing areas that they are not specifically being targeted. 

A lot of labour is involved in the production of a single kilo of cotton, and these cotton growers are actually operating at a loss at the moment. I would like to implore Government not to sit back. I would like to implore Government to make interventions not for the future only, but for the present. 

Teso is under water at the moment. All the food has rotted away. The farmers are left with no option, but to look to their cotton, but cotton is yielding nothing. I would like to request Government to increase the price of cotton immediately. In fact, there is no time to waste because we already have cotton collected and sorted in the stores of farmers. Rather than wait for shocks that may occur in the future, we should respond to the shock that has occurred now. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very important topic, especially as it concerns a basic cash crop, which affects a lot of people.

I support the motion as it is, but I think the most important issues here to consider are that Government moved away from control of prices and kind of left the farmers to be controlled by the market. Now, I think it is time for us to ask whether it is time for the government to review this policy of complete liberalisation of the economy and see whether it is not in order for Government to really examine the economy and see areas where it can strategically intervene.
 
In this particular case where the farmers are being exposed to the vagaries of international prices and to the vagaries of the traders who are simply out to make a profit without regard to the farmers, I think the best thing would be for the government to study this issue in detail and see how to establish price stabilisation mechanisms. Government should not necessarily guarantee a minimum price or come in and say, the price will be this, as my colleague was proposing; for the government to come in directly and intervene may not be very practical at the moment and the government may not have the funds to do that. 

However, the government should take this as a lesson to set up the proper structures for our agriculture, not only for cotton, but for other export commodities such as cotton and those other traditional export crops. So, I am generally in support of this. However, I would caution that there is a grey area in terms of the fact that the economy has been liberalised and the government may not very easily intervene. However, the interventions need to be put in place for the long-term. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.49
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Akena for moving this motion. I rise to support it very strongly. Uganda’s comparative advantage in the region and abroad remains agriculture, and this is the surest way for us to achieve our objectives in the budget, of increased incomes for the poor and job creation. 

Even with the situation of low prices for cotton, in our region, in the west, the areas of Kasese and Bunyaruguru continue to depend very strongly on cotton and they have the hope that Government can intervene and save their situation. 

I look at the resolutions as given to us by the mover of the motion; they are good, but I think we could improve on them and make them even more specific. An example is, “That Parliament urges Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives”. I would have desired that this be more specific to say, “Government takes the appropriate measures to revive the cooperatives in this country”. 

The second one is good. On the third one, yes, we are looking at protecting the farmers in terms of the world market prices, but why don’t we come out more strongly and say that the stabilisation fund should be revived and used to provide subsidies to the farmers in terms of inputs, protection from vagaries of prices, disease control, etc?

Mr Speaker, the challenges we have with cotton also apply to other crops. In my constituency, Igara West, if there is anything that they rely on, it is their tea, the bananas, the pineapples, but they have challenges of low prices for the commodities, weaknesses of the institutions, like the Tea Development Authority is not in place and the farmers are simply struggling on their own. So, when you define this kind of resolution to strengthen - to review the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation, I think it reminds Government to look at the institutional framework generally for agriculture. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the mover of the motion for this initiative.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It looks like there is a lot of interest. So, can we give it twenty more minutes? That means 10 people. Let me begin with hon. Kagwera.

5.52
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Actually, cotton has been a major cash earner to most of our people. The problems of the cotton producing areas are not of today; we have had them for some time. Previously, I chaired the committee on agriculture and we had even to travel to Tanzania to study their case. We realised that we had problems with the CDO. So, the issue of Government putting in money was handled sometime back. I think the mover of the motion even knows it, but even then, we moved for a short while and came back to our problems. 

I believe there is more than Government just giving money. I believe the CDO must be reviewed. The other stakeholders, like the investors – we had problems with investors like Dunavant. So, my proposal is that the motion is good and the House should support it, but let us have facts from our committee. Let our committee on agriculture bring a comprehensive report and we review the whole thing. Otherwise, giving money alone will not solve the problem. 

5.55
MS MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion. I come from Eastern Uganda, Pallisa District, and they have produced a lot of cotton this time, but our people are very frustrated and disappointed and maybe we may even discourage them from growing cotton next time. I addressed this matter to the relevant ministry some time back, but I did not get a clear answer. 

We have got an organisation called Cotton Development Authority; this organisation is causing more misery to the people. The farmers believe this is an agent of Government that is extorting money from them. The situation there is very bad. 

Some of you have heard that Pallisa is one of the districts that have been affected by floods. As they are crying because of cotton prices, the floods have swept away their homes; our people are in a total dilemma and nobody is giving a substantive position about how cotton issues are going to be handled –(Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, hon. Amoit, for giving way. Mr Speaker, as hon. Amoit is saying, the situation in Pallisa is becoming very desperate. If you moved around, you will see many places submerged in water and the little cotton which the people cultivated, is what they expected to sell and buy food. Now Government has not been of any help to them. So, what do we expect of them - a lot of misery. So –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please give the information.

MR OPOLOT: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am giving the information. There are already people telling the people of Uganda, and particularly those in Pallisa, never to grow cotton again but focus on food crops which they can eat in case the market prices are not favourable –(Interruption)

MS AMOIT: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, the poverty level of Pallisa and the eastern region in general is always immeasurable. This was one of the ways that we thought our people would overcome poverty, but it has desperately been increased –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Akena for the motion and the honourable members who seconded it. 

I have been having sleepless nights for the last almost one month because of the numerous calls and cries from my people of Pader District who grew cotton this year. It is very serious. At the start of the harvest, the price was 1600 and the information available was that the price was set by Government. I do not know whether that was true, but over a very short period, the price is now Shs 800. I have been wondering whether these prices are influenced by the middlemen to exploit our farmers. This is what I have been wondering about and I would really want to get clarification on this. 

We also tried to advise the farmers to hold on a bit to see the trend of the prices, but we all know that cotton is a product that cannot be kept for a very long time. Last year, in my constituency, very many farmers lost their cotton to fire. So, they cannot keep it because of the risk of fire. When we look at the trend of the prices now, from Shs 1600 to - now when Christmas is setting in - Shs 800, this makes us think that maybe it is the middlemen who are trying to exploit the farmers by varying the prices like this. So, we really need the intervention of Government to protect the farmers. It is really frustrating. This is my appeal to Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.01
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. This issue of low prices of cotton has not affected only the farmers; it has affected the economy of this country because farmers have roles to play yet they are highly de-motivated. We find difficulties supplying our factories. When we look at the production of cotton, it is an easier cash crop to manage as a country. Therefore, as we look at the economy of this country, we need to be able to select some enterprises and initiate deliberate actions to promote them.

On the issue of cooperatives, the President of this country has ever talked about revitalisation of the cooperatives. I feel he is very right and we have to do this. The non-revitalisation of the cooperatives has got a negative effect on food security because people relate to how the cooperatives were performing. Like in Adjumani District, we have ever encouraged the farmers to produce in bulk and store their food, but they normally ask and they are still asking, “What will happen if our stores also collapse like the stores created under cooperatives?” I feel the idea of revitalisation of the cooperatives will also help us enhance our food security. Thank you. 

6.02
MR ISAIAS JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda as a country has got both a comparative advantage and absolute advantage in food crop and cash crop production. In the 1980s, Uganda was doing very well. If you came to Teso it had a lot of cows and was producing a lot of cotton; Bugisu had a lot of coffee; the North also had a lot of cotton. But when this government came to power, the preaching was, even if you danced from morning to evening, the prices of these cash crops would never rise. But history has proved that the price of coffee shot up to around Shs 10,000 per kilogramme although the farmers had been encouraged by the President to cut down the coffee. The cotton was left to die a natural death. 

These cooperative societies were doing a lot of good work, but the government deliberately, I believe, left them to die. Now, this is the time; the farmers are suffering. They were encouraged to grow mangoes, rear butterflies and bees; all this, they have done, but history has proved that we must go back. All these theories the government was preaching were to divert the people and make them so poor so that they could be bought with Shs 500 for votes. 

I think this is the time for the government to listen -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this motion is very clear. It is one of those motions whereby if the Speaker had the opportunity, he would speak, but he is limited by the rules. Is there any objection from the government on this motion? Can we hear what the government has to say in response to this motion? 

6.05
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker, first of all, I wish to observe from the word go that Government attaches great importance to this crop. It is one of the priority commodities within the Agricultural Sector Investment and Development Strategy as well as investment plan. (Member off microphone.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lift the microphone a bit so that it can capture your words.

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Thank you. I was saying that this crop has been prioritised as one of the key enterprises to be handled by Government. As such, I noted the concerns raised on the Floor of this House from production, marketing, pricing, value-addition and so on, up to the stabilisation fund, as well as crop financing. All these are legitimate concerns, but they bear certain characteristics. To mention them briefly: 

One, there is the private sector involvement, who are the spinners. First of all, start with farmers, spinners and textile mills. These have to be consulted. 

You talked about the revival of cooperatives. This belongs to the Ministry of Cooperatives, Trade and Industry, and then there is the Ministry of Agriculture involved. 

With all these and with due respect to what has been said, if we had been given due notice a little earlier, I would have prepared a comprehensive paper to answer these concerns. I want to ask the Speaker to allow me time to coordinate this kind of information and report back by Tuesday next week. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a motion and this House is required to take a decision on it. Do you have any objection to the proposed resolutions requested by the Member on those three issues? Let him respond to this then we come to the specific issues.

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, he talked about the promotion, production, processing and marketing of export crops. The issue is that Government is going to take corrective measures to address these issues. This is already being addressed now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you have no problem with this motion?   

MR BUCHANAYANDI: We have no problem with this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Alaso, can we agree that we go to the substance of the motion; what is required of this House and see if people want to make some changes and then we move forward? Let me listen to hon. Alaso and then we see how to move.

6.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely agree with the spirit of the motion and the submissions that have been made by my colleagues. Three things are very dear to my heart and I want to attach two of them to the resolutions. Before I do that, if you let me say one of them – the other concern, which bothers me is that the minister must explain to Ugandans why it is only cotton for which it sits and says, “You grow, the price will be Shs 2,000.” After growing it, when you are marketing, the same Government comes up under CDO and says, “It is now Shs 200.” Why is it cotton, not coffee, not milk, not vanilla? Why cotton? 

In 2003, you recall when we were in this House together and a motion was moved which sought the same explanation. Tonight, almost seven or six years down the road, we are asking for the same explanation. Why does Government treat cotton, the way it does? Until we get that answer, I do not think we are making progress.

Having said that, my amendment to prayer number two, which says that, “Government reviews the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation,” is simply to add another bit to that sentence, “...and immediately appoints a new board to manage CDO.” I am looking at the law, the Cotton Development Act, which provides for a board of directors, which should serve a tenure of six years and by 2003 or 2004 when we were debating a similar motion in this Parliament, there was a name of Mrs Sabune. Up to now, the same name is directing this organisation. Why doesn’t Government do what the law requires it to do? That is why I am proposing that immediately, the minister appoints a new board to manage CDO. That is part of the problem.  
 
The other prayer I would like to add is that the Cotton Development Act be reviewed with a view to addressing the current market concerns. It should also be about how to create the stabilisation fund. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Hon. Jimmy Akena, do you have issues with the proposed amendments?

MR AKENA: No, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion to amend has been agreed upon by the mover of the motion and it is about the amendment on the Cotton Development Authority Act and the extension of the appointment of a new board and the second one, which will allow for the review of the law itself. Can we hear from hon. Wafula Ogutu now?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Alaso is saying that the board should direct. She also mentioned a name of a certain person and that is Mrs Sabune. But I would like to give information that this lady has been CEO of CDO since 1995. However, even with her poor performance, she has remained in that position for those many years. In the circumstances, I wish to introduce an amendment, which requires the management of CDO to be rejuvenated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it goes back to the same proposal. Yes, honourable member, over there.

6.13
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleagues have been emphasising the fact that cotton growers come from the North and east, but I would like to say that I come from Kasese District, where there are cultivators of cotton.

Let me get to the proposals as moved by my colleagues. The challenges we are facing today are the world shocks though according to my own assessment, Uganda has enough capacity to handle them. For example, where is the textile industry so that we can gin and produce textile clothes? I am saying this because we have enough markets in Uganda for such cloths. For example, we need school and Army uniforms. What has happened to it?

The other issue concerns the liberalisation of the economy. To me, the economy has been liberalised, but that has its own shortcomings. Government has not invested – UDC as another proposal, should be revitalised so that it becomes the government initiative to invest in the textile industry – to gin the cotton. This will help farmers to know where to take their cotton.

6.15
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Before I propose the amendment to prayer number one, I thought I should make a short background. One of the biggest problems causing the effects that the farmers are now experiencing is because the farmers are now too low in the value chain of cotton. My proposal is going to be towards supporting farmers to move to higher levels of the value chain. What do I mean by that? What I mean is that Government should facilitate the process of acquiring ginneries for farmers. Today, a ginnery from India costs about Shs 200 million and an integrated one that has a processing mill would actually cost the same money. That means that the farmers would be able to gin their cotton.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that proposal would hit a snag with Article 93 because that directly issues a charge on the government money in the Consolidated Fund. So, there would be a problem to direct Government to release that money; we don’t want to get into that debate, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: May I make an amendment here that it may not necessarily require Government to invest in - other means could be explored. My amendment would read: “Parliament urges Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and the challenges of the cooperatives and the need to facilitate farmers to move to higher levels of the cotton value chain.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That language – you see, resolutions are supposed to be direct in their phraseology. You are not supposed to have somebody to interpret them. So, in your absence, the person reading it might not be able to understand what the resolution is all about. That is why resolutions and provisions of the law must be clear; they should not require lots of interpretations. So, when you talk about things like higher value chains – that might be complicated for the ordinary person outside this House to understand. So, can we make it clearer?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I can do that if I am given more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do so. 

6.17
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to propose an amendment on prayer number three, bearing in mind that the peasant growers plant cotton basing on the information they have received from Government. Also, considering the fact that cotton is a one-season crop, unlike tea and other crops like coffee - many of these farmers borrow money when they are about to plant, but with higher expectations. Given that background, I propose that this particular prayer – I mean to say that word “future” be deleted so that it can read as follows: “Government intervenes to ensure that farmers are protected from external shocks and receive not less than 75 percent of the world market prices or at least Shs 1,600 per kilogramme.”

I am saying this because this figure was announced to the people by Government and they know it. It was also because of this that they grew more cotton. These people are indebted and so they want to have Government with them. When Government needs the peasants, especially during the time for elections, they are there to support the NRM. So, when the peasants need the Government, it should be there to protect them from the throw-away prices that they are suffering from in selling this cotton. 

That is why I beg to submit that the word “future” that does not specify the timeframe, should not appear there. The intervention should be now.

In 2008, the Government moved to help these farmers with price stabilisation and we are making a similar proposal that it be adopted even during this season, that the cotton peasants should not go to prison – I mean those who have debts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we will have difficulty in terms of putting figures in the resolution. I don’t know what the Government side has to say, but definitely, the Chair will have difficulties in dealing with figures in formulating a resolution of this nature. And from the proposal, it is written as follows: “Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that future Government interventions ensure that farmers …” So, you can see that it is a different subject. If you want to introduce another one, that can be possible.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, if that is not possible, then we can have it as a new resolution number five to read as follows: “Government intervenes, immediately, to ensure farmers are protected from these external shocks and that at least a minimum of Shs 1600 be paid to the farmers.” I don’t want us to delete that figure because it is Government’s responsibility; it informed the people; it is Government that misled the farmers and so they cannot say now that they are not responsible because you told them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akena, what do you say about this particular proposal?

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, I put the word “future” based on the previous interventions of what Government has done and we cannot look at this shock in isolation. The prices are going to swing from time to time and they need to be addressed over a period of time. 

The reason why I mentioned the cooperatives is because the cooperatives provided the stabilisation mechanism, which is being sought throughout the resolution, and there were times when Government had to pay above or the cooperatives were buying products above the world market price in order to keep the production and the industry.

So, I just put it that at least it should never go below 75 percent of the world market price. That would be justifiable because the ginners and the traders will have something, at least 25 percent with which to make their ends meet. 

So, I prefer if we leave “the future” within the context, but the future begins from tomorrow. If we pass the resolution today, the future starts tomorrow. 
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to inform the Members that having a figure of Shs 1,600 is very dangerous because of inflation. It can be overtaken by events any time. So, we better opt for the percentage. I think that is better. However, I don’t know what the minister is going to come up with, but as a farmer, I know that when these prices go down, they create a disincentive to the farmers and they don’t produce. That is why, today, you have only 60,000 bales of cotton when we should be producing 4 million bales. 

We are currently exporting 2.7 million bags of coffee, but as of today, we ought to be exporting 10 million bags. I don’t know what interventions you are talking about or what you are going to come up with, but I feel that the sector has to do much more. 

Mr Speaker, you have been hearing Finance blaming Agriculture and Agriculture blaming Finance, but we think, as Parliament, that in the next budget, we should really see a change in the funding of the agricultural sector. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you had an amendment that you are rephrasing. 
   
MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The amendment reads as follows - that is prayer number one: “Parliament urges Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives and the need to facilitate farmers to invest in ginning cotton.”
	
6.25
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you so much. I have two issues. The 75 percent of the world market price that should be paid to farmers is excellent, but I would think additionally that we should put a clause or an additional phrase on leaving that market price open to forces of supply and demand. 

I am saying this out of experience; in Nebbi District, last year, cotton was so competitive that it attracted so many buyers, but you would be shocked that there were buyers, like some Russian companies, that came with better prices and farmers intended to sell to them, but there were these other ones who are in the good books - the favoured ones of Government and they could not allow these companies to buy cotton at the price they had set. 

I would think CDO should be clear on this matter. Let the cotton industry be a little open to competition to those who have better prices, but the minimum should be 75 percent.

Secondly, CDO sold seeds to farmers; a kilo was going at about Shs 3,000 at my place. And there are those people who are called extension workers who work directly with CDO; they would buy from CDO and they were selling at Shs 6,000. That now led to what we call speculation in the minds of the farmers and somewhere somehow, they were saying that Government said they would buy cotton at Shs 3,000 per kilo. 

As I talk now, there is a lot of chaos in my constituency. From Shs 1,600, they have moved back to Shs 1,200 and there is a meeting and they intend to take the price further lower to Shs 800 per kilo. Even as we talk of future intervention, there must be some intervention pronounced now by the honourable minister. Thank you so much. 

6.28
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to add on the resolution, if Members agree, that to improve on the level of productivity in the regions, North and east, Government should supply farmers with seeds. Because if we say farmers should buy the seeds and yet they don’t have the money, then we shall not increase on the level of farmers engaged in producing cotton.  So, I would think that the Ministry of Agriculture supplies free seeds to farmers so that they increase production of cotton in those areas. 

That is on the resolution. Much as we are looking at cotton prices reducing up to Shs 800, we also have areas whose prices of cash crops are going down. In my district, we plant cocoa. Last year cocoa prices were at –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have passed that stage of general debate. We are now trying to see if we can conclude this matter. There is so much other business pending, but we might need to roll this up and move forward. 

Is the honourable minister – 

MS NTABAZI: But my resolution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we have listened to that, but just like I advised the honourable colleague, if you tell Government to buy seeds, they are going to throw at you Article 93 because you are directly imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund. It is addressed better the way it has been phrased here. Those interventions are taken care of.
 
Yes, hon. Mafabi, and then we take a decision on this matter and move forward. 

6.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala–Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I think the most important thing here is cooperative societies coming back. That is the emphasis. A colleague talked about the stabilisation fund - we had a stabilisation fund we collected before – in fact after liberalisation – I will give an example Of the Coffee Stabilisation Fund, which we must be having in the Central Bank now, and which the ministry of agriculture should take interest in and refund to us, coffee farmers, is now close to about Shs 59 billion, plus interest, that makes it more. It was collected between 1993 to 1996, and I think by then, you were in UCDA and you know what I am talking about. 

But also, for the farmers, I think it is the responsibility of Government to ensure that farmers are better off. It is not necessarily to say it will be charged on the Consolidated Fund. Government should make a deliberate effort to have money in the Central Bank on an account to take care of shocks and I think this should be budgeted for and it should start now. If we don’t have it, we should have a supplementary to take care of the current shock on the cotton farmers.

Why am I saying this? If we can pick billions of money and pay a businessman who invested nothing and has no shock, what about the majority of Ugandans who have got a real big shock and those who contribute a lot of money? I propose that we say that Government immediately gets supplementary funds to put in the Central Bank to cater for the farmers in the cotton sector. 

6.32
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable members for the comments they have made. I want to comment on resolution three where they say that Government intervenes to ensure that farmers are protected from external shocks as they seem not less than 75 percent. As you all know, there is a liberalisation policy, which you must persuade Government to remove if this has to work, and as you all know, all commodities exported are subjected to cyclical changes. In other words, one year they are down and another year they are up, and this is exactly what has happened to cotton. 

I want to correct the impression made that it is Government which picked an indicative price of Shs 1,600. No! It was fixed by the industry after consultations between farmers’ representatives, ginners and textile mills. So, this is not a government fixed price, but it was indicative, reflecting the market price world over at that time, and this is true with cotton. It also works in coffee because prices change on a daily basis and you have to keep monitoring them over and over again. So, it would be extremely difficult for the Government to guarantee this 75 percent when it is not in charge of the commodity prices on the world market and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the resolution is saying whatever the price on the world market, the 75 percent should be protected. It is not saying that it will be stable. 

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Yes, and I was saying that in order for this to happen, then the liberalisation policy has to change. Let me put it this way –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. I want to inform the minister that in the UK, if farmers decided to sell milk, coffee or meat and run their farms, there would be no meat and coffee because the cost of producing that milk, meat and coffee is beyond, and that is why there is the cooperative bank and the farmers have been given subsidies. I am just giving you an example. Here we are saying that for our farmers to grow cotton, there must be Government intervention because we are an agricultural country and we are saying that the 75 percent must be guaranteed. If it is guaranteed and we fall short, we must come to the budget and get money and give to the farmers. 

MR BUCHANAYANDI: What hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying about Europe is correct, but the rationale is different. Out there, 95 percent of the population are outside agriculture and only 5 percent are in agriculture and they can afford to subsidise agriculture. Here, it is the reverse. So, the example you have given of subsidies out there is valid, but the rationale behind it and the ability to support it are completely different, given the differences in circumstances as I have said. So, that is why it cannot work here. A subsidy wouldn’t work. Even with the best of intentions and as someone was saying, I recall the contribution from my brother from Masaka who talked about increases and especially increases supported long-term - what I am trying to persuade at least within the short-term I have been the Minister of Agriculture is to be able to differentiate between the use of a technology and development of that technology. The two are completely different. 

Let me give you an example to illustrate, Mr Speaker. If I go out and buy a kilo of improved maize and I go and plant it, I have used technology, but to get that kilo of maize to the level where it is sellable, as a certified seed is a different matter altogether and it takes a long time, and sustainable investment over a long time because development without technology has to begin with the breeder to develop the seed; it has to be backed, commercialised, corrected, dressed, certified and then bagged off to the market. This is true in all areas where you are talking about development of technology and its production. Now, these strategies have to be developed over time and what I am trying to persuade this august House to appreciate is that yes, even with the best of intentions, we are not there yet, but we have to get there if that has to be achieved. That is all. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the honourable minister to appreciate this type of situation and this is precisely where we derive the argument for stabilisation or subsidies. At the beginning of the season, Government in the form of a cotton development policy will tell farmers the indicative price and that is the motivation for the farmers to grow cotton. I will give you an example, not from Teso where I come from. We do grow cotton and I can be on record; I have been telling farmers not to grow this thing because it just makes them poorer; but I will borrow what happens in Kasese. In Kasese, they don’t have much land. So, the farmers have to hire where they cultivate. Once the Cotton Development Authority says we will buy at Shs 2,000, that is the motivation for you to rent a garden at Shs 200,000 and then labour; you plant the seeds and harvest the crops and then the same people who told you they will offer you Shs 2,000 at the end of the crop season - besides, the authority even determines the season for selling the cotton - yes, it is in the law. They are the ones who say, “Now, it is time to market, you will stop at this.” It is something very ridiculous and then after they have made you engage in that they will tell you, “By the way, the price is now Shs 1,000.” What is this? Is this modern day slavery for cotton growers? And if the government is reluctant to do stabilisation or to subsidise, then they should just get their hands out of cotton, probably so that the farmers know their fate is in their own hands. If they chose to cultivate so be it; if they lose, it is up to them. But this false motivation is really wrong and Government must own up to it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, honourable minister, why should you give indicative prices in a liberalised economy and then later on when the people are excited and they want to do that, then the prices come down? Why would you do that?

MR BUCHANAYANDI: First of all, Mr Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, it is not Government that is fixing the price or giving an indicative price; it is the industry; a consultation between farmers, ginners and textile mills. So, that one is very clear and these indicative prices have worked for a long time. For instance in 2008/2009, the indicative price announced was Shs 600. In 2009/2010, it was Shs 900 due to change in circumstances on the world market. In the recent past, the figure they have been quoting was Shs 1,600 but this was arrived at after looking at the market trend and we realised that cotton prices last year had gone as high as Shs 3,000 per kilo. That was the rationale. So, when it fluctuates and follows the market trend, then that is the business on cotton, which is the demand at the other end. So, this indicative price is not a wrong indicator, but it does reflect what the practical reality is on the world market. 

I already explained why Government cannot subsidise now, because of the differences in the people who do the farming. I told you, when -(Interjections)- can I finish this little thing and I take your clarification. And when I was answering, the issue raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi was that in Europe it is only five percent in farming. The other 95 percent are outside agriculture and can afford to subsidise. Here it is the reverse and that is why it will be extremely difficult for Government to commit itself to subsidise. 

However, if you can persuade and increase the budget and you can subsidise, that would be a good idea. But for now, I am giving you the practical reality as I know it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just understand this, honourable minister, because they are saying not less than 75 percent of the world market price. That means there is a world market price and they are saying this one should not be less than 75 percent of that price, which will have been known at the time you are doing this. What is the problem with it? Hon. Ruhindi.

6.43
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, from the debate, I appreciate the concerns raised by Members who are urging Government to ensure that, for instance, when there are external shocks that affect the farmers, Government should come in and help and stabilise the price. That argument is of course taken up by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, but we are going to run a risk because this motion is moved by a private Member and of course we are all mindful of Article 93. 

My view would be that in this resolution we urge -(Interjections)- hold on - we urge Government to make the necessary interventions. Since the minister has promised to bring here a paper, I think next week - did he? I heard him say that he intends to bring a comprehensive paper on this matter next week. When we are debating that paper, whether it means referring it to the appropriate committee and urging for necessary Government interventions from a financial perspective, then we can do so. Mr Speaker, I beg to advise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in other words, what are you saying in relation to what is before us?

MR RUHINDI: For instance, the requested amendment for a stabilisation fund and also in respect of –(Interruption in Power Supply.)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I was on the issue of, for instance, proposed amendments to do with stabilisation funds in this motion and I am also not quite comfortable with the way clause 3 is worded, because it would mean that should it be less than 75 percent of the world market prices, then the government also comes in to subsidise. That to me is a charge on the Consolidated Fund under Article 93.

I would be happier that those issues to do with financial implications are considered in detail when the minister presents his paper. In the meantime, for instance in clause 3, we could say, “Future government interventions to ensure that farmers are protected from external shocks and we stop there.” But when we go ahead to mention the 75 percent we are tying ourselves. It is actually like what you were saying, Mr Speaker, that when you put in figures - this is an indirect way of putting in figures. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there might be a time that we need to sit and review this issue of financial implication, but for now, we are still bound by it. In order that we can move forward with this motion, can we make some concessions so that we can make some progress on this? Hon. Akena.

MR JAMES AKENA: Mr Speaker, I am not very comfortable with conceding on the 75 percent, the reason being that farmers get exploited. You can find somebody offering a farmer 30 percent of the world market price and immediately the middlemen are making a huge profit off the sweat of the farmers. We need to have - I can adjust the percentage - but we need to find ways of integrating the farmer into the world market price that at least he gets some benefit from his produce which is going to be sold on the world market. Otherwise, when farmers are being paid 10 or 20 percent of the world market price, that is exploitation. They must get at least something and that is why it is pegged on the world market price. If the world market price drops to 10 cents the farmer will get 7.5 cents. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, suppose it was phrased this way: “Future Government interventions to ensure that farmers receive not less than 75 percent of the world market price.”  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what we are trying to do is like a disaster has happened and that is why in our Constitution we have what we call the contingency fund. If we have a contingency fund, it should be the same one to deal with such issues. If farmers have got good yields, but the market has dropped, then they should resort to the contingency fund and the contingency fund can be brought here to be appropriated. There is nothing we are dealing with which is wrong here. We could leave that 75 percent. We should guarantee from now that if there is a problem, we shall refer to the contingency fund. It is there.

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (DR JAMES MUTENDE): Thank you Mr Speaker. I appreciate all the contributions which have been made, but I want to make one or two comments. Cotton is a plantation crop just like you see sugarcane and these other crops like sisal and what have you. To be economically viable even to the farmers, you must have a bigger size of land to use. So, when you have subsistence farming already, we are beginning from a loss. That is just background information. 

But I want to draw us to this paper that was presented, just the first two paragraphs which were very good - the elaborations were wonderful, talking about the need for value-addition and the role of CDO as it was mandated. Really, when we come to the resolutions which have been made here, I think resolution two could be reviewed and it has to give us a longer term outlook other than this thing of short-term interventions. I would propose it reads, “Government reviews the performance of Cotton Development Organisation with the aim of promoting private sector investment in value-addition in the sector.” If we can have corporate investors who can come in and add value, then we shall have cushioned ourselves from the vagaries of price fluctuations globally.

Secondly, on resolution three, what is magical about 75 percent? I think that is why the Attorney-General was advising that we go back and do something more quantitative, and also do a better analysis. What is magical about 75 percent? Let us not be so emotional that we must get 75 percent of the world prices; supposing we can give 86 percent or 45 percent and still keep our farmers comfortable. So, that is why I think that we should allow the minister to go and do a better economic analysis and come up with a figure that makes sense. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sure the Minister of State for Industry comes from Bugisu. We are talking of value-addition and there is what we call the African Textile Mills; what happened to it? We have Lira Spinning Mills; what has happened to it? Now, you are coming here to say that the Member should add that – you should have come here to tell us that as Government, you have done this and this. Otherwise, you should retire to Bugisu if you cannot say that.
 
MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to defend my proposal on the position which we had already taken; the House had already adopted resolution two.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the hon. Jimmy Akena had conceded to it but we had not yet adopted it. 

MS ALASO: Yes, but the minister wants to review it, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He had agreed to it although we had not yet adopted it as the House. 

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker. What I would like to inform the minister, maybe because he is very new in the sector, is that this sector has flouted the law. If the law says six years and you are keeping Sabune from 1994 to date, then we might have – if you cannot deal with the change of the board, then we may have to think of dealing with the relevant minister who should change the board because it is the minister who appoints the members of the board. So, for you to divert us to value-addition something, which you people as a government ran away from long ago, and you are now trying to shield a non-performing board is very unfair. Honourable minister, we must really deal with the board as well. 

6.53
MR JIMMY AKENA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I felt it important to address some of the concerns of the minister. Part of the reason of bringing this whole issue is that the whole idea around private enterprises – investor driven - has not worked in the cotton sector. 

Previously - and I will also address the concerns of my colleague - much of the infrastructure was under the control of the cooperatives. Right now, if you look at the pricing which the ginners put to the farmers - they charge a fee for storage; they charge a fee for buyers; they charge so many categories of fees across the board, which used to be handled by the cooperatives. The ginneries were controlled by the cooperatives. At this moment, there is a stabilisation fund under CDO under which farmers were being charged Shs 200 per kilo last year and that charge is still on this year. So, when I asked to review, I didn’t mention the stabilisation fund because it actually exists under CDO.

The issue of a percentage; even in the world’s leading capitalistic economy, there is something called a minimum wage job. I am just putting it that let us protect the farmers. How it will come in place should not be immediately, but you are setting the intervention. There should be mechanisms which will be able to help the farmer. And honestly, the private sector has not worked. Since you sold Lira Spinning Mill twice, it has not produced a single bit of yarn. Let us review; that is why the question of reviewing and looking at the cooperatives, where they succeeded and where they failed, is relevant. At this moment, cotton has failed.

This Parliament subsidised what was formerly Uganda Garments, now Phoenix, twice, the third time we refused to subsidise. This is an industry in the textile area where we are saying the private sector - it was initially a joint venture, where Government had interests and African Textiles Mills collapsed. NYTIL is possibly the only one which is still going and yet all these were an integrated process. So, let us look at this sector critically with a view of helping the farmers and helping the industry to grow. If what you are doing is not working, please review and let us find a way of moving forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.57
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Mr Speaker, I just want to emphasise that the honourable Member’s motion is very important, but must be within the constitutional provisions. The Attorney-General has said that if this motion is going to work, then it must be moved by the government according to Article 93 of the Constitution. So, it is not acceptable. If you can accept the amendment of the Attorney-General, the minister can come and take some of the issues that you are raising into account, though now on the government side, so that it can be in line with the Constitution. But if you insist, it becomes unconstitutional.  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are really trying to misuse the provisions of the Constitution because if we say that farmers are protected from external shocks and they should receive not less than 75 percent, it might mean that you just intervene and no buyer should buy below that. It doesn’t mean that you will put in money. So, let us not misuse the Constitution to try to undermine this law. You may just insist that no buyer should buy below a stated price and that is all and you will thereby have intervened as a government without necessarily putting in money. So, that is why I wanted that clarification. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Should the figure be more than the 75 percent on the international market, what should we do? But if it cannot be paid here, Government should come in. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is saying it is 75 percent of the world market price. So, if the world market price is Shs 1, then it is 75 percent which is 75 cents. If the world market price is Shs 100 then it is Shs 75.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yeah, what I am also asking is that supposing it is not that, what will happen? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it will have a price. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Then, who will meet the difference? Yeah, we must also ask, who will meet the difference? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is at stake is that the price of cotton, where we sell on the world market, is Shs 1,000. We are saying that you middle men should not buy it at 20 percent so that you go and make 80 percent. We are saying, you middlemen must buy it at, at least 75 percent so that the 25 percent will take care of your transport costs and your margins.

Having said that, if at all you decide to consume it here locally, you should pay the 75 percent because that is the price on the world market. So, there is no way Government should get worried. The only way Government can come in is assuming the cost of production by the farmers is less than the price on the world market; then it should be a sensible Government to come and help their farmers so that they can match it. But I know very well that it will never be less by the world market price.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate is taking us - I do not see - how do we resolve this matter? Because the honourable minister initially said he had no problem with this motion. Now he has had a change of heart that now he has a problem with this motion. Please make a statement then I see how to move forward because we cannot be on this forever.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, when I said I had no problem, I was talking about the trend of thought, but not the actual figures. This is really what I meant. Maybe I did not explain that far. When I asked for time to consult as the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General advised, I still think this is correct.

For instance, we are talking about a stabilisation fund. That fund is not a government fund, but a private one owned by ginners and so on. Now Government cannot commit itself to that fund without consulting them. So, this becomes a matter for consultation.

We are talking about revival of cooperatives. Yes, my colleague is here, but still, we need to consult people in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and so on. This consultative process is required and even the indicative price is not a figure that you just dream about. It is pegged on the international price at a given material time, but I told you characteristically that commodities of that nature have ups and downs over time. That is why I was saying we have to allow time for consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whichever way we go, we will not be able to make a decision on this matter right now. I am, therefore, proposing that we defer continuing debate on this matter and defer our decision to next week on Tuesday, by which time the honourable minister as you promised, should do those background things and come and give a more comprehensive explanation to some of these matters so that we are able to take a decision properly on Tuesday afternoon. Is that agreeable, Members? Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I respect your guidance on this matter, and I will adhere to it fully. I think that the Chair should look for a way to help this House on these so-called financial implications because it is emerging in every debate and I am noticing that it is actually being misused. It is becoming the rope with which our hands are tied on every motion, even when we just want to urge or to propose. Even when there are no figures, the Attorney-General, my good friend, will rise up and say, financial implications and he really intimidates us using that word.  

I think that maybe your office, Mr Speaker, should figure out a way of defining this thing called financial implications, to allow Members leverage to suggest action to Government. Because, now if you go to this thing we have just proposed, we are talking about world markets and they are saying financial implications. We are not even talking about our own budgets, but world market prices and the Attorney-General says financial implications. Of what? Of world market prices? Really, I think help us, Chair on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 01/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, it is 7 O’clock now, but can’t we handle these questions because the ministers are here, the responses are ready and we do not need to vote on them? So, why don’t we handle them? I see honourable members coming in and going out. It is only the Speaker that has been in the same chair since we started. So, why don’t you follow my example and we go on a little longer? Nobody will be going out for now until we finish. Let us see how far we can go with the questions. Please, let us bear this because we have been here for a while and another 30 minutes will not be too bad.

7.07
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was hoping that it would be otherwise because I even forgot the response the minister had given me at home as I did not think it would be on today’s Order Paper, but nonetheless, again we adhere to your guidance on this matter. “(i) Would the Minister inform the House the fate of the fruit processing factory that was pledged to the Teso sub-region in 2005? 
(ii) What measures, if any, has the Minister put in place to fast-track the setting up of the fruit processing plant in the above region?”

7.08
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Mr Speaker, there were two questions in that section. The response for the first one is, first of all, Government constituted a task force with clear terms of reference to -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedure I am raising is I see this 01/1/09 - does this mean 2009?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a number.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, we are answering a question of 2009?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is a number. This is the first question of the first session of the Ninth Parliament. Please, honourable Minister.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, thank you. The answer to this question is that first of all, Government constituted a task force with clear terms of reference to fast-track the implementation of the pledge. The task force is chaired by the managing director, Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) and the members include Uganda Industrial Research Institute - I sent this response to the Clerk to Parliament with a copy to the Speaker and, therefore -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Uganda Investment Authority, National Agricultural Research Organisation, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and the budget advisor of the Ministry of Finance.

The progress so far is that a consultant to carry out a feasibility study was hired and has submitted a draft report for review by the steering committee, which I read a little earlier. A consultant to do an environmental impact assessment was also hired and submitted a draft report for review by the steering committee.

The Korean team came and inspected the proposed site and made the following observations:

The plot that had been allocated for the factory was found unsuitable because of the high water table, and it was prone to water logging and possibly, flooding. Therefore, that plot was found unsuitable. They are now trying to find another plot.
 
Now, the Government allocated Shs 10 billion for the preparatory phase; some funds have been used for the feasibility and environmental impact assessment studies and the rest of it is with the finance ministry. The South Korean Government has also provided a loan of $6.5 million for the factory civil works, procurement of equipment and training. UDC is pursuing extension of power and water to the site in conjunction with the Ministries of Energy and of Water and Environment, respectively. It is also taking up identification and location of the new plot for the factory with the Uganda Investment Authority and Soroti Local Government. That means the construction of the factory is on schedule as of now, but has been hindered by the process of identifying a new plot. Money to do the feasibility study and environmental impact assessment has been procured, and the South Korean loan has been procured to the tune of $6.5 million.

Question two was asking for the measures the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has put in place to support the setting up of the factory. This question is more of production than the factory, which I have just finished. The ministry is supporting the formation and running of Teso Fruit Growers’ Association, which is prepared to partner with the processor factory once it is established. This association is of farmer groups promoting citrus and mango enterprises in Teso sub-region. The ministry provides advisory services in that regard. It is also doing research to screen suitable varieties for industrial processes and we have appointed Okasai S. Opolot, a focal person, who is the Director of Agricultural Resources. His contact is given here on the document. 

There are only two challenges; the up-scaling of production of the right varieties and quality of oranges and mangoes for the factory. The Ministry of Agriculture through the NAADS programme is taking up this challenge. The second challenge is the allocation of an appropriate plot for the factory, but the local government is doing that right now. 

Those are my responses. I want to assure my colleague that action has been taken and work is progressing on schedule. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, do you have any supplementary questions?

7.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister because he gave me a response much earlier and I was comforted by his action even though the fruit factory is really way off. I have three brief questions; what is the percentage of shareholding that the fruit-growers will have in this country? Since you have been holding negotiations, we want to know our percentage. The second question is: I wonder if the minister is aware that there is a lot of produce now getting wasted because when Government told people in 2005 to grow fruits, they were encouraged and they have a lot of oranges and mangoes currently. Unfortunately, now there is no market, and with the speed at which you are moving and with money disappearing from the Ministry of Finance, I think there is a problem. 

Lastly, when Parliament debated here some time back, we were told that money had been spent putting up a signpost; what steps have you taken to recover this money? In your response, honouarable minister, I observe a contraction, because you first said there is a problem with the site since it is prone to water logging and, therefore, a new site is being sought. But immediately after that statement, he said UDC is moving water and power; now, to which site? Please clarify. Thank you.

7.16
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): My supplementary question is: I have not heard the minister pronounce himself on the Shs 5 billion, which was given in the last financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was not part of the question because the question was specific.

MR OCHOLA: It was specific, but I thought he would have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was specific and honourable members, you have to be relevant to the question because I am very strict with the rules now. You have to supplement the question raised because that is the question for which the answers were prepared.

MR OCHOLA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But I will still move to the minister’s talk of the plot not being suitable. I know that site very well because before UIA accepted it, a feasibility study was done by NEMA and other relevant organs of Government and it was found that the site was suitable. Otherwise, by then, I was chairman of that district and we had given a different plot for the factory, but Government preferred that particular location. I do not know what has now changed; did the technical people then fail to advise the Government? The minister should answer.

The other thing is that last time, I mentioned that it was only a signpost which was at the site, but as we speak now, even that one has disappeared. I wonder where the Shs 2 billion being used for taking water and power is going since we do not have the site.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please ask the supplementary question directly.

MR OCHOLA: Yes, that is my question: Where is the signpost on which you spent Shs 5 billion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely. Thank you.

MR OCHOLA: The other question regards the up-scaling of the varieties. The minister said there is a plan to have new varieties suitable for the factory, but there are a number of varieties which Government gave the people of Teso through NAADS. Didn’t Government come up with the right varieties for the factory before encouraging the people of Teso to grow the varieties they now have? What happens if the factory rejects the current varieties which people have grown in acres?

7.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Who was responsible for fast-tracking the factory but never did it, yet you have been provided with a three-year budget for the factory? Secondly, where did you put money meant for the factory in the last three years?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Regarding the first question on percentage of shareholding by the farmers, I have to do consultation because frankly, I have not read the contract that was made. So, I will have to find out.

On the question of up-scaling varieties, research is a continuous process. There is nothing that is fixed; you come up with a variety, and you keep improving. This does not suggest that what was given was wrong, but in agriculture, we keep upgrading and investigating more and more because research produces additional research.

On the question of money for the last years, again, I will have to consult. I told you I have got a focal point and I named Mr Okasai. When I come back, I will give you the correct answer. I do not want to guess.


QUESTION 02/1/09

7.22
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): “(i) Would the minister explain to the House the progress made in the Karamoja disarmament exercise?
(ii)What measures have been put in place to stem further incursions by the cattle rustlers into the neighbouring districts?”

Mr Speaker, I have not got the answer to this question as required by the rules. When the minister is coming, he is required to provide me with an answer first. So, I have no answer to this question. I do not know whether you would advise me to proceed and just hear it on the Floor or should I have studied it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us receive the answer because he is already here and then we see how to move.

MS ALASO: Maybe, they give me a copy. Otherwise, I have no entitlement in this question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there is No.2, can we have the next item.

QUESTION 04/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS

7.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): “(i)How many orphans and vulnerable children are in Uganda?
(ii) What interventions has the ministry put in place to alleviate the challenges faced by the orphans and vulnerable children?”

My position is the same on this matter. I have no response from the minister, so what do I do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will take that up, honourable member.

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, the question is: How many orphans and vulnerable children are in Uganda?

Honourable colleagues, Government of Uganda with the support of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Uganda, contracted the Population Council and its partners, Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Mathematical Policy Research, to conduct a second situational analysis of orphans and vulnerable children in Uganda. 

The study established that up to 96.1 percent, which is equivalent to 16.4 million of the children in Uganda, are considered to have some form of vulnerability. 43 percent of these are moderately vulnerable while eight percent are considered critically vulnerable, requiring immediate support. 

My ministry’s focus is the moderately vulnerable and critically vulnerable children who constitute approximately 8.5 million.

Honourable colleagues, orphans in Uganda remain a big challenge. According to Uganda National Household Survey report 2009/2010, children constitute about 57.4 percent, which is equivalent to 17.1 million below the age of 18 of Uganda’s total population by then, which was 30.7 million people.

Out of the 17.1 million, 14 percent, which is about 2.43 million have been orphaned. 45.6 percent, equivalent to 1,108,080 of the orphans, are due to HIV/AIDS, and 105,000 children are in the age bracket of 0-14, and are HIV positive. That answers question 1, on the level of orphans and vulnerability.

Question 2 was: “What interventions has the ministry put in place to address the challenges faced by orphans and vulnerable children?” 
Government’s commitment to address the challenges faced by OVCs is manifested in the National OVC Policy and the five-year National Strategic Programme Plan of intervention. This plan has been under implementation since November 2004 under the leadership and stewardship of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. During the five-year period, a number of strategies, guidelines and systems were developed to guide stakeholders in providing comprehensive and quality services to OVCs in Uganda. 

Some of the key interventions and achievements include expanding social delivery to OVCs through the civil society organisations. Through the Civil Society Fund, basket funding by the Italian Cooperation, United States Agency for International Development, DANIDA, DFID, and the Swedish International Development Agency, grants were provided to 42 lead civil society organisations countrywide, which enabled them to reach and provide care and support to 935,000 OVCs, which is equivalent to 11 percent of the OVCs and their households.

The OVCs through the grants provided to the civil society organisations have been able to access tuition and non-tuition items as a way of complementing the UPE and Universal Secondary Education programmes. The support targets OVCs, who would otherwise have dropped out of school for lack of tuition and non-tuition items. The subsequent is further explanation of how this grant has helped these OVCs and their households.

In line with the mandate of the ministry, grants were provided to seven technical support organisations to mentor and strengthen the district systems for planning, coordination and monitoring of the OVC response at district and lower government levels. Consequently, 80 districts have been enabled to develop OVC strategic plans and establish multi-sectoral coordination committees at the district and sub-county levels, enhancing the response to the problems of OVCs. 

With the creation of additional districts, plans are underway to scale out to all districts. 

Additionally, grants were extended to three regional civil society organisations: Save the Children in Uganda for Northern; Mayanja Memorial Hospital for Western; and Mildmay for central. A reasonable number of OVCs have been able to access these services under these arrangements.

We have also coordinated the mobilisation of resources for OVC service delivery through the Civil Society Fund under the Public-Private Partnership. The ministry has also been able to mobilise funds from USAID to support the implementation of this National Strategic Programme Plan of Intervention - Level II. The subsequent explanations for those funds that we have managed to mobilise are there.

The ministry through the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) under the Expanding Social Protection Programme, will provide social assistance in form of cash transfers to chronically poor households deemed eligible on the basis of old age and vulnerability and here, I have to explain. 

You are talking about children and we are talking about old age because research has it that many of the orphans live with the older population. So, through SAGE transfers, the target households of which the OVCs are part, will be empowered to address the needs of the OVCs like food, non-tuition items, nutrition issues and access to medical treatment among others. A pilot programme targets to reach 600,000 persons over a five-year period, of which 50 percent are OVC. 

In conclusion, Government remains committed and the progress toward the national OVC response remains on course in spite of the challenges that continue to impact negatively on the OVC heightening their vulnerability. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I see that you have not gone through the full report. You have jumped some of the critical areas and the document does not seem to be signed. I would like you to sign one copy and lay it on the table for the committees to pick it up later. 

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I have signed; I was just mindful of the procedure that responses don’t go beyond three minutes. So, I wanted to be within the law. I, therefore, take this opportunity to lay this response on the Table of the House. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am not satisfied by the answer; I am actually trying to study it, but I think the minister side-stepped my concerns. For that reason, I wonder if the minister can avail us a detailed criterion upon which he selected the civil society organisations that have been given support and grants. And also, he should detail to this House the beneficiaries of this grant. 

I also think that that minister should not have stopped at capacity building because these orphans do not eat capacity building. So, I would like to know the beneficiaries of the other programs other than capacity building. This workshop mentality is unfair. 

Finally, I would like to pray that this response goes to the committee so that the minister is tasked to give a proper response. It is over five years since we got the OVC policy in place and you cannot talk of capacity building when there are children who are starving and there are child-headed households. So, let the relevant committee look into this so that the minister provides a better response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Chairperson of the Social Services Committee is here; pick that up and we shall see how we can make progress on that in the committee. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, such questions should come as soon as we enter Parliament. I want you to tell me; we have Karimojong in Mbale and even Kampala; but I want to specifically talk about Kampala. Where is the OVC for those Karimojong? 

I want you also to give me an example where you gave ox-ploughs to these children; where are they?

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want the minister to help me understand what tangible arrangements he has in place as far as planning for vulnerable children who are under his care like those in the reception home in Naguru. Children are taken there when they are still very young and many of them do not know any of their relatives. How many of them have you settled as men and women so we can know that you are really delivering.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Honourable minister, make your quick responses so that we can go on. And on the issue of those pending matters raised by hon. Alaso, the committee will pick it up from there.


MR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, this one is not under the mandate of Social Services; it is under the Committee on Gender.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, sorry, it will go to the appropriate committee – it is of Gender. 

7.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (MR Suleiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I think the most unfortunate part is that Members do not have copies of what I have presented. But from my presentation, we are not merely talking about workshops. I have told you that we have put in place an OVC program where we provide support to this group and this support helps them to get the non-tuition and tuition issues. 

I have also said that we have introduced what we call a Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE), where we are piloting in 14 districts, and we are providing Shs 23,000 to the older persons, which we think if they have it – of course one may think it is very small. For a person in the village to get Shs 23,000 monthly, it would be able to provide them with a piece of soap –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have all along appreciated the difference between being 60 or 70 years, and being 12 or 14 years. And the minister is the custodian of the children. He knows that the people we are asking about are below 15 and 16 years. Why do you now want to explain away the challenges of those little children sitting in the streets the whole day begging for food, with a program which you are piloting for people of 60 and 70 years, whom by now do not even have children begging for food. 

Mr Speaker, is the minister in order to mislead this House by mixing up 60 years with 12 years of age?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is about children and you should present the acceptable ideas about children in this House. 

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I want to explain; people should be able to appreciate that when we talk about older persons, the beneficiaries of the older persons are children – (Interjections)– you may dispute it. But HIV/AIDS has killed many people and the orphans are leaving with the older persons.  Our research has shown that by providing for the older persons, you are in turn providing for the children. 

Studies all over the world, even in this region, have indicated the same results. In South Africa, for example, where this grant was started earlier, it was found out that children living with the people getting the funds are 3 inches taller than those who are not getting the fund. This is because these children receive food and their nutrition levels have improved. 

Therefore, this money to the older persons is meant to help the people they study with. All over the world, this intervention has been helping the orphans. 

Someone has been talking about the ox-ploughs. On the issue of Karamoja, there is a separate question that the honourable Minister for Karamoja is going to respond to and it is on the Order Paper. So, it is not part of what I am addressing.

You have talked about Karamoja; the issue of street children is going to be addressed by my colleague, the Minister in Charge of Karamoja. As for the other details, we will present a report to you and you will be able to see what we are doing in terms of helping the OVCs.

QUESTION 10/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Minister of Defence is not here. (Mr Ruhindi rose_) Are you the Minister of Defence? So, the minister is not here. Next item.

QUESTION 07/01/09

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has he delegated somebody to answer this question? [HON. MEMBERS: “Nobody.”] Next item. 

QUESTION 03/01/09

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I communicated at the beginning that I would bring the other questions forward since the answers were ready. I amended the Order Paper to allow Questions 3 and 5 to be dealt with before we adjourn. Is there nobody to ask Question 3? Hon. Alaso is here. 

QUESTION 03/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
 
7.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): “Would the minister explain to the House the plans, if any, the government has to compensate the people of Teso for the losses incurred during the UPA-NRA war, cattle raids and the Lords Resistance Army invasion?”

7.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, this is a brief statement of commitment in answer to this question. On 4 January, 2011, the President –(Interjections)- do you want me to state the question again? Hon. Alice Alaso, Woman Representative, Serere would like the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to explain to the House, the plans, if any, the government has to compensate the people of Teso sub-region for the losses incurred during the UPA/NRA War, cattle raids and the Lords Resistance invasions?  

In answer to this: On the 4th of January, 2011, the President wrote to the Attorney-General and stated that he had been briefed about the concerns of the people in Teso sub-region. These concerns touched claims brought by over 10,000 claimants about the loss of livestock and other property lost during the insurgency in the region.

The President directed that a verification of all losses suffered be undertaken and all claims verified and approved be settled within the financial years of 2011/2012 and 2012/2013.

Following this directive, a pre-verification and information notification tour of the whole of the Teso sub-region was undertaken by a verification team appointed, following the President’s instructions in February 2011. Within this calendar year, it is anticipated that a verification of all cattle loss claims will be undertaken with a purpose of creating an enlightened position of the liability due to Government. This position on the total value of these claims will be used as a basis for compensation.

Therefore, in answer to the question for oral answer, Government is committed to compensating the people of Teso sub-region for the losses suffered during the period of insurgency. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, any supplementary questions? 

7.45 
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General says there was a team appointed in February 2011. Is the minister concerned that February 2011 was an election period and, therefore, owing to the atmosphere in the region, the pre-verification exercise was misunderstood as an election gimmick? Does he consider that it is necessary for him to undertake a verification exercise now when there is no such atmosphere and when people can fully participate? 

The final bit of my concern is that he also attached a letter from the President. I do not know whether it is the Attorney-General who sent it along with the answer, but a copy of a letter from the President in regard to the matter – my concern is whether the Attorney-General is aware of a team of people already in court over this matter and whether you have contacted them because the President is advising an out of court settlement. The group is led by Mzee Epafulas Imodot and Mr Julius Ocen. Are you in touch with them and are you considering them as part of this group whose claims you are going to handle?

The final and last concern is that previously, in 2003, Government came up and said no claim should be entertained beyond 2003, yet the process was so messy. Even here, I read a letter from the President saying no further claims should be entertained from this region in future; yet the Attorney-General, the Minister of Justice, is aware of the challenges in his ministry. Why would he put a cap on a process which he has not even started? Thank you.

7.48
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two questions. One, I do not know whether –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask the question please.

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, I am asking the minister. Is he aware that there was a lot of politicisation of this verification at that time? Two, how are you going to handle those families, especially those who lost their animals and property by then? The parents have died and we now have the children or grandchildren. How are you going to handle those kinds of families? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

7.49
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Can I ask the minister to confirm whether the verification and compensation is going to cover the Lango sub-region and Acholi? Secondly, there has also been a case of – which has been won in Lango led by Moses Otim - and whether the ministry is planning to compensate those who had applied through court and got a settlement. 

7.50
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): To add on what hon. Akena has asked, is the minister considering the victims of the LRA insurgency, especially in my constituency, in the Adelogo and Otkwac parishes in Alito sub-county, where they were massacred and thousands of property was lost? If you are to quantify -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The question is asked. Hon. Magyezi.

7.50
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Is the verification and subsequent compensation for losses incurred during the war restricted to the Teso region or is it a national exercise to cover all the other regions? 
 
7.51
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (INDEPENDENT, Kalungu East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the first page the minister said – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just ask the question, honourable member.

MR SEMPIJJA: Yes, I am asking the minister whether there is a timetable for the verification of the cattle loss and the consequent compensation.

7.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE (Mr Ruhindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is quite a mouthful. But first, I want to thank all those who have raised these supplementary questions.

On what hon. Alaso said, I would like to say that I am not aware that when this verification was carried out in the Teso sub-region, it was considered to be an election gimmick. I am just being informed now. But of course, the most important question is whether there is another verification that is about to be carried out.

I must state – and of course, this is also related to what hon. Jimmy Akena is saying on why there has been a delay in concluding this exercise in the Teso sub-region. It is because our staff who are conversant with these matters and who even went there during the February exercise, are busy concluding the verification exercise in Gulu and the Acholi sub-regions in general. They have assured me that within one month’s time, they will be in Teso sub-region.

What I am trying to say is that there is going to be another verification exercise. The budget for it has already been drawn. So, it is just a question of time.

I undertake, and hon. Jimmy Akena, you will bear with me – I will have to cross-check together with you whether the verification in the Acholi sub-region, which I was briefed about, also includes the Lango sub-region; we shall do that together.

Yes, I am aware of the court case because this is Eyotu Jackson and others Vs the Attorney-General. It is because of this that the President intervened. 

On why put a close or a moratorium; I think I cannot speak for the President who wrote the letter on this matter. However, my thinking is that certainly, cases of this nature – I think what he had in mind was that we do as much as possible to ensure that whatever we do is conclusive so that it closes the subject matter about these expected compensations.

On the issue of politicisation, I would like to say that I do not know what has not been politicised in Uganda. From my understanding, everything has been politicised. So, we must bear with that kind of situation. But anyway, on a serious note, these are matters where people have died and their property lost and so they should not be politicised.

About what should be done to those who died; of course, we all know what happens when people die. They leave legal representatives or those who are left behind are helped to see that they can actually get what is due to them through that kind of representation, which is legitimate. And that is precisely the work of the verification team. We shall do our best to help those who were left behind.

There was a question on the victims of the LRA and so on. But as I said, we should follow this up with those people raising concerns as to what these matters pertain. That also answers hon. Magyezi’s question.  I know that we are looking at regions that have been affected by such insurgencies and those are the ones we are talking about.

When you talk about all the regions, in Ankole and so on - to some extent – I remember when the President visited some parts of Ankole – and we have been looking at estates of people who were killed during the Amin’s regime and see what we can do about them. So, certainly this is being handled on a case-by-case basis for very deserving cases.

On schedules, I want to say they are there because they are worked out. Of course, you know Mr Speaker, when you talk in terms of schedules, you also have to talk in terms of availability of resources because they go together. So, as Parliament, we allocate these resources and activities are done according to those resources. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable members. Next item.

QUESTION 05/1/09

7.57
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not want to discourage the spirit of continuity. So, unless you advise me in light of rule 36(2) –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does it say?  You are raising it for the consumption of the Members?

MS ALASO: It is about the order of oral questions to be determined by lot, and sub-section 2 states thus: “Not more than three questions for oral answers shall be asked by a Member at any one sitting.” I have already exhausted the three, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am using my prerogative to allow you ask the next one. (Laughter) Please, go ahead to ask the last one.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that, but I was also hoping that for this one question, I should have a written answer. So, I was escaping through the rules – I have been very tolerant to the ministers, but for this one, I am so passionate – if I can be assured through a written answer, then I will go to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I got a request from the minister in charge of this sector – she is supposed to be in Karamoja and she is supposed to have left today. So, if we do not do it today, we might have a problem – would you like to receive this answer now for us to free the minister; she has been here since?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I want to say is that the minister is free to go to Karamoja because she is supposed to do her work. But we need to bear in mind that she is not going to use her own resources. If she has to go to Karamoja, why didn’t she provide the answer to the Member? And since she did not do that, it is ideal for her to wait. I know that the concerns of the Karamoja children touch all of us; we need the answers seriously. I know the question will attract more questions. So, if she has to go to Karamoja, she can do that and come back for this later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This particular answer is in this House and the Member has received it. I want to ask the minister to sign a copy and lay it on the Table for further action. When the day comes, responses will be made. Please, lay it on Table after signing it.

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Ms Barbara Nekesa Oundo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With me is a response to hon. Alice Alaso’s concerns on what the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs is doing about the increasing number of street children in Kampala City, particularly.  I would like to lay my copy on Table. It is a response of five pages. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sign the last page. 

MRS OUNDO: Mr Speaker, I lay this copy on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, let the records capture it for further action. At the appropriate time, you will get an oral response to the question. 

Honourable members, thank you very much for persevering. One last announcement and then I will adjourn the House. The Parliament of Uganda will, on Friday this week, host the 2011 National Schools Debate Championship finals in the Conference Hall. You are all invited to come and participate in a special debate between Members of Parliament and students, from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on: “The Effectiveness of Caucuses in Parliament.” 

Please, find background information in your pigeon holes. I invite all of you to come and participate. Personally, I will come and participate in both the morning session and the afternoon session. I encourage you to come and encourage the young people so that we can revive the culture of debate. 

Many of us try to speak the way we do because of the background we had in the debating clubs when we were students. Let us try to encourage the young ones to learn the same and be good debaters in future.

Honourable members, if I had a means of making awards, today, I would be awarding medals to all the Members who have persevered with me up to 8 O’clock. We have been able to do a lot of work. Thank you very much.

Tomorrow, as you are aware, the request has been made by the Speaker that Members join her and the people of Busoga, the people of Uganda and visitors coming from outside the country, to fundraise for Busoga University. Members, you are all invited, and because of the significance that we have attached to this matter, there will be no plenary tomorrow. I will not be around because she has invited me to the function; so, nobody will be able to chair since she is also chairperson of the university there. 

So, we will adjourn this House to Tuesday 2:00 p.m. There are important business matters to be discussed on that day, please keep time. See you in Busoga.

(The House rose at 8.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 December 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)



