Tuesday, 9 December 2003

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been requested by the chairperson of the Young Parliamentary Association to invite you for a grand get-together tomorrow evening at which the Vice-President will be the guest of honour. So please polish your dancing shoes for tomorrow evening.  The function will take place in the Parliamentary Gardens at 7.00 p.m.

I would also like to ask you to join me in congratulating the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, who last week received an award from Global International –(Laughter and Applause)- Yes, the very Lukyamuzi of Lubaga North. 

He received the Queen of Lake Victoria Royal Environment Award 2003 in recognition of his dedicated services towards environmental conservation, development of natural resources and ecology, and his input to policy formulation in Uganda’s Parliament. Congratulations hon. Lukyamuzi. (Laughter)

Honourable members, as a result of the parliamentary debate on industrial unrest at Apparel Tri-Star Ltd that occurred in October and November 2003, this Parliament on November 6th adopted a resolution to set up a select committee. It was mandated with the task of inquiring into industrial labour relations concerning rights of workers and other employment issues. 

We have now formulated the terms of reference into the inquiry, which will be as follows:
1. The authenticity of allegations raised by workers of Apparel Tri-Star Ltd.

2. To examine the existing labour policies and laws with the aim of ascertaining as to whether they conform to the Constitution of Uganda.

3. To examine whether existing labour policies and laws comply with international treaties and conventions (such as AGOA) that Uganda is signatory to.

4. To examine whether Uganda’s labour laws are in harmony with those of Kenya and Tanzania in the spirit of harmonising the legal framework of the East African Community;

5. Any other matter, incidental or arising from the above-mentioned terms of reference, and the way forward.

The Select Committee on Adequacy of Industrial Relations in Uganda is comprised of the following Members:

1. Hon. Dora Byamukama  - chairperson
2. Hon. Ruth Kavuma  - member
3. Hon. Rex Aachilla -  member
4. Hon. Martin Orech – member
5. Hon. Lule Mawiya – member
6. Hon. Wagonda Muguli - member 
7. Hon. John Byabagambi - member.

Honourable members, Parliament also received and discussed a brief on displaced persons and government emergency intervention in Lira, Kaberamaido, Soroti and Katakwi districts. It was submitted by the Rt. hon. 1st Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Lt Gen. Moses Ali on Thursday July 13th 2003.  

This Parliament decided that owing to the serious and escalating security and humanitarian situation, the problem being faced in the capacity to handle it, as well as the problem of access to distribute the resource assistance to the affected people, the Speaker should establish a special or select committee to look into the matter and report back to Parliament as soon as possible.  

Accordingly, the Committee on the Security and Humanitarian Situation in Lango, Acholi and Teso sub-regions is hereby set up with the following terms of reference:

1. To study the report or brief on the situation of internally displaced persons and Government emergency intervention in Lira, Kaberamaido, Soroti and Katakwi districts submitted to Parliament on 13th November together with other previous reports of Parliament, which are available elsewhere, on the security situation in the northern part of Uganda.

2. To select, invite and interview persons in the civic society organisations, in the war ravaged areas, in the donor and NGO communities who have dealt with and handled humanitarian support programmes, who have carried out research/studies and written reports on the security situation in Northern Uganda, and the officials/members of the District Disaster Committees in order to appraise the state of humanitarian needs or crisis as well as the manner in which it is being handled in the war affected areas. Focus on the magnitude and the various capacities to handle the food, medical and education needs arising from the situation.

3. Invite and interview the ministers and officials of the ministries responsible for disaster and relief, medical and education programmes focused on the needs of internally displaced persons in particular and on war affected areas generally.

4. From the above interviews and findings, write a report to present to Parliament before it adjourns for recess indicating:

(a) The factual magnitude, scale the capacity and state of preparedness to handle the state of humanitarian situation in the Lango, Acholi and Teso sub-regions 
 
(b) An assessment of the way the situation has been handled so far and whether there are any existing and long-term plans on how to deal with the situation by the various agencies including government departments that are directly responsible for the various aspects of this matter

(c) To assess the government and donor capacity to deal with the current and projected needs for all aspects of the humanitarian assistance 

(d) Propose solutions to provide emergency and sustainable management of the security situation and humanitarian needs created by the Northern war

(e) Any other matter which the committee may consider important in the efforts to end the war and to ensure humanitarian support.

The committee is comprised as follows:

1. Hon. Alice Alaso  - chairperson
2. Hon. Jack Sabiiti  - Member
3. Hon. Mathias Kasamba -  Member
4. Hon. Angiro Gutomoi -  Member
5. Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo -  Member
6. Hon. Juliet Rainer -  Member
7. Hon. Hilary Onek -  Member
8. Hon. Jalia Bintu -  Member
9. Hon. Jessica Eriyo   Member 
10. Hon. Hood Katuramu - Member.

Honourable members, last week I did indicate that we are consulting on the way forward for the other committee we discussed last week. I will be in a position to give you the terms of reference and to name the committee at tomorrow’s sitting.

I would also like to amend the Order Paper to permit the hon. Michael Mabikke, Member for Makindye East, to make a statement. Immediately after that, the Attorney General will make his.

3.00
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of great concern in which I am seeking your guidance. I am raising this under Rule 29(1).  

Madam Speaker, on the 4th of December 2003, the Army Spokesman is quoted to have warned me and other people who are trying to undermine the institution of the Army. He specifically singled out my name in the Monitor newspaper of 6th. 

Again, Madam Speaker, today in the Monitor newspaper, on Page 4, under the heading “UPC pedalling coup in the Army”, he singled me out and Dr Rwanyarare and said that we are bent on dividing the Army.

Madam Speaker, on the 24th of November 2003, His Excellency the President paid a visit to my constituency, Rukiga County, in Kabale. During his address to the people of Rukiga, he warned those people talking about the Army to stop it or else he will arrest them. 

Given the Military Spokesman’s continued statement attacking me, and others, I would like to state here, Madam Speaker, that: One, I am not a member of UPDF and I have had no access to UPDF.

Two, I have never planned or engineered any coup in the UPDF.

Three, I have never talked ill of the Army. The only statement I have made on the Floor of Parliament and outside this Parliament is that there is some sort of mismanagement in the Army. And this was confirmed by the recent reshuffle and the statements made by the Commander-in-Chief and indeed Bantariza.

Madam Speaker, I need your guidance on this matter. I need to know whether Jack Sabiiti, a citizen of this country and a Member of Parliament for Rukiga County, is not supposed to talk about an institution of Government such as the Army. 

I am requesting you, Madam Speaker, to guide me on whether I should shut up and never talk about any institution of Government? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know last week you hinted to me that there was something you wanted to raise. I gave you guidance that you should proceed under Rule 29(2), put down the question in writing so that I give it attention today, but you did not do that. 

Now I do not even know who is going to answer the question. I wrote to you a note and I told you, “please proceed like this and send me the question.”

MR SABIITI: With that advise, I think I will write that question today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you do it today, I will ask whoever is responsible to answer tomorrow because it is very important to you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Madam Speaker, just to supplement on what the honourable member has just said -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not debating it.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, it is an issue of procedure, which I just wanted to raise to the House and everybody who is concerned. 

Even as the Minister will be answering the question, our mandate as Members of Parliament is drawn from the Constitution. The Constitution is clear about what we are supposed to do. The Army being a public institution which we vote funds for, I think members are right, procedurally, to comment on issues of policy and administration as regards the running of the Army. 

It is based on this that the Minister of Defence recently was asked to come and make a comment as to why the President had made a re-organisation.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to agree with your ruling that he goes ahead to draft a question, but I would have been happier if he had asked specifically on the question of his personal protection. Many of us would wish to be guided on how best we can be protected in such circumstances.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way.  

Madam Speaker, I was in Mparo where the President was. I come from Rukiga, that is my constituency, where I vote. The President never said that nobody should talk about the Army. He said that they should not incite the Army. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter of hon. Sabiiti is becoming a bit recurrent, because I also saw it in the papers. So, I think it needs to be looked at specifically and tomorrow when you bring the question, I will also give guidance on your constitutional protection. Thank you.

3.12
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of concern on the image of this august House and especially so, the honourable members. 

Madam Speaker, I read in today’s newspapers, with great grief, a statement attributed to one of our colleagues who is enjoying a higher status of the Office of the Vice President. This person who happens to be our colleague who we hold in high esteem said, among other things, that we were idle, doing nothing in Kampala, wasting public resources and that we should go back to our constituencies.  

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the Vice President knows that we are his primary constituency in the Office of the Vice Presidency. We did not vote for him in Wakiso as a member of this august House, but we voted for him to become Vice-President. 

The least we can expect of him is to ask us how he is performing. But for him to take it upon himself to attack us that we are idle and wasting public resources by being in Kampala! 

Cognizant of the provisions of the Constitution, especially Article 79, which spells out the role of Parliament, I am seeking an explanation from the front bench - the hon. Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, the hon. Minister of State in the Office of the Vice-President - whether this information as quoted in the papers is correct. 

I feel hurt as somebody who voted for him, who expressed my confidence that he is the right man to be the number two in the nation. Now he turns round and insults me that I am being idle and almost disorderly!

Madam Speaker, over and above that, he is also indirectly withdrawing his confidence not only in Parliament but in the officers who preside over it including the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, -(Applause)- because you are presiding over a House of people who are idle, almost disorderly and misusing public resources.  

Madam Speaker, could the honourable ministers on the front bench explain, on behalf of the Vice-President, why he is insulting us, his constituency and members of this august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Awori for raising this concern. Madam Speaker, I understand the members’ concern, but I would like to say that before members get annoyed, the rules of natural justice demand that before you form an opinion on someone, you listen to his side, and I would like to give the side of the Vice President -  (Interjections) - Yes –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he is the Minister in the Office of the Vice President.

MR MWESIGE: I am the Minister of State in the Office of the Vice President and what I am going to state has the full authority of the Vice-President.  

Madam Speaker, it is true that the Vice-President met journalists in Kakiri. But in his remarks he did not touch on Parliament as an institution nor did he touch on the performance of Members of Parliament at all.

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament himself, the Vice President enjoys a very good working relationship with Members of Parliament. First of all, as hon. Awori knows, the Vice President knows the fact that he was approved by this Parliament. 

He is aware that it is this Parliament, which approved him, and he knows that this House is indeed doing a very good job in both its legislative function and oversight function. So, the Office of the Vice President appreciates the good job this Parliament is doing in legislation and oversight.

The Vice President, Madam Speaker, has on several occasions been in the countryside. On those occasions, he has always informed Members of Parliament who come from those areas. Indeed, a few weeks ago when the Vice President visited Bundibugyo, he was accompanied by members of the Natural Resources Committee. All these incidents, Madam Speaker, illustrate –(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was very specific with the words used by the Vice President about us. It is true he never talked about the august House, but it is also true he talked about us in very disparaging terms.  

Mr Minister, can you read to us what he meant to say, instead of talking about what he thinks about us? Tell us, what did he say? 

I can read to you what he said about us. We want from him an apology, not telling us about his various associations with us in Kakiri, in Fort Portal or wherever. What did he say about us on Saturday? Do you plan to withdraw those remarks, amend them or give us a fresh statement on what he intended to say?

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking simple clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori. He is insisting that hon. Adolf Mwesige should tell us exactly what the Vice-President talked about at Kakiri. He says he can bring the information, as if he was recording what the Vice-President was saying. Can he give us clarification whether he has the recorded speech of the Vice-President?

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the Minister’s attempts to play his role very effectively by certainly defending the Vice-President. But the words that are here are really very serious. 

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that the Executive goes around talking about the uselessness of the Members of Parliament, that they are a failure to development; all these kinds of talk. At times I listen to the TV and I hear people speak and when these words come up, especially the two words, it is simply unacceptable. This should stop –(Interjection) - I am coming with a question.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Minister of State in the office of the Vice President was still on the Floor. He had not even reached the critical area referring to the words complained about. Why don’t we allow him to finish and then members can make their comments? He has not finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what members want to hear is what transpired on Saturday. That is really what they are interested in. Please, address what transpired on Saturday at Kakiri because that is what the members want to know.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I was getting to a question, which would help. I wanted to ask, was he actually there listening to these words? I have heard the Vice-President use these words; they are absolutely unacceptable! This must stop. So, was he there to listen to the very words so that he can now defend him?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, I was not at that function, but –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order, members!

MR MWESIGE: But, Madam Speaker, I have a brief from the Vice President, which I thought I should communicate to this House because hon. Aggrey Awori did ask that the Minister of State in the Vice President’s Office should make a statement.    

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that the statement, which appeared in the New Vision, is a total misrepresentation of what transpired when the Vice President met the journalists at Kakiri. The reasons for such a statement so far, of course, are only known to those who made the statement. 

I would like to undertake on behalf of the Vice President that he will come here not to apologise because he did not make the statement, but to make further clarification.  

I would like to state that the Vice President regrets, as a Member of Parliament, the discomfort and embarrassment this statement could have caused to Parliament. But I would like to categorically state that he did not make that statement. 

He cannot apologise because he did not make the statement and at an appropriate time he will come here and clarify that statement further. That is the interim statement I can make, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, hon. Matembe said there has been a persistent kind of attack by the Executive on Parliament. 

To substantiate my concern, the other day the hon. Minister of Local Government sitting in front of me went to my constituency and he said, “These honourable members of yours who want pension, there is no such money.” 

There is a bill before a committee of Parliament, then you go to a constituency and start prejudicing the minds of the people, and yet the Minister himself had not even read the content of the bill! He does not even know that the money we are asking for in the Pensions Bill is not for next financial year but the year 2007. Now, he goes to my constituency and starts prejudicing people against me on pensions.  

Over and above that, Madam Speaker, the President on many occasions has also attacked this august institution. It is not a single incident, but a pattern. We want to stop it, reconcile and work together. Otherwise, we can also put on the gloves and continue with the battle.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to  -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I stand on a procedural point and I am concerned about the fact that although we do have the Domestic Relations Bill within our hands, we do not have anybody to table it. It has been long awaited and in other circumstances we know that other ministers have taken brief for others. We wonder why this procedure is not being followed now.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to humbly request that since we have several ministers, the Leader of Government Business and the Attorney General in person, we would like to follow this procedure so that we feel comfortable about this. I thank you.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I can move the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Attorney General.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE DOMESTIC RELATIONS BILL, 2003

3.21
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled “The Domestic Relations Bill, 2003” be read a first time. (Applause). 

HON. MEMBERS: Seconded!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the bill has been laid for the First Reading. However, I was hoping that it would be accompanied by a certificate under Section 10 of the Budget Act. In the circumstances, I will hold on to it and commit it tomorrow to the committee provided I have the certificate.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.23
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make this statement to the House in reaction to, and clarify, the story, which appeared in the edition of the New Vision newspaper of 4th December 2003 –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of procedure. Madam Speaker, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, let alone the standing ovation, I was expecting the –(Prof. Kagonyera rose_) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is interesting how the honourable Professor could perceive what I was going to say before I said it. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, I expected the Attorney General to have started reading the statement after we had accessed a copy in writing. This is a very serious matter; we should not be taken for a ride.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, it is our practice to have the statements given to us in advance but it is not a strict rule of procedure that they should be done. It is strict in questions, which you ask. Those must be given to you in advance.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I was aware of that rule. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to make this statement to the House in reaction to, and clarify, the story that appeared in the edition in the New Vision newspaper of the 4th December 2003 captioned, “Ayume sides with Mutale”.  

I am making this statement well aware of Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure regarding the subjudice rule, which does not allow me to talk about the details of the case brought against Government by Maj. Kakooza Mutale because the matter is still in court. I will, therefore, only make a clarification on the position of the case and what transpired in court to clear the wrong impression created by the New Vision story. 

The New Vision story personalised the involvement of the IGG and the Attorney General in this case, as if they were acting in their personal capacities when in fact they were acting in official capacities as institutions of government. 

The second impression that has been given is that I, as the Attorney General, opposed the testimony given in court by the IGG on behalf of the Attorney General, who should be acting for and defending the IGG.  

As you may be aware, Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale appealed to the High Court, challenging his dismissal as Presidential Advisor by the appointing authority on the ground, inter alia that he did not file a declaration of assets, income and liabilities, in breach of the Leadership Code. 

The position of that case is that the trial was concluded when on 26 November 2003 both sides filed their written arguments in court. The matter now awaits judgement. 

Even before the hearing of the case was concluded on the 26th of November 2003, the records of the proceedings before the IGG in respect of which Maj. Kakooza Mutale appealed to the High Court were provided by the IGG and filed in court by the Attorney General as required. The record contained the necessary facts and evidence in the matter for the court’s consideration.  

What transpired in court on 3rd December 2003 was that earlier, the IGG had filed an application to be joined in the case between Kakooza Mutale and the Attorney General. However, there were two illegal impediments with the IGG’s application to be joined as a defendant in the case. 

One is that the IGG has no corporate existence and cannot, therefore, sue or be sued in a court of law. It is only a government institution with corporate legal status that can sue or be sued. The IGG has no such status. 

Secondly, the law does not allow a person to be added to a case after the hearing of that case has been concluded.  

These, therefore, were technical legal issues which the Attorney General’s representative in court was under duty to bring to the attention of the court, particularly if the issues were raised by the other side. 

It would appear that because Attorney General’s representative did so, the New Vision newspaper erroneously understood it to mean that the Attorney General was against the IGG and siding with Kakooza Mutale.  

I wish to assure this House that the Attorney General’s Chambers and the office of the IGG have a good working relationship and share useful information to the mutual benefit of both institutions. This, of course, does not mean that there can be no disagreement with regard to approach on legal issues. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is a bit tricky because the case has been heard and it is awaiting judgement. What we discuss here might prejudice or influence the opinion of the Judge. So I think we should not discuss this matter; it was for information and assurance.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, then I do not think the Attorney General should have brought the statement, because there are salient issues concerning his office, which we wanted him to clarify. 

We would have wanted him to clarify on cases where an officer in the person of Byaruhanga takes Government to court and the head of state swears an affidavit in support of Byaruhanga, who is suing the state; or in a case of a government officer challenging a law in the court. Those are salient issues we wanted the Attorney General to clear, other than these ones of subjudice and what not. 

There are salient issues, which must be clarified, other than this one of the IGG. The press has reported so many things. Those are the ones you would have picked, which are very important. This one you have picked is not very important.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think we have to ask specific questions. You are saying it is not important but maybe he feels these are the important. Anyway, we are not going to discuss this matter. 

Honourable members please join me in welcoming the children of Kyanvuma Primary School of Luuka County. They are up in the gallery. (Applause)   We also have some friends from the Norwegian Labour Party up there in gallery. They are also welcome.  

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.34
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to first and foremost thank you for this opportunity to explain to the House the sad, violent and despicable happening to me, our guests and some young leaders in this country, which occurred in Kabale on Sunday, 7 December 2003.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you are all aware that on top of my position as Member of Parliament for Makindye East Constituency, I also occupy the position of Secretary General of the Uganda Young Democrats (UYD). 

The UYD branch of Kabale District extended an invitation to me and other members of the National Executive Committee for a leadership training seminar. My colleagues and I decided that Kabale should be the venue for the southwestern regional leadership-training workshop. 

These regional training workshops are a component of the on-going partnership programme between my organisation and the Norwegian Labour Youth (AUUF), who we are honoured to have here today in the gallery. The workshop, Madam Speaker, was scheduled for Sunday 7th December at Victoria Inn Hotel, Kabale Town. 

Madam Speaker, I want to state categorically that the District Police Commander, Mr Martin Amol, was notified of the event by the local organisers and was indeed fully aware of the event. 

I, together with a team of UYD leaders and our Norwegian delegation, arrived in the wee hours of the morning on Sunday, the 7th of December. We began the leadership training workshop for the participants at 9 O’clock in the above mentioned venue. Over 70 participants were in attendance by the time the seminar was violently disrupted.  

At around 10.30 a.m., Madam Speaker, rowdy men and youth in civilian clothes, armed with AK-47s, pangas, clubs, knives and a five-litre jerrican of petrol, stormed the seminar venue and immediately begun a violent assault on the participants. 

Madam Speaker, while these youth beat up the participants, they were hurling sectarian abuses like, “Kabale is for Bakiga alone, return to Buganda.” They poured petrol on the floor in an attempt to inflame the hall. The beatings lasted for about 20 minutes until the intervention of the Officer in Charge of Station, Kabale. He came in company of about 15 policemen.

What is most perturbing, Madam Speaker, is that the advance team of the Officer in-Charge of station, who happened to be members of the Local Defence Units (LDUs), on arrival in the hall also descended on the participants and began roughing and beating them up thoroughly. 

Ten participants sustained very serious injuries and two are now in hospital. One is Didas Mwebaze, Chairman of UYD Bushenyi, who is now hospitalised in Mbarara University Hospital in very critical condition, because he suffered internal bleeding. The other one is Vincent Byamukama, who is an activist in Kabale National Teachers’ College. 

Our guests were roughed up and warned. Seven mobile phones were stolen by these thugs, one video camera was lost, one photo-camera was destroyed, radio equipment for a Radio Simba journalist was destroyed and a lot of furniture also broken.

Madam Speaker, what is disturbing also is that when Police arrived, despite the fact that there were bleeding participants, no arrests were made. The hooligans were escorted away from the scene of crime leading us to believe that this perhaps could have been a state-inspired and sponsored incident. 

Madam Speaker, the local participants have positively identified the perpetrators of this act. One is called Kalid, who is known in Kabale as the chief of the LDUs.  The other is a lady who is very vigilant and violent, called Pamela, and another called Matsiko. 

The other thugs, Madam Speaker, have also been identified as workers of the Horizon Bus Coach based in Kabale. Others are operatives in the Office of the Resident District Commissioner’s Office, Lt Mwesigye.  

Madam Speaker, whenever I go to the United States of America and United Kingdom, I have got to apply for a visa.  Today I am questioning the powers that be, do I need a visa to attend a peaceful workshop of young people in Kabale?  

Madam Speaker, all of us know that in 1986 when the National Resistance Movement was capturing state power, they promised us a fundamental change, they promised to do away with incidences related to state-inspired terrorism on the people of Uganda. Today I am asking; has the National Resistance Movement moved full circle? Are we back where we began?

Madam Speaker, the incident in Kabale could have happened to me and to the young democrats, but there is a possibility that this incident is going to happen elsewhere. It happened to the UYD on Sunday, it is going to happen to the UPC, Reform Agenda, PAFO, and even to some of you Movementists who may have divergent opinions from the mainstream.  

Madam Speaker, there are several questions arising out of this incident. Under what law do individuals and persons like the RDC of Kabale operate private militia and terrorist groups of this nature? 

We were wondering whether the Government of Uganda could come out clean after this act. Can we have justice? Can we have the perpetrators of this incident arrested and legal proceedings ensued? Is there a possibility, Madam Speaker, that public servants like the RDC of Kabale can be reprimanded for such acts?  

We are wondering, Madam Speaker, whether there is a relationship between these thugs, the perpetrators of the thuggery and the rebels of Kanungu and Kichwamba infernal massacres.  

I would like Parliament to take this very seriously. You are aware, Madam Speaker, that the Kanungu infernal and the Kichwamba massacres were executed in similar style. Investigations must therefore ensue whether there is a link between these thugs and the perpetrators of those despicable incidents.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I request the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to condemn these acts. I propose that the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament pursues this matter, particularly investigations into the operations of Lt Mwesigye.  

Madam Speaker, I want to end by saying that this was not my first time in Kabale nor will it be my last time there. I will return to Kabale to prove to the perpetrators of this act that terrorism can never deter the cause for justice, peace and democracy in this country. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank hon. Mabikke for his statement, but in making the statement he also asked questions and made some demands. I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs has anything to say to this matter.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I obviously deplore the incident in which hon. Mabikke and a number of his colleagues were manhandled. The Police are pursuing the people who did this and the culprits I have no doubt will be properly dealt with according to the laws of Uganda. 

It is also true to say that when this incident occurred, I was actually physically in Kabale.  However, I got to know of it after my honourable colleague had already been badly handled by these people. So, I called in the DPC of Kabale to give me a brief of what had transpired and this is essentially what the DPC of Kabale said:  

He said that hon. Mabikke and some other activists of Uganda Young Democrats had come to Kabale late at night on Saturday and had organized and attended a meeting without the knowledge of the Police.  Then when the meeting was in progress, apparently some fellows armed with clubs - the details of AK-47s are not part of report I got from the Police – and armed with sticks, came in and manhandled people who were at this meeting.  

The Police had no knowledge until the scuffle. When the scuffle took place, the Police came in and rescued my honourable colleague and his team. They took statements from a number of the people concerned. I tried to get a progress report today from Kabale but they told me that they have in fact sent a team to Mbarara to take additional statements from the two people who are in Mbarara Hospital. So, that is the gist of it. 

Madam Speaker, negative comments have been made about the RDC. This is not the first time we have heard negative comments about the RDC of Kabale, and calls that he should be questioned, fired or dismissed. 

The position is that Lt James Mwesigye is an outstanding mobilizer. (Applause). He is a forthright person who uses open methods of work.  When you are wrong, he tells you his piece of mind, and some people do not like him because of this forthrightness in the way he handles things.  

However, as far as this incident is concerned, Madam Speaker, if I may report to honourable members, James Mwesigye was attending a meeting of RDCs in Kampala. This meeting was addressed by hon. Kirunda Kivejinja and in fact some of these reports appeared in the press. James Mwesigye arrived in Kabale only yesterday at about noon.  

I also questioned him about this point. I told him, “You are being accused of doing a, b, c, d”. He told me that he had absolutely no hand in this matter.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would advise colleagues to avoid condemning people before they hear their side of the matter. I think we should accept what we have done as Government, ensure that systematic and thorough investigations take place and then the culprits are eventually identified.  

However, let me also say that on the basis of the report from the DPC Kabale, which apparently is being contradicted by hon. Mabikke, if the Police had been duly informed, if the Police were covering the vicinity to protect hon. Mabikke and his team, these thugs would have found it difficult to penetrate this place and cause trouble.  

I, therefore, would like to take this opportunity to once again stress that Government encourages different political forces to do their political work, but do so in accordance with the law. Also, they should inform the Police when they are going to hold meetings so that the Police can play its role whenever it becomes necessary. (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way.  I remember one time I sat with you in your office and we discussed so many things regarding how we should move in the countryside, for instance, getting signatures in case we wanted to register our parties. How are we to ensure that they do not contradict the communication you gave to the Police?  

You have heard the honourable member saying they went there after prior notification was given about the event that took place in Kabale. How are we going to get evidence from the Police, because it seems somewhere in between somebody is lying and there you are? 

We always give the Police notice. This happened in Jinja; we gave them notice but they fired at us.  In fact the other time they also used live bullets. If we had not taken cover we would have been shot. 

So, it seems somewhere there is some mischief happening, and at one time you are going to be shot at and lives are going to be lost. I am sorry to sound abrasive and impulsive, but I think something should be done to create clarity to the RDCs, the policemen and even the state functionaries. Otherwise, we are getting embarrassed. 

Those are development partners who are contributing $27.2 million annually to our budget, now they are going to take back a bad image. No wonder we were kicked out of the Commonwealth Summit- (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the response of the Minister of Internal Affairs has not cleared anything at all. If anything, it has created further commotion. 

A similar occurrence had befallen me in Masaka. I want the Minister to explain why an individual with some knowledge of a political formation cannot even talk to the people! 

I was invited to Masaka to talk about the phenomenon of federalism and it was indoors. I introduced myself to the Police and they told me that I could go ahead.  No sooner had I left than I saw a group of people following me, instructing me that according to the RDC of Masaka, I could not go ahead with the advocacy on the philosophy of federalism.  

Our Constitution is very clear. According to our Constitution, education is a human right. Even in circumstances where a quasi expert comes to talk to the people and to give them knowledge, you cannot talk. What is the response of the Minister of Internal Affairs on that Masaka occurrence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know this is not a general debate. In fact, we were not supposed to debate after Mr Mabikke had made his statement, but because he made some demands and asked some questions I asked the Minister whether he could respond. This is not a debate.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To correct one of our colleagues, hon. Mutumba, Uganda of course has not been dismissed from the Commonwealth. On the contrary, Uganda has been selected to host the Commonwealth Conference of Heads of State in 2007. A big victory for Uganda! (Applause)

On the point being raised by colleagues that there may be a discrepancy between policy and actual implementation, there is a possibility that this is true. We should work together to ensure that if those bottlenecks exist, they are broken as quickly as possible. 

However, one way of removing those bottlenecks is to openly organize meetings, openly inform and involve the Police, so that everybody concerned knows what is happening. But as we have stated before, Government encourages different political forces to organize themselves in accordance with the law of Uganda. 

You should go anywhere in the country, but make sure that the Police are informed and that the meetings are in proper places that will not disturb public order.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. I have listened carefully to the Minister’s response and I have come to the conclusion that one of us, the Minister, the DPC of Kabale or myself, is telling lies. It is unfortunate that I could not access Mr Julius Mwebaze, who was one of the local organizers of the event.  

Even before I began the workshop, I saw a letter notifying the DPC of Kabale of the meeting. The local organizers assured me that they had actually contacted the DPC. But the Minister is now saying that Police was never notified and that actually we require Police permission for an indoor meeting or workshop. I think there is something out of context completely. 

Madam Speaker, it is also a well-known fact in Kabale that the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Rugunda, and the RDC, Lt Mwesigye, are very close buddies. Is the honourable Minister aware of a militia group, the Interahamwe Organization, being aided and sponsored by his close buddy the RDC, Lt Mwesigye?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just put an end to this matter. You are now introducing new matters, which I cannot even rule on because I do not know about Kabale. I do not know where the militia are and I have never seen Mwesigye in my life. So, let the Minister complete his statement.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, let me wind up before the Minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Minister is responding, do not introduce new matters. You have made your statement.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To conclude this short statement, I want to state that there is no state-inspired violence as my colleague is suggesting.  

Two, as to who is telling lies or not, there is an inquiry that is going on and it will be able to establish the actual position. 

Lastly, the question of the Minister of Internal Affairs and the RDC being close is absolutely normal. Government functionaries at different levels should work very closely together to execute government programmes.

MR SABIITI: I have some information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you finished?

MR SABIITI:  No, he sat down for information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He says he has finished.

MR SABIITI: But it would be in his interest, as a Minister of Internal Affairs. This group in Kabale, which caused havoc and threatened the life of our honourable member, is headed by a Masiko, one of the LDUs. When His Excellency the President visited Rukiga, the same group was organized and ferried to Rukiga and it nearly caused a problem to the people of Rukiga. 

So, I would request the Minister of Internal Affairs to look into this matter seriously, because this group is not handled by the State properly. You are going to cause unnecessary problems in the area because certainly we shall not allow such a group to harass us and we stand by when the State knows. 

Therefore, I request the Minister to tell this group not to pursue this type of hooliganism.  Otherwise, if the state cannot handle it, then the law is very clear, the Constitution is very clear, we shall not allow them also to come and harass us in our constituencies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, this matter involves a Member of Parliament and you have undertaken to investigate. This is now a government assurance, so we do expect a report, and I shall demand a report on this particular incident. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE ON THE CAUSES OF THE STUDENTS STRIKE AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AND MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL

4.04
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  The debate on this report, as is reported, lasted until very late on Thursday evening. A lot of very important issues have arisen out of the report of the committee and also from the debate. 

Government takes very seriously the issues raised both in the report and out of the debate. We had a meeting and decided to request the House that because this debate is very important, it be deferred to a future date so that the Government can look into the issues raised very carefully and when the debate is concluded, we make as good a response to the issues raised as we possibly can.  

Therefore, we are requesting you, Madam Speaker, to postpone the conclusion of this debate to a future date. We had suggested next week, but through consultations we have discovered that a number of members of the committee who wrote this report will not be present on the day we had proposed. 

Therefore, we have agreed that we postpone it to yet a later date, Madam Speaker, but before Parliament goes on the Christmas recess. That is the request we are making to the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I was here during the course of the debate, it was a very vibrant debate. I agree that a lot of issues were raised, but we cannot go beyond next week. We can only defer the matter maybe up to Wednesday.  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: I have just consulted with hon. Mwesigye; we had asked for the day after tomorrow but the committee said they would not be available. Therefore, we have requested for Tuesday next week. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, this matter will be deferred to Tuesday next week.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just wanted to recap briefly the situation concerning this report. You may recall that on 10 September 2002, the hon. Augustine Nshimye who was then chairperson of the Election Violence Committee presented an executive summary of the report of the Select Committee. He laid the report on the Table together with annexure and the minutes of the committee on floppy disks.  

Owing to the length of the report, I had set the debate to commence later in the week. However, it was not possible for the debate to commence on 12h September 2002, and it was eventually started on 2 December 2002 when hon. Nshimye moved a motion that the report be debated. He then proposed that he would be presenting another motion seeking adoption of the recommendations of the committee.

However, before the debate would commence, hon. Ruhindi raised the possibility of the House proceeding in breach of Rule 53, that is, that certain portions of the report touched on matters that were at the time under consideration by the High Court. 

The committee chairperson confirmed that indeed there were matters that were subjudice. The Speaker then ruled that the report could not be debated until the court processes have been concluded.

Honourable members, a lot of time has elapsed. So, I will request the chairperson of the committee to refresh our memories by again presenting the executive summary as prepared by the chairperson in September 2002. I know that we have distributed copies of the executive summary.

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE (Mr James Mwandha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you for those introductions. 

I am not going to read the entire executive summary because it has about 33 pages, single space. So, what I have done is to get a supplement of the executive summary, which is 16 pages and double spacing. This means that it is much shorter than the original executive summary. 

However, you are right that the executive summary was given to members. I believe that they have not only read the executive summary but have also read the entire 355-page report. I have requested Parliament to distribute this supplement to the executive summary and I hope copies will be coming in due course.  

Madam Speaker, as you rightly stated, the report of the select committee was first presented to this House on 10 September 2002 together with all the minutes, as provided by our rules. Debate was deferred to give members time to study the report.  

On 2 December 2002, the report was listed for debate by the House. However, due to the fact that there was an election petition in court at that time, it was considered very difficult to carry on with the debate without referring to that matter in court. The debate, therefore, was deferred to a future date. I am now very happy that at long last I am presenting this report again. 

By way of opening debate on this report, I am presenting a supplement to the executive summary to highlight a number of major points raised in chapters 3, 4 and 7. 

Chapter 3 refers to the Electoral Commission itself, in which the committee analysed its structure, staffing and the general management of the Commission. Chapter 4 refers to the causes of election violence and chapter 7 refers to the role of the armed forces and other security organs in the conduct of elections. 

Madam Speaker, I hope that the honourable members will acquaint themselves with chapters 5, 6, 8 and 9, which refer to the conduct of political leaders in elections, the misconduct of public officials in elections, the suitability and adequacy of laws governing elections and the major recommendations by the committee.

Let me start with the Electoral Commission. The committee examined the structure and staffing of the Commission. The Commission is headed by a Chairman who is assisted by a deputy chairman and five Commissioners. These all work for the Commission on a full-time basis. 

The accounting officer is the secretary to the Commission, who is expected to be at the rank of Permanent Secretary. He is supported by two directors and seven departments.  

The Commission is expected to have commissioners of high integrity and ethical standing supported by high calibre personnel to ensure the independence, impartiality and efficiency in the execution of the Commission’s duties. 

The committee, however, discovered that the reality at the Commission does not reflect the aspiration suggested in the constitutional and legal provisions of the Constitution and the Electoral Commission Act 1997 respectively.

The apparent lack of independence of the Commission, lack of clear, assertive and impartial leadership exhibited by the then Commission Chairman, Hajji Aziz Kasujja, unclear recruitment procedures and methods, unethical and inappropriate social relations in the Commission, opaque funds management and suspicious contract and tendering system, all pose serious concerns to the great majority of Ugandans and leaders. Evidence adduced to the committee testifies to this unfortunate situation.

The Electoral Commission staff:

The Electoral Commission as of March 2002 had a total of 896 employees. The permanent staff were 295, that is, 33 percent of the total staff. The rest, 601, were temporary employees representing 67 percent of all the employees of the Commission. 

The Commission carried out an analysis of 21 permanent posts headed by senior officials of the Commission. Among the 21 officials, one was on contract, one was on probation and 91 were confirmed. Of the 19 confirmed officials, seven were acting in positions higher than those at which they had been confirmed. 

Out of the 21 senior officials, only eight were qualified for their posts while 11 were not qualified and one could not be categorised due to lack of records. Thus, 52 percent of the senior staff were not qualified for the posts, which they held.

The posts held by unqualified senior staff were: Director of Elections, acting head of data processing department, head of civic education and training department, and acting head of human resources management department. The unqualified senior staff also included the heads of registry, stores, office supervision, procurement, and public relations and communication section. The details are found in our main report. 

The committee also discovered that some of the staff in the Electoral Commission were irregularly appointed. Many of them were not qualified and were not easy to discipline since they were connected to big people. Some Commissioners admitted that sometimes staff were sourced through internal contacts, which of course, provided a fatal ground for nepotism.  

The Appointment of Mr Sam Rwakoojo, Secretary to the Commission: 
The circumstances surrounding the appointment of Mr Sam Rwakoojo as Secretary to the Commission are unclear. The procedure for appointment of Secretary to the Commission, who is supposed to be at the rank of Permanent Secretary, is outlined in Section 7(1) of the Electoral Commission Act of 1997 and the Public Service Guidelines. 

The committee was also availed a letter from the Public Service Commission, Ref: HRM/211/01 of 10 December 2001, advising against the appointment of Mr Rwakoojo on the grounds that:

(a) Mr Rwakoojo lacked experience other than that of financial controller. 

(b) The Public Service Commission had reliable information to the effect that Mr Rwakoojo was one of the representatives of Litho Tech, a South African company that was doing business with the Commission at that time.

It was evident from the information collected by the committee that Mr Rwakoojo falls short of the qualifications envisaged in the Electoral Commission Act and the Public Service Guidelines.  

The committee was surprised that in spite of the full knowledge of the background information concerning the unsuitability of Mr Rwakoojo for the post of Secretary, Mr Aziz Kasujja went ahead and appointed him to that post.  

Financial management: 

The committee scanned through the reports of the Auditor General and the Inspector General of Government. The perusal of these reports gives a horror story of corruption, fraud, theft, embezzlement of public funds with impunity, and great abuse of office by some of the Commissioners, staff of the Commission, CAOs and other district officials.  

Listed below is the summary of the estimated amount of money lost from the referendum elections to the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections in 2001 to 2002. Maybe I will not read all of it but I will give you the summary: 

    • Losses related to unaccountability for elections of disabled, LCs, 
    • Court fees not accounted for, 
    • Overpayments for the Referendum exercise, 
    • Funds lost in delay to install a printing press, 
    • Hire of boats not accounted for, 
    • Deposits with the local fuel company not accounted for, 
    • Advances to Movement Referendum Committees not accounted for, 
    • Advances to multi-party committees not accounted for, 
    • Fuel not accounted for, 
    • Field staff allowances for the Referendum not accounted for, 
    • Money paid to seven top officials of the Commission for reasons that could not be explained, 
    • Imprests paid to regions not accounted for, 
    • Money paid to CAOs for civic education not accounted for, 
    • Commissioners paid themselves packages over and above their entitlements, 
    • Photo screens for photographic registers, which never worked, 
    • Unaccounted for funds released to the Electoral Commission for various purposes, 
    • Unaccounted for funds released to districts for various purposes, 
    • Air charter for materials not used, 
    • Extra charges on letter of credit, 
    • Double payments for Celtel bills, 
    • Advances paid to Electoral Commission officials and CAOs not accounted for, 
    • Freight exchange losses arising from inflated exchange rates at Orient Bank, 
    • Nugatory interest paid on loan from Orient Bank, 
    • Amount deposited with Orient Bank for super disks for the PVRIS project, which were never used 
    • Loss on purchase of ballot papers from Litho Tech for local council elections. 

The total loss was Shs 10,482,514,758.  

While the Minister of Finance may be blamed for not releasing enough money to the Electoral Commission, if what had been released had been judiciously spent on what it was intended for, the financial situation of the Commission, in our view, would not have been as bad as it was.  

Madam Speaker, now let me go to the award of tender to Litho Tech, because this is another very controversial subject. The award of tender to supply ballot papers to Lithotech, a South African Company, was another classic case of corruption and total disregard for laid down procurement procedures. 

According to the IGG, the people directly concerned for this scum were Mr Aziz Kasujja and his procurement commissioner, Ted Wamusi. In this one deal the Commission lost over Shs 2,000,000,000 according to the IGG. 

The IGG held Mr Kasujja and Mr Wamusi individually responsible for the loss and recommended that they should be advised to vacate their respective offices, and that M/s Ben Sachs-Lithotech Ltd should be debarred from doing business with Uganda Government again.  

The main report gives other details of several other financial malpractices - lack of accountability, double payments, collusion with suppliers, irregular payments, falsification of payments, illegal borrowing, et cetera. We refer you to the main report where you will find the details.

The next subject with regard to the Electoral Commission was the famous Photographic Voter Identification Project. This is another case where money was lost in connection with the Photographic Voter Identification Project. 

The project was ill-conceived and mismanaged, and there is nothing to show for the Shs 26,258,136,000 so far spent on the project, which is above the original estimate by Shs 8,862,080,000. 

The whole project execution and management has been characterised by lack of forward planning and crisis management. This gave golden opportunities for corruption, embezzlement of public funds, leading to massive financial losses to the Ugandan taxpayers. It will be appropriate at this stage to say that anything that could be done to mismanage an organisation was done in the Electoral Commission.

Causes of election violence:
The committee adopted the definition of violence as “the threatening or actual use of physical force or power against another person or group or community, which results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death or deprivation.”

Evidence adduced from public hearings, responses from questionnaires, various election observers’ reports, Electoral Commission reports, Police reports, court proceedings, memoranda and both the print and the electoral media, clearly shows that electoral violence in Uganda has been steadily increasing since 1996. Several illustrations can be found in chapter 4 of this report, if honourable members can go through the main report.  

In the past, election violence was primarily restricted to spontaneous eruptions of fighting, which resulted in injuries and destruction of opponents’ property. Today it manifests itself as highly planned and organised episodes, resulting in loss of lives, serious and fatal injuries, and massive loss of property. 

Election violence, according to the evidence before the committee, is perpetuated by four groups of people: the candidates themselves, their agents, criminal elements in society, and agents of the state. 

Some criminal elements such as the LRA, the ADF and other hooligans have applied election violence to make political points. Others have used election time to commit crimes using violence. 

However, whereas many agents and candidates were found to have participated in election violence, much of the election violence was escalated by the illegal involvement of some of the agents of the state.  

The committee found out that, whereas some of the state agents initiated and executed election violence themselves, many candidates and agents who opted for violence employed state agents especially UPDF, LDUs ISOs, DISOs, RDCs and cadres in the office of the RDCs to execute violence against their opponents. 

Commenting on the issue of violence in their report, FIDA stated that, “The acts of violence in some instances were perpetuated by candidates or their supporters and on other occasions, state sanctioned. State inspired violence was evident especially in western districts.” That was a quotation from the FIDA report. 

Evidence especially from Kabale, Rukungiri, Mbarara, and to a large extent Sembabule, Kasese, Arua, Gulu, gave graphic accounts of how RDCs, DISOs, GISOs, LDUs and some members of the UPDF where the leading perpetrators of election violence in those areas. 

The committee received testimony that in the Rukungiri District chairman’s election, GISOs, DISOs and RDCs physically overpowered the Police and committed acts of violence, intimidation, torture against Mr Rutaroh’s supporters, and illegal interference in the police work by ordering release of suspects. 

The committee was further informed that in that election alone, there were eight RDCs and almost an equal number of GISOs and DISOs besides the GISOs of Rukungiri assembled for Mr Kangwagye against Mr Rutaroh.  

Concern, frustration and disappointment generated by election violence, rigging, malpractices and other irregularities have bred intense apprehension, despair and anger among the electorate in the country. 

Hence, a number of those interviewed from Mbale, Rukungiri and Kabale made very cynical recommendations. One of them was that, since elections did not reflect the freewill of the people, elections should be scrapped to save Ugandans from the pain and suffering from election violence. 

They told the committee that the President and some of his powerful ministers - here they quoted hon. Jim Muhwezi - should only appoint their preferred people to all election positions in Parliament and local councils.  

As already stated above, election violence in Uganda has become widespread, fatal, destructive and threatening to the democratisation process.  According to evidence adduced from interviews, the forms of violence experienced included physical beating and shooting, threatening with weapons, being abducted or detained, being compelled to vote against one’s choice, being forcefully barred from voting, chasing agents away from polling stations, fighting, et cetera. 

Police reports show that in 2001/02 presidential and parliamentary elections alone, 17 people lost their lives in election-related violence - seven in central region, one in northern region, one in western region and eight in eastern region. The main report of the committee gives details of more cases of election violence and demonstrates how widespread election violence was in Uganda in recent elections.  

The six leading districts of election violence cases reported to police stations were: Masaka, Rukungiri, Mukono, Kampala, Lira and Jinja. It is important to note that some cases were reported to LCI authorities, some to sub-county authorities while many cases went unreported.

A great majority of witnesses, respondents, reports and memoranda received by the committee appreciated the role of the Police in election management. They strongly recommended that the Police force should be the only security organisation, which should handle all security aspects of elections. 

The committee was, however, informed that the total number of the Uganda Police force is just about 15,000 and the number of polling stations (17,000) outstrips the number of policemen. Not only is the Police force numerically small, they are also ill-equipped, under-paid and not sufficiently facilitated or trained for election management. All this has undermined their performance.  

The Role of the Armed forces and Other Security Organs in the Conduct of Elections: 
The committee examined the role of the Army and the Police as provided in the Constitution of Uganda.   Article 209 of the Constitution provides that: 

“The functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are – 

    (a) to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda;
    (b) to co-operate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters;
    (c) to foster harmony and understanding between the Defence Forces and civilians; and
    (d) to engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.”
  
While Article 212 of the Constitution provides that: 

“The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following –

    (a) to protect life and property;
    (b) to preserve law and order;
    (c) to prevent and detect crime; and 
    (d) to co-operate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under this constitution and with the population generally.”  

The committee, taking into account the above provisions, notes that internal policing or maintenance of law and order is not one of the functions of the UPDF except in emergency situations and in cases of disaster as under Article 209(b) of the Constitution.

Accordingly, it is the view of the committee that the UPDF has no business in the electoral process and should only be deployed if there were emergency situations or cases of natural disaster during election time.  

Further still, the fact that soldiers are not trained to maintain law and order means that they are bound to commit mistakes because of assigning them a function that they are not trained to do. Case examination of evidence available to the committee shows that institutions most abused during the elections were the UPDF, ISO and the RDCs and their assistants and cadres.  

In Presidential Election Petition No. 1 of 2001, Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye v Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the Electoral Commission, court found that although the official reason advanced for deploying the UPDF in Rukungiri, Kabale, Kanungu, Mbarara, Kamwenge et cetera was to augment the police work to maintain peace and security, the unfolding activities of some of the members of the UPDF and PPU revealed the true purpose of their deployment. The behaviour of some of the members of UPDF and PPU alarmed opposition presidential candidates who took up the matter with the Electoral Commission. 

The Commission Chairman, Hajji Aziz Kasujja, was sufficiently concerned about widespread army involvement in the election process. He wrote a letter dated 24 January 2001, appealing to candidate Yoweri Museveni, the incumbent, to prevail on soldiers not to interfere with elections. 

Although it is not known whether there was any action taken, the conduct of some army personnel left a lot to be desired. During the last presidential election, there was the murder of Johnson Baronda on 3 March 2001 in Rukungiri. When the committee held public hearings in Rukungiri, Kabale and Mbarara, many witnesses gave evidence that corroborates the observations and statements made by most judges on the role of the UPDF in election violence.  

The committee learnt that during the parliamentary and local council elections in 2001/2002, some candidates and highly connected public figures such as ministers, Members of Parliament and Resident District Commissioners used their offices to deploy the Army, ISOs, DISOs, GISOs, and LDUs to tell lies about, assault and even kill opponents. 

Cases of the murder of Mallinga in Kiboga, the death of six people caused by RDC Simon Mulongo’s bodyguard in Mbale, the death of four people and injury of so many others in Kireka when Maj. Owula’s driver drove into Dr Besigye’s supporters, and the assault and beating of the electorate by soldiers, ISOs, and LDUs reported in Kabale, Rukungiri, Kiboga, Gulu, Mbale, et cetera show the extent of the contribution to election violence by the Army and other security organs.

It is the considered opinion of the committee that the UPDF is a very important national institution, which must remain impartial and above personal interests and rivalry among politicians. Unless expressly provided for under the law, the Army should be excluded from all election management.

Madam Speaker, I now come to the conclusion. I wish to remind members that when Parliament was setting up the Select Committee to investigate election violence in Uganda, there was a lot of resistance from several members, especially from the front bench. There were claims of conflict of interests since Members of Parliament were the many players in the recent violent elections. Therefore, some people were saying that for Parliament to investigate election violence, we were appointing ourselves judges in our own cause.  

When preparing this report the committee tried to be factual, focused, balanced and candid. Indeed, some members of the House, including those who originally opposed the setting up of the committee, have commended the work we did. Parliament has, therefore, proved that it is capable of carrying out investigations fairly even where its members are involved. 

We all know that one of the major objectives of the NRM is to build a true and genuine democratic system of governance based on free and fair elections. To that end, the NRM initiated the writing of the 1995 Constitution providing for regular, free and fair elections of peoples’ representatives.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this report on election violence has been with us for 15 months. Government did not have to wait until this report is debated before they would implement the committee’s recommendations. We must hold government accountable, and we must ask:

1. The Minister of Constitutional Affairs: 

(a) Has the Minister of Constitutional Affairs caused the Electoral Commission to review and rationalize its organizational structure, job and function analysis to ensure efficient performance of the Commission?

(b) Considering the gross misconduct, incompetence, fraud and financial losses incurred during the tenure of office of Chairman Aziz Kasujja and his former Commissioners, has the Minister held them personally responsible, investigated them with the view to prosecuting those found guilty?  

(c) In view of the fact that Mr Sam Rwakoojo was found by competent authorities not to be qualified for the post of the Secretary of the Commission, when does the Minister intend to appoint a qualified person to fill the post?

(d) Has the Minister caused the Electoral Commission to weed out of the staff of the Commission all those who were irregularly appointed, unqualified staff, drunkards, incompetent, over-age, corrupt, and other undesirables?

(e) Does the Minister intend to put in place a system of continuous civic and voter education, which would ensure that voters do not remain ignorant and prone to manipulation, which would undermine the power given to them under Article 1 of the Constitution?

(f) Does the Minister intend to introduce laws to reform the electoral laws in good time to enable the Commission make appropriate arrangements in time for the next elections?

2. To the Minister of Internal Affairs:

(a) What measures is the Minister of Internal Affairs taking to expand, strengthen, adequately facilitate, and train the Police in election management in order not to leave the Police weak, vulnerable and demoralized so that the Army is always called upon to get involved in the election process under the pretext that –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I am reading the last one then I can take the clarification. 

(b) Has the Minister instructed the Police to vigorously follow up the 742 violence related offences committed during the presidential elections, and the 474 offences committed during parliamentary elections 2001 reported to the Police? They should be disposed of by the courts of law, expeditiously –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I do not have to accept a clarification. When somebody is reading a statement it is usual –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I am just wondering, you are demanding that action ought to have been taken on a report, which has not yet been debated! That is what I am wondering about. It has not been debated so the House has not taken a position on it. But you are now asking whether the Government has moved ahead of Parliament even before we debate.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I find that rather contradictory because I do recall that there was a new Commission put in place. Was that not part of what the report had recommended? Did it have to wait? Could it have waited until we debated this report, or was it on the schedule of Government to change the Commissioners of the Electoral Commission as we were debating this?

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, as far as the dismissal of Commissioners of the Electoral Commission is concerned, that actually followed a report of the Inspector General of Government (IGG). The IGG carried out investigations and reported to the President and on the basis of that report, the President took that action, and in fact Parliament was informed about it. 

I was the chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee at that time. The IGG took liberty to come and inform the committee about what the President had done. So, it was not as a result of the recommendations of the select committee.

MRS MUSUMBA: I want to give more information to the honourable Minister. As a Member of Parliament of the Sixth Parliament, he remembers the Railway Report in which Mr Enos Tumusiime was supposed to have been investigated. Because Parliament had put up a Select Committee on Uganda Railways, the IGG then stopped the institution. 

In fact, a letter was laid on the Table to the effect that we would not have to work on Uganda Railways because the IGG was working on it. I remember being a member of that select committee and wondering what the precedent was in this House. 

So, for purposes of the precedent of Uganda Railways, now a precedent on the Electoral Commission is being set again. Is there nothing that the Government is tracking, because in the Uganda Railways case it was Parliament, which moved first and the IGG interfered. This time round it is the IGG that we are putting before Parliament. 

To me it is like confusion, it depends on what Government feels like at any given time. There is no precedent we are following and I am not sure that actually it was the IGG and not the report of the House. 

Even when you look at the way we have been asking for it to come on the Order Paper and over and over again debate has stalled, interjections have been coming in to a point where you shred the report and you claim that it was due to other influences and not this. When will Government work as one, Madam Speaker?

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you rightly ruled, I was concerned about the way the report was being presented. At the beginning of the presentation of this report you did direct that the report be presented as it were the first time the chairperson of the committee presented the summary report. I was getting worried that new issues are being raised in the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I said we should refresh our memory by presenting the executive summary again.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thought it was not necessary for me to read this again because it is in the Hansard; there is nothing new in it. 

Secondly, I said I was not going to read the 35-page report typed in single spacing and that it was better that I read the summary, as a shorter text. When you did not object I thought that I had your concurrence. 

Then, there is nothing in this, which I have read, which is not here. That one, I can bet and you can check for yourselves. But it is reasonable that these questions be put because after all, if people were killed, if there were 742 cases, which were reported to the Police, this Parliament is entitled to find out how fast Government has moved on these or are they being swept under the carpet? Therefore –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I expected you in your summary to actually go to the recommendations that you had made so that members can get back on board.

MR MWANDHA: This is not my own report. The executive summary originates from the original report, which is our report signed by everybody except one. You are at liberty to check any facts as you have copies of the main report. 

But, Madam Speaker, are we not entitled to ask whether Government has got to wait all this long for people who have suffered, people who have cases pending in police stations and in court, to find out what action has been taken on people who looted the Electoral Commission? Are we not supposed to put these questions for the Executive to answer?  What is the problem?  

I want to finish by raising the last matter and that is related to the Minister of Defence, because according to evidence that we received in this report the people who gave testimonies were concerned about the involvement of the Army and other security organs in election management. This is an area where we shall seek commitment on the part of the Government that this will not happen again. 

Madam Speaker, with those concluding remarks, I move that the report of the Select Committee on Election Violence be considered by the House and adopted together with all its recommendations. I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson.

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker, I greatly appreciate the presentation made by the vice chairperson of the Committee, but I see a problem in proceeding with this debate. I see a problem of a communication barrier. 

In communication, there are various ways we can get information. One is just what the committee has done, to give us text information and in following this information we were given a summary of the bigger report. Now, the vice chairperson has made another summary. I am finding a problem in encoding this information. 

I cannot refer to the summary the vice chairperson has just read. Despite the fact that the content is the same, the information that we need to look at critically and systematically is disrupted. There is already variance of information. Madam Speaker, I find difficulty in this and I need your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps you read the executive summary; you concentrate on that. I think it touched the broad areas and the recommendations. Yes, you also have the main report? Honourable members, you are free to debate.

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker, I purely put this case forward as personal but maybe I share it with the rest. In the report the chairperson raised some questions and when I look at this big one, the questions are not there. Shall we go by all this? There are already questions the committee has raised, which we do not have. I see a problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ignore the questions of today and focus on the executive summary because that is what was presented by the committee as they presented their first position.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was listening attentively and the chairperson of the committee said that what he read is exactly what is contained in the first summary, which was presented here. So, I do not find any difficulty in debating it. If you are uncomfortable with what the chairperson has just read, then you will rather use the first summary and proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have the main report and you have the executive summary. You have listened and there is a lot of information in your heads. Just pick out what you want to use and use it. I will listen to everything.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, the select committee did present a report to this House, of 300 or so pages. In my opinion this Parliament is debating that report. However, the chairman, for convenience, did present an executive summary of the report and we would expect that to reflect a summary of the bigger report. 

The chairman, in his wisdom, did import some questions into this summary, which as far as my recollection is concerned, are not in the main report. 

I propose that for purposes of fair debate, these questions the chairman has raised in his summary should be expunged from his summary and do not become a subject of our debate. We should stick to the terms of the report and pronounce ourselves on the report as such. I thank you, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I believe you are well armed with the information. Concentrate on the main report because as a report of the committee –(Mr Wambuzi rose_) yes, are you armed with all those? You leave these questions alone. So, are you ready?

5.00
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I beg you to protect me from hon. Aggrey Awori.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, please do not intimidate hon. Wambuzi. It is very important for us to debate this election violence report very seriously and coolly so that we lay a foundation for stable elections in future. 

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: It is a great pity that hon. Aggrey Awori who saw the chaos, which was in this county as a result of wrong elections, cannot allow me to exhaustively debate this report. After all, this report contains nothing about Kamuli. As a matter of fact, this committee did not visit Kamuli in particular –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am not on record anywhere in this august House or outside this august House as having made any remarks to intimidate my honourable colleague. 

Is he in order to implicate me in his presentation and for that matter on the record of the Hansard that I was partly responsible for his political problems and failures? Is he in order, madam Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate that this is a very important matter the outcome of which will really determine how we are going to conduct ourselves in future. I want you to concentrate on what is contained in the report and not go into personalities now, unless they are named in the report. Just concentrate on the contents of the report.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker for your ruling and I appreciate the comments, which the hon. Member for Samia Bugwe has highlighted. 

Yes, there were problems in elections. Unfortunately, as I was saying, the report was not comprehensive enough. It did not cover all the districts. 

We expected this report to have carefully collected the pains, the cries of each district on paper so that you would summarize that, “We have this from Kamuli, we have this from Iganga.” There were irregularities in the whole country and we expect this report –(Interruption)

MRS GERTRUDE KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the member is raising is actually very important. Kapchorwa had very violent campaigns and I am surprised that it is not included in this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe this stemmed from the terms of reference. Let me ask the chairperson.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is true we did not go to every district of Uganda. Firstly, we did not have the time to do so, and secondly, we did not have the resources to do so. But we thought that we took a reasonable sample of the districts and that is what helped us to come up with the conclusion that we made. 

With regard to cases of violence, we collected the Police reports from all over the country, that is why we were able to tell how many violence-related cases were committed in the presidential elections and how many of those were committed in the parliamentary elections. We could also have given those for local government councils, but at that time it was not possible to get that information. 

I also want to inform the House that this report, which I have just read, should have been with us but apparently Parliament has run out of photocopying paper and they are not able to reproduce this report. Immediately they have paper, I am sure everybody will get a copy. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which report, hon. Mwandha?

MR MWANDHA: The summary, which I have just read out. I had provided the summary for reproduction, but apparently there is no photocopying paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, they have the executive summary already and the big report. They can use those.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the vice chairperson of this select committee for the clarification. 

It is a pity that the Select Committee on Election Violence did not collect the final reports of the CAOs or the people who were presiding over elections in the districts. It only depended on the report from the Police as a source of what was happening. Even he has been putting forward to this House that the Police force of Uganda is only 15,000 men strong –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK APUUN: I would like to inform my colleague that the resolution was made in this House for a committee to probe into election violence in Uganda and we were given only one month to report back. So, we had to divide ourselves into two groups. One went to the Northern and North Eastern parts, and another went to Western Uganda. We had to zero down on places where there were problems, what they call hot spots. 

We were not able, because of time, to cover the whole country. Besides that, our mode of approach was to get the members of that area who freely came and submitted their reports verbally, and we interviewed them. So, we were not only relying on the Police as he has alluded to. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you concentrate on the principles raised by the report.

MR WAMBUZI: Of course, Madam Speaker, if the approach was wrong, even the committee itself, we could actually say, did not do the work of Parliament because it did not delve into the actual meat of what should have been done. These are the preliminaries I was trying to put forward on the Floor. 

I am glad that those who were on the committee are coming out with exactly where they went right and where they went wrong. I think this is now starting to enrich this debate. So, after we have debated it thoroughly, we will come out with the actual meat. Now we are hearing what they did and what they did not do. That is why you have ruled that we must debate this report now to make things right. 

I was the first person in this House when we came back from elections of LC V, to stand up and challenge the Office of the Speaker. Madam Speaker, you were not in the chair, it was your colleague. I was not happy with what happened in Kamuli. 

Surely, if I was the first person to bring this thing up, I should have been listened to. This committee should have gone to Kamuli to see my problems because I was the most hurt. (Interruption)

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, you have been informing the House to stick to the report of the committee. When the committee was endeavouring to find out the realities on the ground, we put information on the boards to all the Members of Parliament to report to this committee. I am surprised that my colleague did not appear before our committee and he is even raising the case before this House. 

Instead he should inform us now, because the committee report is ready for debate. You better inform this House that you failed to inform the committee when we were still inquiring for your information. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you do not go back to the report, I will have to give the chance to somebody else who has read the report and who can concentrate. You stop lamenting, go to the report.

MR WAMBUZI: Yes, Madam, I am on the report. I have read this report thoroughly, I have seen its shortfalls and I am pointing them out to this House. Surely, I am on the report. 

It is a pity if you rule me out when actually I have examined this report and I have seen its shortfalls. You cannot leave out a population of 800 or 700 people in Kamuli. They are an issue and you cannot say we should not put out our cry here in this Parliament. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you go to the committee and they declined to hear your matter? That is what we want to hear. Did you go to the committee?

MR WAMBUZI: Yes, we waited to be given a slate as people of Kamuli and we were not given a chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think you better get time, read the report and concentrate.

5.10
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I read this report and I would like to bring our voice from Bukoto East and what we think would be important for us to adopt in this august House. 

First of all, the major problem that we faced as Bukoto East and Masaka District in general was the element of money, which is vividly reported in this report. Money was extremely influential in these elections, to the point that people even wished for, and took up jobs as agents of the candidates. 

Money was a big problem to the extent that it influenced most of the election results. So, we ask this august House to find ways of taking out money from politics, in other words, reduce the commercialisation of politics.  

Unfortunately, the actual person or the actual element that brought this money issue into the elections might not have been fully mentioned in the report. The truth is, and which was actually witnessed though not elaborately expressed, that most of the money that was used to buy votes came from candidates who stood on the Movement ticket. 

We were informed, and I ask myself why it is not in the report, money was coming from Kyadondo Road here in Kampala. And when we talk of sectarian politics, if we decide to give only one candidate money and yet we are looking for perfect leaders in the country, I do not know if in future this will help this country. 

In this case, Madam Speaker, we as Bukoto East beg this august House and even the Government, if they really have a heart for this country and for the future of this nation, to absolutely stop supporting particular candidates by giving them so much money while at the same time trying to undermine the rights of others. 

The money was channelled, most of the time, through the Army. I am so happy that even our Minister of Defence is here. This was not actually mentioned in this report too. In our Masaka case, the centre for the money distribution was Kasijjagirwa Barracks, which is in Masaka. And back then it was our Army Commander today who was actually giving out money. 

Soldiers would also actually go out and beat up people who would resist a particular candidate. Unfortunately, most of these candidates belonged to the Democratic Party (DP), but some of them were standing on an independent ticket. 

It is terribly rude and dangerous for this country to see that an Army Commander decided to get involved even in meetings deciding who should stand in our district and who should not, and who should be funded or not.  

Madam Speaker, at that point I felt very privileged to have witnessed these cases in a way. I was at times working as a spy to see who is bad for this country and who is not. 

If I could mention this, there was a time when I pretended to be a sweeper at a particular hotel. I overheard today’s Army Commander talking about another candidate and how they could stop him. I remember in that meeting the Army Commander we have today, he is called Col. Aronda, said, “If we cannot beat this candidate monetarily, let us beat him by undermining his security.” 

That means that army elements would go out and beat up supporters of other candidates to the point that they would intimidate them. In the end they would not even show up on polling day. If I can mention –(Interruptions)

MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I participated in the elections because I was elected here. I would like the member holding the Floor to substantiate that report because I really did not see most of these things he is reporting. I thank you.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I would just leave my honourable colleague’s comment as it is, but I am presenting what we came up with after reading this report, as Bukoto East -(Interruptions)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, common decency dictates that when you make allegations of the severity the honourable member is making against another person who is important, that person ought to be given the opportunity to defend himself or herself. 

The honourable member is making allegations to the extent that criminal acts took place, but he never reported these acts to the Police in spite of the fact that he had gone as a spy? Whatever he was spying for, we do not understand. 

Is the honourable member in order to make such severe allegations against that person and he is unable to produce any form of substantiation? Is he in order, especially when that person is not in this House to defend himself? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should not take the opportunity to introduce new matters. You know you had an opportunity to go before this committee and make your complaints, and you had an opportunity to report to the Police. But now you are introducing new matters, which cannot be investigated. I do not know whether hon. Mwandha will have time now to go and conduct new investigations! Do not introduce new matters. Concentrate on the report as it is.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I may not be in order, but at least I have grabbed this opportunity to tell you the truth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you grab it nicely. Do not grab it to accuse someone who cannot enter this House and defend himself. That gentleman you are talking about is not a member of this House. He will never have the chance to defend himself any way.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I may not have done it, but I am using this opportunity to help. We are working together. I do not gain anything in telling lies and the Minister does not gain anything in sitting on the truth.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Is it in order for the honourable member, who is saying that he is saying the truth, to make claims in the House where he is privileged? He could be misleading the House! Is it in order that he does this? Would it not be in order for him to go outside the House and repeat the same so that the truth can be elucidated through proper investigations and charges, if it is necessary? 

Is he in order to use the privilege of the House to make allegations against the person, a very senior person in this country for that matter, which can even cause a breach of the peace? -(Interruptions)- Yes, it can! I have every right to intimidate him because he is doing the same. Madam Speaker, is he in order to make a statement of that severity and he cannot go out and repeat it and be challenged?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, if that person has not been named in the report, do not introduce that matter into this debate. We are not holding any more inquiries into this matter. You can say in general that Army officers did a, b, c, and give some recommendations.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss. I need some guidance from the chair. Earlier on when hon. Gagawala, the engineer, raised a matter here that his district was not visited, a ruling was made that the committee because of the limited time and resources, could not reach all places. 

I thought this was the time now for us to fill those gaps. We should come in where we felt the committee did not reach, to air out our grievances and views and be listened to. So, I do not know how we should move because you have made a ruling that if the committee did not visit your district, you do not bring the issues here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. If the committee did not visit your district, did you make an effort to take those matters to the committee? If you did not make an effort to report those matters, there cannot be a solution now. If everybody now begins to bring up new issues, this thing will never end.

MR OKUPA: Maybe the question I would have asked hon. Nsambu was that he substantiates them. If he did not make an effort, then he should be out of order. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He admitted that he did not make an effort. He says he is just using today. Hon. Nsambu, please concentrate on the principles in the report.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But I have to mention this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not dispute my ruling.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I am predicting; if we are going to strictly limit ourselves here, there is going to be a repeat of what is given in the report. I do not see anywhere else we can debate this, if we have to retract or we have any obstruction to our own thoughts and what we have actually understood out of this report. 

Anyway, having heard all these interactions within my briefing, I think I have one more point to make. This point is to do with our RDCs, Madam Speaker. It has been mentioned in several pages both in the bigger report and this executive summary that the people who got involved a lot in these elections as far as the civil service is concerned, were actually the RDCs. 

We should not turn a blind eye to this trend. We have to come out with a resolution immediately after this report. The RDCs, given their nature of work, should absolutely keep out of politics. They are there to represent any President that comes in, but not to support any President that is within the Government. 

The way it looks in the report, they were actually soliciting. If I can interpret it in layman’s language, they were soliciting for votes for the President. The Resident District Commissioners should, as far as their terms of service are concerned, always remain in their chair. We should take this thing very seriously because an RDC is a strong agent of any serving President at the time of elections.  

Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that those who want good governance, who are actually ministers, keep ridiculing me. They should be happy that we are helping them to make this nation become better as they decide to sit on the truth. They will actually see that even the element of RDCs is not important. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate the chairperson of the committee and the members because I think they did a good job. I think they were so thorough that we are all satisfied with the findings of the committee. It is, therefore, not surprising that the chairperson was elevated because he did his work as impartially as possible.

The committee found that the Electoral Commission is full of unqualified persons. Really, there is no justification, when there are so many people on the streets looking for employment, to retain people who do not measure up to the posts that they are holding. 

You ruled that Government could not have acted before the report was debated, but I think this is a matter that requires immediate action. It does not matter what we say here. As long as the persons who are holding posts in the Electoral Commission fall short of the expected qualifications, they will never deliver and this country will be left in electoral problems round after round. 

It is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker, that Government takes the recommendations of the committee on this matter very seriously.

The other concern that I wish to raise is the politicisation of the civil service. I have before on the Floor of this House, raised the issue of RDCs. Are they senior civil servants in the true meaning of it? 

In the civil service, seniority is earned; it is not conferred. In the case of RDCs, seniority is conferred by appointment. What are they supposed to do? If they are in place to solicit votes for certain candidates, then their behaviour is clearly inconsistent with the status of a senior civil servant. They are clearly being partisan and, therefore, do not merit the title of senior civil servant.  

Then there is the issue of corruption in the Electoral Commission. I am a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and I have read the report of the IGG. 

Why, up to now, has the Electoral Commission virtually lost interest in the cases of people who connived to defraud Government of millions of shillings? We are saying we have to wait for this report to be read. Yes, it is now read and it is being debated. I hope tomorrow concrete action will be taken. 

We are all very aware that the Police have been in bad shape right from the time the Movement took power. Yes, they knew the Police was dilapidated and we would have expected that Government would have made the building of a strong Police force one of its priorities. 

Whereas they were 28,000, as we talk today they are about 15,000. That is not the way to maintain law and order, with a poorly equipped Police force, which is under-manned and then you expect them to maintain law and order at peak periods of elections –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. I take this opportunity to inform you that there is no love lost between the head of state and the Police force. As an illustration, not long ago he made a statement to the effect that if they put a cow and himself in the police barracks during elections, most of the policemen would vote for a cow.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. He says at the time when the NRM took power the Police had 28,000 men. Actually, that is not so. The Police force, as you may recollect, was roughly 9,000 men and after we had taken power an exercise to screen the force to determine the qualifications of the people in it was carried out. 

It was found that of the 9,000 only about 4,000 had the basic qualifications to be police officers. A decision was made that if we retained only 4,000 it would be impossible to maintain law and order. So, I think a force of close to 6,000 was left in place and it has been gradually built to where it is today. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, the bottom line here is that election after election, the Electoral Commission did not have enough policemen and they had to borrow soldiers from the Ministry of Defence and manpower from other security agencies. 

Is it deliberate that the Police should be left in its weak position to allow room for interference from other security agencies? Even on the equipping of the Police, Parliament had to be called upon to make personal contributions to help in equipping the Police –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way.  Parliamentary and presidential elections are held every five years. District council elections are held every four years and in between –(Interjection)- if I can be protected from hon. Awori. Thank you. 

The honourable member is suggesting that for every election we have, we ought to have enough policemen to man the task. Is he suggesting that every time we have an election we should recruit policemen and then after the elections we retire them? Or we recruit them, they monitor the elections, and after that they go on leave for five years? 

Can the honourable member help us understand even as a former senior civil servant how he could justify such a thing? And he knows that in all countries of the world, including the United States, soldiers are employed to man unusually big functions like elections. I beg the honourable member to clarify that.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister has clearly misread my mind. There is no suggestion anywhere that policemen should be recruited solely for the purpose of overseeing elections. 

The fact that the Internal Security Organisation is very often called upon to carry out police duties is clearly an indication that ordinarily the police manpower available is not enough to cover the security of this country. He is a member of Cabinet and he should know that. (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: I would like to enrich my colleague’s debate. The ratio of the population to policeman in Uganda is very low. My friend here is arguing that it is important at this stage for almost every polling station to have at least one well-trained policeman who knows the law of Uganda, to stand at this polling station. 

These polling stations are only 17,000. This brings the ratio nearly to that of Nigeria as far as police to population ratio is concerned. At the moment, it is 1 to 1600 which means that our policemen cannot even remember the people they are supposed to police by name, which is the practice in other countries. The policeman knows the people whom he keeps as a herdsman.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank my colleague from Kamuli for that very enriching information. Really, the honourable Minister did not have to wait for hon. Gagawala for him to know that.

Madam Speaker, the report has come out very clearly about the commercialisation of politics, the colossal sums of money that change hands during campaigns. This is dangerous for this country and indeed it should stop. 

This practise has been brought about mainly by the so-called individual merit principle. The individual bears all the burdens of the election personally, and it has brought about lack of equity in participating in politics. 

For example, if hon. Aggrey Awori was given Shs 15 or 16 million and His Excellency’s campaign team used more than Shs 10 billion –(Interjection)- 20 billion. So I am actually giving a lower figure. 

Assuming it was only Shs 10 billion, you clearly see that there is no way a person with Shs 15 or 16 million can compete against another candidate who has Shs 10 billion! It is definitely uneven ground. So, I think it is high time that we found a formula that would pull the use of money out of our politics.  

Besides that, Madam Speaker, I think there is need now to review the entire electoral law. We have seen people in this country who have been convicted of election malpractices and their seats have been declared vacant. Others were convicted of voting more than twice, they return to this House and they are made ministers. 

We should make the law in such a way that participation in electoral malpractice is made a non-profitable undertaking. (Applause).  

Madam Speaker, clearly the report has confirmed what the courts of law established in the petition of 2001, that indeed there were malpractices during elections. Although they said that they were not significant enough to make a difference. 

My concern is are we retrogressing to where we started off? The revolution that brought about this government started from allegations of electoral malpractices and rigging elections. Today, we are still reading about rigging of elections, we are reading about Kalangala Action Plan caning people. 

In Mukono during the LC V elections, you would get the likes of Capt. Muwanga caning people. We raised this issue on the Floor of the House and the honourable Minister of Defence answered that those were acting as individuals. In fact these people were arrested and put in a police station at Mukono (Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The honourable member mentioned that the very reasons that took us to the bush were because of election rigging. 

But today we see the same men whom we fought with ridicule someone telling the truth. When they do this and yet in the past there was only the capacity of buying 27 guns and today we have the capacity of multiplying that by millions and probably even getting tanks, I cannot understand. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I thank my honourable colleague for the information given to me because I think these are issues, which should enrich our debate. 

We should not look at the symptoms only but we should also take a holistic approach and be able to diagnose what the cause of election violence is. It is not enough to admit that there was election violence, let us address the root causes of this violence.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I hope that Government will come up with an action plan - not the Kalangala one though - to address the various issues raised in this report. I think as Parliament we deserve to be informed, not today but at least in the future, of action taken in rectifying the anomalies found, and against individuals who were implicated as having been in the wrong in one way or the other.  

We need to be informed of the progress in investigations where deaths were recorded, because I think the people of Uganda would wish to see that Government is acting decisively against the perpetrators of such lawlessness during elections.  

We cannot talk about democracy if people are not sure that when they go to attend Muguli’s rally they will go back peacefully to their homes. They would want to know that if anybody waylays them and they report to the Police, the Police would take quick and decisive action to apprehend the offenders. I think Ugandans need that assurance. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for having come up with such a report. 

In the same vein, I should make it clear that under whatever political shade one may belong to, we need to clean our politics and elections. In whatever form one may look at it, we need to clean politics. 

In the Movement, we should be proud of having commenced on this job of democratisation of the elections, of elections being free and fair and on individual merit. In my opinion, we should move ahead, we should move forward, we should jump over the pitfalls. We should be proud to have made this country what it is. 

However, such incidents that mar elections even make a mockery of the very Constitution that we are so proud of. Article 1 of our Constitution stipulates that power belongs to the people, but it is very unfortunate to see incidents that pervert that spirit of the Constitution. I really feel bad about this. Whether we are in politics, whether we get out of politics, at least we should leave a mark where others who follow shall begin and move forward. 

I was looking forward to peaceful, free and fair elections and to take on the mandate of the people, but all this did not work that way. And I am surprised that up to now - you ruled on that one – no action has been taken. At least action should have been taken against the perpetrators of election violence, Madam Speaker. Why should we allow it to move on? 

In that spirit, I call on all members of this House to take the recommendations, those that are benefiting this country, panel beat them if there is any panel beating that is needed, and see how we can reach our desired destination, all of us in this country. 

When I look at the causes of violence outlined in the report, the second highest, with 10 percent, is the Army. It is good the Minister of Defence is here, I beg your pardon, honourable Minister. Why do we do this? 

I omitted the first one with full knowledge that the Army is a sacred institution in this country. It has a high profile standing and the honourable Professor knows this very well. This is why he was lamenting about mentioning someone and it touches the security of this country. He is quite aware of that. So, it is really bad. 

That institution should not be marred by our shortfalls, by our inadequacies. It should stay clean! It should be an institution where members serve. They are Ugandans for that matter; they have the spirit of this country at heart. They should live beyond our petty wrangles and interests. But to my surprise –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, when you say that you are glad the Minister of Defence is here, I take this opportunity to inform you that he was a beneficiary of violence himself until he was taken to court.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I may not look very far, my honourable colleague mentioned here Capt. Muwanga. I raised this matter on the Floor and he was imprisoned, but mysteriously disappeared. He never appeared before any courts of law. 

When you read the report you find many serving officers of the UPDF mentioned. There is Capt. Ndawula who was by then in Rukungiri, I am sure now he is a Lieutenant Colonel commanding a brigade somewhere. 

I see others like Col Kayanja, Col Noble Mayombo; all of them were implicated in one way or the other. Maybe they have their case to put forward, but to my surprise instead of a penalty we just saw promotions. Where is the sincerity in this country? They should not have been rewarded for having meted out violence. There are many cases. 

My worry about that, and I strongly put this forward, is that tomorrow in 2006, or any other year, officers could be plotting on how they can excel in violence so that they can also attain the limelight. (Interruption).

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to clarify that even if an election petition court makes a finding, that finding, the law is very clear, is not a finding about the criminality of the individual even if that individual was named. The law is clear on this. 

The presiding Judge who makes such a finding is required to immediately forward his findings to the District of Public Prosecutions (DPP) or to the authorities for further investigation and prosecution if adequate evidence is available. 

I did not even get the list or the particulars about where they were alleged to have been involved in violence. But even if there had been a petition in which Col Mayombo and the others that you mentioned had been found to have been involved, that in itself is not enough to lead to the conclusion that they were criminally responsible. That is point number one. 

Two, in reference to the point earlier made by hon. Wagonda Muguli and hon. Awori about myself, I would like to invite the honourable colleagues to read the judgment petition in which I was involved. The finding of the court was that I was not involved in any election offence of any kind. 

I want to repeat this for the sake of hon. Bigirwa, and I stand really to be challenged, I was not found guilty of committing any election offence –(Mr Awori rose_)- I will finish and give you the Floor. 

Definitely, I could not have been a beneficiary of election violence at all. I was in fact –(Interjection)- I will make this point only. I am coming to contribute on this important topic and the report, I will then have an opportunity to talk about violence generally and violence in my area, and who actually was a victim. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Could I inform the honourable Minister although he has left the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can only inform the speaker. 

MR AWORI: Oh! I thought he stood down for me.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, such tendencies of rewarding people who are implicated in one way or the other is what is undermining the spirit of democratisation in this country. 

Many people suffered, many people were beaten, some others lost their lives; this is why I recommend that the recommendation for the payment of the ex-gratia compensation to the violence victims should be effected henceforth. It should not delay because the victims are still looking forward to this Parliament, to this Government, to come up with a remedy. 

They would be compensated but in a way it would act as a remedy; individuals who are mentioned as the perpetrators should be held personally accountable for the crimes they did to other Ugandans. 

I have been looking at the suitability and adequacy of the laws governing elections. We need to strengthen them. I am proposing that we move forward to clean them. I think we should have presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day, and electoral offences should be heavily punished. 

Also, it should be criminal for one to engage in election malpractice, because at the end of the day once it is annulled again the country loses more money in the same exercise and people go away scot-free. We should criminalize this. We should never allow it, and the perpetrators should always be people of shame to this country and to the democracy of Uganda.  

I read about allegations of financial impropriety in the Electoral Commission, and this was since 20 February 2002 when we came up with that resolution on the Floor of the House. But just last week, the Public Accounts Committee was still inquiring about the Shs 760 million in the Electoral Commission for the photographic voter registration. This was carried out on the whims of people without due consideration to the tender process and it is still going on. 

So, I think we should come up with strong recommendations to plug any loopholes or any financial gaps in the Electoral Commission. We should seek for strict financial regulations to govern the Electoral Commission. 

I know this could be by omission or commission, more so knowing the staff at the Electoral Commission whose qualifications are wanting. I saw the shake up in the Commissioners but the staff down there, up to the lowest person in the Commission, their qualifications leave a lot to be desired. 

Similarly, Members of Parliament aspiring to join this Parliament should be people of capable credence, people with qualifications, people who can stand in the public with their heads high. But where you have allegations of people who cheated their way to Parliament, people with inadequate education debating on this Floor of the House, I think it leaves a lot to be desired. I would not wish to be associated with such a group, Madam Speaker.  

Lastly, this country belongs to all of us, whether those in government or those aspiring to join government, and I was almost running mad seeing the torpedoing of the report, which was being attempted here on the Floor for one reason or another. 

But I think, and I still feel, that this is in good spirit and in good faith. So, we should debate this report, come up with viable recommendations and we usher our country into a new and prosperous era. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MR EDWARD WESONGA KAMANA  (Bubulo County West, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I rise up to talk about violence during elections I feel like shedding tears. This country is for all of us but during elections other people personalise the elections and literally take over elections.  

I happen to come from the district, according to the report, which had the worst election violence. Nine people died carelessly in the hands of government agents. 

I am saying this with authority simply because I have a case in point. Some masquerader was dressed in double uniforms, both different colours, given two pairs of boots and driven to my village with the intention of killing me before 26th, the day of the elections. I was only lucky though I suffered afterwards. 

The dramatized soldier, the masquerader, was dressed, armed and even given permission to go on a short leave, allegedly, by some barracks in Nakasongola. When the character tried to confront me –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected from the Defence Minister, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected.

MR WESONGA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the so-called soldier confronted me but I was lucky that the voters were also around. They struggled with the so-called soldier at a distance. I witnessed what happened; he released bullets and at the end of the day he saw that the public was rougher than him and committed suicide. 

Madam Speaker, the issue was, for the good of Government, Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) must work very hard and Wesonga must be arrested.  For the good of the Government, DISO must mobilize soldiers to look for Wesonga. The word was, just like hon. Awori said, “When you get him, shoot on sight”.  

Madam Speaker, miraculously I managed to go to the police station. When I got there, the policeman who should have protected me also now openly said, “The President’s Office says that whether he killed or not, we want him in Maluku two days before elections.”  

Madam Speaker, as if that was not enough, I was kept in the cells. The first day nobody talked to me. People struggled, but the security officers were fighting them off until the following day.  

Madam Speaker, I have made two historical events: one, I was elected two days after I was in prison.  Two, I was taken to court after 5.00 p.m., but that is the law in Uganda. They collected the Magistrate and in her consciousness she never returned to that court; she shed tears after sending me to Maluku.  That is the type of election violence in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, what interests me is when I read the recommendations on page 23 of the short report, one of them says, “The acts of all security personnel named in this report and the Police report should be investigated for the alleged crimes they committed and prosecuted, if sufficient evidence is available.”  

Madam Speaker, it fell short of mentioning a man called Wasieba. Here is a masquerader, who even up to tonight - and I am saying this in the presence of the Minister of Defence - your Ministry has continued harvesting guns from his house. They give them keys to go and open and harvest guns and no action has taken place. I wonder where he gets the immunity.  

Madam Speaker, there is one man now appearing before the Court Martial. That man was armed by Wasieba and even given a gun to go and work at a factory. He was using it on hire basis. Your department just went, got the man and the man confessed. They went to Wasieba’s garage to collect the rest of the bullets and brought the man to Makindye. The man could be suffering because he thought that Wasieba had the right over the gun.  

Madam Speaker, CMI operatives – I used to know it as Operation Wembley – drove from Kampala, were given the keys and they collected two guns from Wasieba’s house. Wasieba was not arrested, he was not prosecuted; Wasieba is not above the law. That is what I hear, but that is not how CMI operatives operate.  

Madam Speaker, this is why the insecurity during elections will never end; look at a man who murdered seven soldiers, some of them from Hoima, others from my home district. They were brutally murdered on the election day and loaded on a government pick-up that was helping him during elections. The man was promoted and he now investigates for this country externally, and that is Simon Mulongo. 

Madam Speaker, some of those fellows could have died simply because they thought they were performing a normal national duty.  

I know of a soldier who was a Lieutenant, very well behaved, but he was beheaded and all guns were loaded on the pick-up and no step was taken. Instead, Wesonga, who was innocent, was taken and committed to Maluku until the DPP cleared me. Madam Speaker, such double standards shall never encourage Ugandans to continue participating in elections.

What we should have done is to do this like Amin did in broad daylight when he declared himself a President, other than pretending to be democratic when you hit the worst. This experience was bad. The Movement Government should be different from Amin’s, and for it to prove its worth I want the victims prosecuted as per this recommendation.  

Madam Speaker, these double standards will not help.  There is no better supervisor than a Ugandan who sympathized with the Movement. There should be no other people who are special and above the law because they talk well of the Movement. I am now appealing to the system. If the Minister of Internal Affairs is sincere to this country, I want him to challenge me on this matter.  

The gun that was meant to kill me was recovered. The DISO then gave my driver Shs 2 million and told him, “you say that this man came from this house with this gun. He said he was going to pay you only Shs 30,000.”  

Madam Speaker, that was a very unfortunate thing. At the end of the day the gun belonged to Police. The gun passed through the RDC’s office and ended up in the hands of a civilian, a dangerous fellow, and in broad daylight this was proved and the Police accepted that it was theirs.

I pity that man because he died, maybe unexpectedly, but his children are suffering.  Since the operatives belong to this government, they should compensate those families. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will end here for today. The debate will continue tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock and I think we shall start with Prof. Kabwegyere. 

There is a small announcement. The members of YPA are invited for a meeting immediately after this session in the Member’s Lounge. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 December 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)
