Monday, 2 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the reception you gave to His Excellency President Arap Moi, when he visited and addressed us. I have received a report from those who were close to him, in his delegation, that they were very happy with the way you moved in the House. I thank you very much - (Applause).  

I have also received a report from our colleague hon. Wambi. There was a petition, and court proceedings against him for the election he won. Today he informed me that the same has been struck and he has a peaceful mind to conduct his business - (Applause). Perhaps now he is away celebrating, but he told me to pass on that information. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am raising a matter of procedural concern. As much as I appreciate the efforts of some of the ministers in answering our oral questions, it looks like a number of their colleagues are making no serious effort to answer our questions. 

I am bringing up this matter on the issue of Kinyara Sugar Works. I brought this question to the attention of the minister concerned six months ago, about the privatisation of Kinyara.  I now learn with great concern that this institution is not being privatised in accordance with the policy of the Privatisation Unit. I learnt that some people want to block the sale, and I learnt that the people of Bunyoro are concerned. I am also concerned because when we have a policy of government, then it must be followed.  

Mr Speaker, can we get a statement either from the Prime Minister or the minister concerned with privatisation, whether indeed the Kinyara IPO, which was issued will not be realised, especially before Friday?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I will get in touch with the people concerned.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a supplementary to hon. Awori’s concern, I would like to inform this House that government has actually stopped the listing of Kinyara Sugar Works on the Stock Exchange, which was supposed to take place on Friday. 

As I talk now, the workers, management and the people of Masindi and Bunyoro in general are worried that they may not benefit from the sale of Kinyara. The argument being that once Kinyara is sold through the Initial Public Offer, then it may not be sustainable. So they changed, they want to say that it should be sold to a core investor.  

But, Mr Speaker, according to the information I have, and I hope it is in the hands of government also, all these options were considered by the technical people, by government, by Kinyara and all the stakeholders. Eventually they came out with a strategy to privatise Kinyara under the Initial Public Offer. So we would like to know, what is the way forward? Assure our people that you will not take a strategy that will be disadvantageous to them. At an appropriate time I will beg to move a motion on this issue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, since the Prime Minister is here and he has heard, I think he will direct the minister in charge of the subject to make an appropriate statement.

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, on behalf of my constituency - sometime ago a Member of Parliament representing Workers got lost. That was about three months ago. Ever since, we have not heard him say anything in the House; no statement at all and he is not seen anywhere. We wonder whether he was found or not. 

I went to his house to congratulate him for coming back, but his wife could not tell me of his whereabouts. Up to now I am worried, and my constituents are worried too. Is he in the country or did he get lost forever? Could Parliament be informed, and our constituents know? 

MR AWORI: I am seeking clarification from the honourable colleague. Given his previous experience, normally how long does it take before one explains a situation like that? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we move on to another item on the Order Paper, there is an announcement. The YPA is launching a countrywide Constituency Education Programme, on 7th and 8th December, in Kumi. The programme is starting at sub-regional level, bringing five to six districts together, focusing on sub-county councillors and participants.  

The Members of Parliament from Kumi, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Nakapiripirit, Kotido and Moroto are invited to actively participate in the mobilisation of participants in particular, and for the programme in general. They are therefore invited to a meeting at the YPA offices after the plenary, today. This is from the Chairperson, YPA.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE (Mr Augustine Nshimye): First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for at last finding room for the report on the Order Paper, for it to be debated.  

To remind honourable members, this august House, after very lengthy deliberations on 20th of February this year, after considering whether to hand over the matter to a judicial commission of inquiry or to a parliamentary select committee, decided to elect a select committee to investigate, among other things, causes of election violence.  

The committee was mandated to do this work in two months, and it sought an extension of one month.  The committee was ready to present its report before this House on the 10th of September this year. Members have had enough time to go through the report and the recommendations therein. I am very sure they are in a position to debate this report.

Before I move that the report be debated, I would like to first of all say that some of the recommendations of the report have been overtaken by events. On this note I would like to thank government for acting, say, by removing the then existing Electoral Commission, and appointing a new one. 

I also wish to request members to bear in mind, when they are debating this report, the time limitation. The time given was of two months, which Parliament considered as adequate for the committee to do its work. 

You will find in the report that where the committee was unable to get the persons who were alleged to have committed acts of violence for an answer, we did not come to a specific conclusion. The committee ended up by referring to the evidence as “allegations”. And we requested government, through its appropriate machinery, to carry out further investigations, get the truth, and where possible, bring those persons to book. So, I request the House to take into account that element of time limitation.

I would also like to take into account the fact that although members should be commended for having devoted all their time to this work, when you compare this committee to other committees or other judicial commissions of inquiry, this is a committee that operated with limited resources. Even repeat journeys to some districts were not very easy.  

Without wasting the time of this House, Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the report be debated. But as I promised last time, at a later stage I will be moving a motion for the adoption of the recommendations of the committee. This motion has already been circulated and it will be presented at a later stage. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded!

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, the chairman of the committee has proposed that at an appropriate time he will move a motion for the adoption of the recommendations in the report. I would like to find out from him whether he would request this House to adopt only some recommendations, or the whole report? 

For me, the recommendations are part and parcel of the whole report. Why would he then move a motion that would only request us to pass the recommendations? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking further clarification from the chairperson of the committee. There is a matter that may create some friction in terms of the interplay and the interface of the different organs of the state.  

We are certainly very aware that the Judiciary is currently handling cases involving some matters, persons, and issues well presented in this report. I do not know how he intends to advise this House to debate this report in view of the generally accepted principle that we should not actually handle matters that are subjudice. We should not pre-empt any matters, which are before court. Thank you.

MR NSHIMYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This committee is a child of this House, and members made the recommendations, as you have seen them. It is within your greatest wisdom to adopt, amend and delete as you so wish. Indeed, the recommendations that the committee will be seeking to adopt have got the background of the whole report. So, it will be the report, plus the recommendations.

Answering the question of hon. Ruhindi, I wish to assure him that the court decisions that were referred to were those cases that had been decided on already. If the parties have gone further, let us say to appeal, we did not refer to those matters so as to make them subjudice. So, the matters we referred to are decisions that were made already, although they could have been appealed. Thank you very much.

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, I need clarification. The member is saying that the matters, which were already decided upon in court, had not been touched. But I heard a case regarding the honourable Minister of Defence, who was mentioned in the report, and yet to my understanding that case is still on in court. So, could you please clarify on that?

MR NSHIMYE: That is actually what I have been explaining. Cases have got stages. When a case comes up for the first time, let us say in the High Court, and the High Court makes a decision on it, then that matter ceases to be subjudice. When it goes on appeal, then it is subjudice, and we did not refer to the matters on appeal, but to those in the lower courts.

THE SPEAKER: The question from hon. Ruhindi, which requires clarification from you is, what will happen if in the report there are matters that are relevant to matters currently pending in court? That was his point. What shall we do?

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Speaker, if in the course of our debate we find that there are relevant matters that are pending in court, we shall as much as possible avoid them. If somebody raises a matter that is before court in this debate, then that matter will be subjudice.  

THE SPEAKER: Now the question is, how do we debate a report, which is chequered with matters that are pending in court, and others that are not? That is his question.

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Speaker, my understanding is that this report is not at all based on matters that were, or are, subjudice.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter did arise in the Court of Appeal hearing of the Political Organisations Act petition. When I was appearing as a witness, under cross-examination, the lawyers of the petitioner raised the question of judgement and the Court of Appeal ruled that it was subjudice. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter we are invited to debate is of a nature that is like a river, which is flowing day and night. You cannot say, “I shall wait to discuss this river when it is dry”  -(Laughter). For that reason, I recommend that the chairman handles his motion so as to cater for such affairs, which have already taken place because they were not investigating on matters ahead of us, but of matters that had passed. So, we cannot say, “no, we are not handling this because there is a case somewhere.” When will the court be without cases? (Laughter).

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to hon. Nsambu’s. Actually I think it is our own mistake as Parliament to have delayed debate on this important work that was done. The subject matter very intimately touches on a number of us. It is only fair that those feelings that have been injured and those others who were not even able to have an opportunity to come out and air their views here, be given an opportunity as we discuss this matter. The longer we delay, the more aggrieved the parties will be. 

At this point, we shall have to be very selective about what issue is already before court that is considered to be subjudice. That way we shall be able to pick out those salient issues, which have not been brought to the attention of the law through court appearances. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What I gather from members who have stood to speak is that some contents of the report are on matters that are pending in court. The motion is to debate and adopt the report. The question is, if we adopt the report including matters that are pending in court, what will be the implications in as far as the pending cases are concerned? That is what we have to try to settle before we proceed.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If we adopt the report, it means we agree with what is in the report. Will it influence the decisions of courts, which are handling some matters, which are part and parcel of the report? That is the question, and that is what we should address.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have remembered the Speaker’s ruling in this House before, when members brought up issues of sub-judicial nature. The Speaker has in the past said, “I am not aware of a case of that nature being in court, or the contents and issues being raised in the case.” The speaker has ever ruled to such effect.  

Secondly, we do not know all the issues at stake in court. For example, last week or two weeks ago, this House went ahead and amended the Parliamentary Elections Act on the time limit for displaying the voters’ register. This may or may not be one of the issues being contested in court, but we still went ahead and amended this law. 

We are continuously conducting elections in this country. Yesterday we conducted elections, very soon we are going to conduct an election in Bukoto East, and somebody may go to court after that. Won’t we go ahead and make amendments of the law? Won’t we go ahead and debate it?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are mixing issues. If Parliament went ahead and amended a law for displaying the voters’ register in respect of a certain constituency, it was not backdating it. It is something for the future. That has nothing to do with somebody who is petitioning about the time when the law required displaying the election register for 30 days. He will not refer to Parliament’s amendment. The issue will be determined as the law was at the time the complaint arose.

MR MWADHA: Mr Speaker, the rules of procedure give you very wide powers and we as members do respect your Chair and your ruling. It appears that because of one or two cases that are mentioned in this report, just on technical basis, we should not discuss a report, which touches on a number of issues. I think that you as Speaker, if there are matters in this report that are in court, you can at any one time restrain a member from making comments on those matters because they are in court.  

Secondly, if at the time of adopting the report there are matters that are sub judice - we have done it before in this House, I do not see why we do not adopt the report, subject to certain matters that are not being accepted by the House. I am told that lawyers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this question should be directed to the chairman of the committee that dealt with the report. They have made inquiries to him. What are they going to do with that? I cannot answer for him. It is for him to make a clarification, and we proceed. There is nothing that has come to me for a decision. These are clarifications from members. I think you should allow the chairperson to clarify as far as he can, then we shall see how to proceed.

MR MWANDHA: Can I make a specific proposal therefore, Sir? In the event that any matter that is in court is mentioned by a member, you use the powers you have to restrain that member from discussing that matter. Also, should we reach the level of adopting the report, we can exclude matters that are already in court so that we do not influence the position of the judges. I wish to propose, Sir.

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking two clarifications, one from you and another one from the chairman of the committee.

First of all, I want to thank the chairman for the report, but I find it unnecessarily bulky because of the way it was typed. In fact, I showed it to a friend and I was thinking that perhaps it is a draft and not a standard report. So, Mr Speaker, I am trying to find out from you whether the Rules of Procedure can establish a standard report. Should it be typed in single line or double line spacing, and in which font? We can probably amend the Rules of Procedure to cater for a standard format of presenting a report – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me answer that. The volume of the report will depend on the volume of the work. So, there is no standard volume of a report because the nature of work is not the same. In this case, however, there is nothing we can do if the volume is like this. Since this is the report we have, we shall have to deal with it in the way it is, unfortunately.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would have loved to be told the spacing to use while typing a report. Thank you very much. 

The second clarification is to the chairman. Given his complaint of inadequacy of time, was he able to cover all the points raised in his terms of reference? As I read the report, I find that some – maybe it is due to my poor reading or understanding – of the points raised in the terms of reference were not answered. I am trying to find out, before we can discuss the report, whether all the points in the terms of reference were covered. Thank you.

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Speaker, the issue of sub judice is a very important rule. Indeed when the committee was considering its work, within its terms of reference, it was allowed to refer to court decisions and other forms of literature. The committee at that time did not consider the matter sub judice. But if you find that in the course of the debate some matter appears to be sub judice, I think the Speaker can rule on that matter so that it is excluded.

On the point raised by hon. Mugerwa, unfortunately I have not benefited from those things that she considers to have been left out in the report. When we come to that stage in the course of our presentation, they will be noted and an appropriate answer will be given. Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The chairman of the committee is a lawyer and I think choosing him was deliberate. He has agreed with his learned colleagues that the matter of sub judice is very important. This is where this Parliament must pronounce itself on whether they will, through expediency, debate matters that are sub judice or not. 

I find it very difficult to agree with hon. Mwandha who suggests that the only time the matter becomes sub judice is when you come to the resolutions. Matters sub judice are even in the content of the debate! This report, even its motive is under discussion. I do not know how you are going to charge these members to draw a line between a matter that is sub judice and a matter that is not sub judice. In practical terms, it is not going to be possible. 

Members should agree that we have no problem with this report being debated. There is no question about it. We will debate it, but that is a fundamental decision that has to be made. For anybody to ask the Speaker to be eternally awake, every split second of the debate, to decide whether a matter is sub judice or not at that instant, is probably asking him to be next to God in his ability to make decisions. 

So, I am seeking your help, Mr Speaker, as to whether it is not wise to actually put off this debate. This report will be debated, but I think we should allow the courts to finish the job they are doing before we handle matters – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the honourable minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you stand up, I should recognise you first and allow you to speak, otherwise other people will not be able to contribute. Can we hear from hon. Ndeezi?

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We gave you that sweet Chair but at times it is also hot and challenging. Today is the time and day for you to give proper guidance to this august House.  

Mr Speaker, many times we in Parliament have said we must safeguard the independence and integrity of this House. I support this view as well. But while you are struggling or you are advocating for our independence and integrity, you must also bear in mind that there are some other institutions; the judiciary is one of them. My colleagues here are saying that some of the issues raised in this report are not very good or positive for the good relationship between the legislature and the judiciary. 

Others are saying that it is possible for us, as the entire august House, to identify the thorny issues that may spoil our relationship with the judiciary, and leave those out. As far as I can look at this from the perspective of a common man, Mr Speaker, this is not a very easy job for us as a House. 

I would like to know whether we could ask the select committee to go back and panel-beat its report and then come back to us at another time. Or may we ask any of the other committees of Parliament, perhaps the Legal Committee or any other structure, to help us sort out this difficult question? Otherwise, we are all pinning our eyes on you. We request for your guidance. Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of sub judice comes, not only at the stage of a report like this, of Parliament, I believe that when the committee was going to write this official report, it should have known, since it was chaired by a lawyer, of the issue of sub judice. It should have been conscious of that important aspect of the inclusion of those cases in court in an official report for the public and for this Parliament. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is whether the committee was not aware of this sub judice issue. 

I want clarification also on whether those people referred to, and who are in court, were interviewed by the committee, so that we are guided on what rules or procedure they used around that issue?

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, it is purely a technical matter. It is either sub judice or it is not. The only person who can decide is you. We cannot debate it indefinitely. Just tell us, is it subjudice or not at all?

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is a reference being made. If a motion is moved here that the Speaker has to decide irrespective of the decision of the House, then that is different. This is in reference to somebody who moved a motion that a matter treated as very sensitive should be voted on by secret ballot. Yet somebody went on to say that the Speaker should have decided on that too.  

I do not know what is in this report. It has been tabled but the chairperson has conceded that there are matters that are sub judice. Now that the report consists of matters that are sub judice, there are proposals that we can remove such things from the report. But we are also going to deal with those matters that are sub judice, in the process, because they are part and parcel of the report. 
 
So, we have to treat the report as a whole. Therefore, if there is a matter that is sub judice and the committee has accepted that there are matters that are pending in court, then I have nothing to do rather than to read to you rule 53. It says: 
“Reference shall not be made to any matter on which decision is pending in such a way as may, in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” 

Because of the admission by the committee that there are matters that are sub judice contained in this report, I see no way out other than to say that let us keep this pending until those matters are settled in Court - (Applause).

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I respect your ruling on the matter. However, I believe also that after ruling on the matter, we can re-introduce it at an appropriate time and this being the appropriate time, I would like to move that this House debate the report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next item on the Order Paper is the Financial Institutions Bill. I had put it aside and given three days in which we would debate this report. But because of our rule 53 and the ruling I have made, the next item will be the Financial Institutions Bill, which I think members are not ready to debate now. It will be debated tomorrow. 

The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 December 2002, at 2.00 p.m.)


