Thursday, 8 December 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE LEGAL NOTICE NO.1 OF 1986, AMENDMENT BILL 1994

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr S. Kavuma): I thank you very much Mr Chairman. I beg to move that a Bill entitled: The Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, Amendment Bill 1994, be read a First Time.  I beg to move, Sir.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL AMENDMENT NO.2, BILL, 1994

(Debate continued.)

MR MARWAS (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to put forward my comments on this Bill and, I think the people of this country know for sure that the Constituent Assembly will be able to finalise work by next Monday, the term we gave them.  But in principle, I do not agree with the method the Minister is using.

This Bill was signed by the Minister but has not yet appeared some days back.  Unfortunately, Government found it wise to wait until four days to the expiring to the CA term, and then they rush here and say, we do not have time.  I want to give the Minister my answer to the time of the CA. He very well knows that at the time of the campaigns of the Constituent Assembly, we went beyond by 30 minutes in 30 days and Parliament did not come back and stop the campaigns to enact the law and campaigns were allowed and we came back here and amended the Statute prospectively.  What is wrong with this one? 

Yes; things are being done by our Government haphazardly, and nobody knows what is happening! What do we do? You only come here and tell us what is done, after asking up their own statements.  Somebody asked me outside, and I want you to confirm, by the Members of the Back-bench, as to why everybody was here yesterday. We had the Constituent Assembly there; and we have our members of the executive; they are given chauffeur driven cars, they have houses, they have offices, they get money from government, something that is a - that members of the executive and of the CA, and I withdraw Shs.100, 000/- everyday and yet, on top of that, they continue earning money as members of the executive, when Members of Parliament who are members of the CA do not do the same here; they earn money alone here.  What hon. Nekyon said, when in politics, man starts eating man, he closes his eyes. 

It was unfortunate yesterday, I asked the hon. Kanyeihamba -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to make a very serious allegation that some Members of Government are drawing subsistence allowances from the CA when they are also paid subsistence without substantiating this kind of allegation, Mr Chairman? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you substantiate, please?

MR MARWAS: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  That order has been given to the Members of the Front bench, if they challenged me, but they decided to keep quiet. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are in order, please. Order, continue, please.

MR MARWAS:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, yesterday I raised the issue of who comes first. I am not a lawyer, but I am told by the lawyers that, when a need arises, where a constitutional bearing takes place, together with a statutory enactment, the Constitution should be taken care of first.  I raised this question and my hon. Friend dodged it; unfortunately, hon -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member on the Floor stated that some Members of Cabinet, some Members of the Front Bench, who are in the CA are drawing subsistence allowances where they are staying in Government houses and is he in order to continue without substantiating this very serious allegation, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is out of order, please. Withdraw your statement.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I am talking about the Constitution -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you going to substantiate or you re going to withdraw? 

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I am not withdrawing, because first all the Members of the CA are getting money here as subsistence allowance. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, all what I know in my wisdom is that, we are getting Shs.75, 000/= in the CA and the Members here, as NRC like him is getting Shs.80, 000/= subsistence allowance.  So what he is talking about Shs.100, 000/- is completely untrue.

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order. Leave the money issue and concentrate on the Bill itself.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I was talking of - which comes first -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. (Inaudible)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you Mr Chairman.  As hon. Colleagues are aware, until up to days back, I was a very effective Backbencher, so I do not know what has been happening with Ministers.  But I am saying, it is not enough to come and say, I meet so and so in the Cash Office  -(Laughter) 

You can go to the Cash Office for a number of reasons; you can go to the Cash Office to collect you Sitting Allowance, which may not necessarily be subsistence allowance. So, I think this matter should not derail and  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, cried of order.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I want to end on this by saying, now that the matter has been brought to our attention, I am sure we shall take responsibility to look at it, and see financial regulations we have at hand and if there is anything that is abnormal in what is happening, it will be put right; I will come and make a report to this House.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Concentrate on the Bill and do not talk about the money.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I was saying -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I was saying everybody in Uganda knows the present Government is a Government of people who know what to do; so I am saying why do we not follow the way things are supposed to be done, we amend the Constitution, and we come back and amend the Act of Parliament, that is the procedure behind our backs where we are jumping off the lion. We should stop running this country by assumptions because we should, I think - today we are extending the CA to six months and yet we know, the NRM, the Movement is expiring on the 25th of next month, but we are all assuming that, after all, since its we, we shall still come and do it; the legal system to be in place than running our country through presumptions. We are saying the CA must not be extended.  But we are saying, let us do it the right way, amend the Constituent law; that is all! A lot of time here, we told the Minister about these things, what do we do?  These are simple -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let him finish, I will give you time.  Have you finished? Try to wind up, please.

MR MARWAS: After all, even the six months we are given - the issue of the referendum in the CA when it arises, I think before.  So, we may find ourselves, if we are not in June 1996 again doing the same things. You remember when we were discussing the CA Bill we shall end at December 1995; some Minister rose up and said, some of us were dreaming, but I hope I am not dreaming today again - the Minister who said that, has dreamt him self.  So, I am saying, let us decide today, amend the Constitution and come up and amend this and go ahead and run this country.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The spirit of this Bill is to enable CA to continue with its functions and I think, every Member here, should see it in that spirit. Otherwise, if we have to look beyond essence of this, Bill, it mens we are frustrating the continuation of CA.  CA is a baby of this House. Therefore, as I stand here, I am supporting this Bill on the principle that CA must continue and we finish the exercise that this Parliament and the nation at large has given the CA Members to do.

If I any refer to Section 8 of the Constituent Assembly Statute, when this House was discussing that question, definitely, we could not foresee  the problems we have met now and I remember nobody raised the question of this time limit of four months plus three, coming to seven months; because that question, Clause 2, says that the Assembly shall complete its functions under this Statute within a period not exceeding four months commencing from the date of its first meeting. 

(iii) If the Assembly does not complete its functions within the period prescribed under the sub-section (2), the Minister may in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, by Statutory Instrument, extend the period by an additional period of or period not exceeding in the aggregates three months - being thus, total of seven months.  When this House asked this section, we did not foresee the problem, but the problems for CA have been many; one of them is that, definitely, the Delegates needed time to know each other and that is why we started with a General Debate. Yes, I am telling you the experience we have seen! Indeed the General Debate, we needed a General Debate, because -(Interruption) Mr Chairman, can I be protected; so that I give them the experience we have gone through?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR RWABIITA:  We needed a General Debate, Mr Chairman, in order to familiarise ourselves; one, from each county and knowing what the country is expecting us to do.  Mr Chairman, we started with a Plenary Session, whereby we discussed three Chapters.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. May I inform my Friend, Deo holding the Floor that when the Indians were making their National Constitution, which has lasted a bit of time, they picked people who were not directly involved in politics. But, here we are, as NRC, some of us who are here, are also there, and at the same time, we feel we want to be impartial; yet at the same time, we invite other people we think are Movement people to all sorts of places.  That is really the crux of the matter, which is delaying us.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue, please.

MR RWABIITA:  Mr Chairman, I do not know -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR RWABIITA: I do not know whether that information was relevant to the Bill, but nevertheless -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, order.

MR RWABIITA: As I was saying, the initial phase of the discussion was the Plenary Session, where we discussed Chapter 5; this is Human Rights and then, Chapter 3, national objectives and National Council of the state.  But he told us it was not moving fast, we decided that we go to Committees; so that each Member can have time to put in amendments from his constituency and this was done, and it seems to be taking time but I am telling you Mr Chairman, it has benefited a lot to the making of the Constitution.  In fact, each Member from his Constituency - he has time to give the views on any Amendment. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Continue, please.

MR RWABIITA: Mr Chairman, if I may continue, the Select Committees we used have proved very useful in that, all Members in the CA have had time to make consultations with their constituencies and come back and make amendments as necessary.  From our experience, every delegate wants to make a good law.  Now, if we are to make a good Constitution, it is not going to be of benefit to this nation, if wee have just to hurry through the document and present it tomorrow.  Now, through all those constraints, the CA has found that we cannot finish the Draft by the end of this month - December and that is the spirit behind this Bill, so that NRC gives us more time, to complete this important document, the law of Uganda, which will stand the test of time.  But if you force us to go through it hurriedly, definitely, the result will not be of any benefit to any of us.

When we were passing this Statute, the Constituent Assembly Statute, the whole idea was pegged on 26th January; we wanted to make sure that we finish within.  Now that the fact of the matter has indicated that we cannot, we must be given more time to study the draft and present a good law to the people of Uganda.  

Therefore, what I have done, we have restrained this term of Constituencies, and they have said, definitely, a good law needs  time, but they have given two conditions - that is, people from Igand - Ibanda South, have said, go back but we want you to finish the Constitution as quickly as possible.

(i)	They say that, we must improve our time management, we must improve our time management, so that we start on time and discuss during those hours given to us, so that we reduce on time wasted as it has been done in some cases.

    (ii) There is a problem we have met; because of our past history - some Members are trying to put plugs everywhere and therefore making it too difficult as the Constitution, but I think this has to be corrected; we are not there to be the administrative ways of a constitution but we should discuss the main points and leave the rest, the details to Parliament and other organs that can form laws as they will be needed in future. 

So, if we can avoid too many similar amendments, then this time, we will be improved on and we should be able to finish the Constitution - the Draft Constitution within the next six months as provided in the Bill. 

Therefore, I call upon the Members of NRC to give us the extension, so that we do a good job that will give this nation a new Constitution that will be accepted by all and give us a country in which we shall live in peace and prosperity.

MRS RWABYOMERE (Womaen Representative, Kabarole): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, the Constituent Assembly Amendment No.2 of 1994 for the reasons that were very ably put to us yesterday by the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs.

From yesterday’s Debate that ensued after those reasons; there seems to be a general agreement as to the extension of the Constituent Assembly period for another six months.  What seems to have surfaced as the issue, which I consider to be the only issue, is that whether we deal with this Bill first or we decide and deal with the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, which Amendment No.2, Bill 1994, which has been read for the first time.  

As far as I am concerned, there is no legal technicality whatsoever, to stop us from passing this Bill now and consider the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 later.  (Applause) 

Hon. Marwas yesterday raised this issue first; he has persisted with that issue today, he has gone ahead and quoted advice, the lawyers who have to talked to you - I have this to comment about his observation, Mr Chairman.  

The circumstances he is talking about are completely different from what we are discussing here.  What he points out, is the reference to a Statutory provision, seems to be inconsistent with the Constitutional provision will prevail or succeed the Statutory Provision.  (Applause)

In these circumstances, the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, No.2 of 1994, is not in consistence with the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986. Secondly, he is talking about the time; that why do we present this Bill and discuss it only four days before the expiration of the term of the Constituent Assembly? I have not actually drawn my point form - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MRS RWABOYOMERE:  Let me finish my point, Mr Chairman, that we must learn to cross the bridges when we get to them. In these circumstances, we have four days to do and indeed the more reason that we should dispose of this Bill.

Secondly, the reason that we have to pass this Bill are very clear and since there is no legal impediment, whatsoever, we should not differ this Bill in preference to - or to deal with a Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 at all, there is no impediment whatsoever and the expiration of our term of Parliament as it is pointed out in the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, Amendment No.2, Bill, the reasons speak for themselves. (Applause)

That time is not yet until the 26 January 1995. I would like to repeat, that we should learn to cross the bridges when we come to them.  Today is Thursday, Mr Chairman, and the expiry date of the Constituent Assembly, I think is on Sunday, the 11th.  So, it is a matter of - we have to be reasonable and realistic and go ahead and pass this Bill.  

Also, hon. Members will recall, that during our discussion, on the extension on the Interim period of NRM/NRC there was a general feeling that there ought to have been consultations.  I feel that after this Bill has been read for the First Time, it is not prudent to just go ahead, and dispose of it; which means, even if we started - we went ahead and had this Bill read for the Second Time and started discussing here, there might be need for us to have some consultations. So, that means that we shall have already gone far beyond the life of the Constituent Assembly which as I have already pointed out is Sunday, 11th of December.  

For those reasons, most importantly, the reason that there is no legal impediment whatsoever; I strongly support this Bill and urge Members, having cleared that air that we pass this Bill so that we can facilitate the work of the Constituent Assembly which was created by this responsible House.  I thank you very much for your indulgence.

MR SIBO (Nominated Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand here to support the Bill -(Applause) I would like to appeal to all the hon. Members to support the Bill because not to do so would be illogical.  A certain amount of - I would like to disabuse the minds of the Members in this regard.  It must be very clear to everybody here that there must be a government beyond 26th January.  Come 26th January, there must be a government and that is to enable the constitutional making exercise continue. That government will have to continue in governance of this country until a new government comes into position under the new constitution.  That government may also be required to provide the necessary logistics both legal and administrative towards the formation of a new government under the new constitution.  That interim government can be created in three ways.  It can either be created by the CA in the transitional provisions that will appear in the new Constitution.  It can also be created by a revolution.  In other words, by a proclamation, decretory proclamation which is by sheer force of arms  

Thirdly, it can also be created by ourselves.  In other words, by extending the life of this NRC.  I am sure all hon. Members will agree with me that the first method is practically impossible. There is no way the CA can make a transitional provision and have it promulgated before a new constitution.  Therefore, we cannot expect the CA to provide for an interim measure for an interim government and have it promulgated by itself.  It can only come to this House and of course we know the fate of such a measure.  With regard to the second way of bringing in a new government; in other words by revolutionary proclamation, by someone - I do not know who, is certainly unthinkable.  It is impractical and I think too far-fetched. It would also be contrary to the present spirit of constitutionalism.  

I, therefore, can say that the only thinkable way and the only logical way is amending Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 to extend NRM Government.  The extension of NRM Government means  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Concentrate on this Bill, please.

MR SIBO:  Yes, I am trying to provide a basis Mr Chairman, for people to see.  I am trying to suggest that the fear is most uncalled for.  Okay, having said that, I want to say that logically, the extension of CA should come first.  It is only after we have extended the CA that we can have a reason to extend ourselves because I do not see how you can convince the world today to extend yourselves without a good reason and the only reason we have, is the extension of CA So, we have to extend the NRC as a result in order to provide a government while the constitution is being made in order to provide a government while the constitution is being made in order to provide a government will provide the necessary logistics for the introduction of a new constitution.  

A question has been raised in this House that we are being called rubber stamps. I consider it as a game in its conception.  Bills in this House have been and will continue to be introduced by government except in very rare circumstances when a possible old Bill may come into this House by a private Member.  So far we have had none from that quota.  Therefore, of necessity we have to continue to consider Government Business.  If we accept a Government Bill we are necessarily rubber-stamping.  It is only when we refuse to accept a Government Bill that we are not rubber-stamping.  Of course, if we consider a Bill - or misconceived, we reject it and we have done so in this House.  

Therefore, the idea of rubber-stamping in this case is misconceived. We must expect full co-operation between the Legislature and the Executive and that co-operation can only come through if we seriously consider Government Business and a serious reposition.  

I have heard hon. Members say that, they oppose this Bill.  What are they opposing?  Are they opposing the extension of the CA? If they are not opposing the extension of the CA should continue to complete or that we should provide another way of completing the Constitution making exercise?  I do not believe that anybody is seriously feeling that way.  Therefore, there is no justification for opposing this Bill.  It is for this reason that I am appealing to all Members to accept the Bill as it is and pass it.  

I believe that if we pass this Bill, the hon. Minister will similarly and expeditiously also come forward by requesting the suspension of Rule No.85 to propose the consideration and debate of the amendment of Legal Notice No.1 of 1986. I beg to support Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County): Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  We are here on a very important political debate.  Although some Members have tried to argue legalistically as to which of the two Bills should come first, and I do not intend to go into the legalistic argument of whether the CA should be extended first or this House first.  But I do urge my colleagues and hon. Members here that instead of looking at the legalistic order of the two bills, we should look at the politics involved in these two Bills because I believe that in considering the life of the CA and life of this House, we are taking a political decision and this political decision is going to be given effect by the law which we shall pass.  

I have no problem with the Bill before us but let me say one or two things that may improve the politics of this country and may improve on the working method which in the next one year or so will be extremely critical in making Uganda a better place to live in.  As we concluded that, the issue is legalistic but political, let me also urge my fellow hon. Members in this House, especially, those who are not in the CA to participate in making the new Constitution.  

The making of the new Constitution for Uganda is not confined to 280 Members who find themselves in the CA, nor 102 of us who also double in this House.  The making of the new Constitution is for every Ugandan including my Brothers and Sisters who are here but do not sit full time in the CA; I will urge you to use your hon. Status, to use your contact, to use whatever methods you have to assist us who happen to be there to make a very good constitution for this country.  

When the people of Uganda were told that we are going to have a new Constitution, they developed great interest and hope.  This great interest and hope arose because of our past experience.  Uganda has suffered a lot and everybody in this House do know that, and that one of the instruments and resolutions of this conflict has been hinged in the motto of this new Constitution. If it is important to make Uganda a better place to live in by extending the life of the CA for a mere six months, I and the people of Otuke would have not objection  -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am one of the Members who do not go to the CA As I listen to what hon. Omara Atubo is saying but we are requesting them down there that they should show us a serious way of working by not others running out and others running in.  It is the only way we can assist them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I have been listening to my good Friend, hon. Marwas since yesterday and I believe that the recess has done him a lot of good.  I think he has some extra energy which he wants to use out there.  Let me conclude because I think, this Bill is intended to go through - now I was just arguing my remarks that let us all participate.  

The whole of Uganda is appended to this new Constitution. The whole of Uganda is appended to this new constitution.  We are hoping that our political conflicts, our economic problems somehow will bee resolved in this new Constitution.  But in urging our colleagues who are here and the people of Uganda to concede to the six months, it is with this hope and very important hope that all interest groups in this country will be listened to on strategy and objectively and that the very expensive exercise in the making of a new constitution will not be wasted because all the interest groups - whatever you may call them, will be listened to and catered for. (Interruption)

MR NTIMBA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking is that in this Memorandum, the Minister talks about six months extension and most of the people her who have contributed in the discussion have been saying six months extension.  Now, we need to be very clear about this.  Does six months actually mean 180 actual working days of the deliberation.  We need to be very clear on that.  

Secondly, where the memorandum talks about the fact that the amendment does include the period when the Assembly is officially in recess.  Now, this is clear - officially in recess but what does the minister have to say bout such days as week-ends and public holidays like Christmas, Easter Sunday and so forth and so on.  I wish the Minister had been very clear on this.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  So, Mr Chairman, my hope, the hope of the people of Otuke is that these six months will genuinely be used by the CA by the people of Uganda to try to put their heads together to resolve all the fundamental issues facing this country and to make Uganda move ahead.  As you are aware, we have been accused that we are wasting time in the CA because of talking out, others are signing are they do not attend.  

Let me say one word on this before I sit.  Making a Constitution is a very complicated process.  In other countries people, have - in the House including Canada.  In India they have boxed each other, in other countries the constitution making process - in Britain, has been very bloody in the last 400,500, 700 years.  We are lucky in this country that people are still walking out only.  (Laughter) 

I emphasize that in Uganda people are still walking out and sitting within the lobbies and talking to each other.  That is a very important message. That let them not walk out of the Assembly completely because if they did and if they go, it will be a very sad history for this country. 

Let me end my contribution by saying this - that the political mathematics in making the new constitution was correct but the scientific time frame was wrong at inception.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Mover to wind up, please.

MR S.KAVUMA: I thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to start by thanking all the Members of this august House who have contributed to this Bill in most frank and responsible manner. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order. - that Members should be gagged. There have been people making all sorts of statements but we have got fresh ideas and fresh opinions which can put this constitution -(Interjections) No, I am raising a situation where, please, you should allow us to speak and give you idea so that government will know what best to do for this country.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what I have been doing, precisely.  Proceed, please.

MR S. KAVUMA:  I thank you, Mr Chairman, once again.  I had thanked all the hon. Member of this august House who has contributed on this very important Bill.  I have noted that there was overwhelming support to the substance of this Bill and the complaints that were aired did not touch matters of substance but maybe methods of work and some details.  
Permit me to say one or two things. There has been an argument on the Floor that actually there is no cause to hurry.  Government programme as of how we are handling these affairs of managing our society, we must constantly be reminded that we do not have to unnecessarily jeopardise their virtue of patience.  I therefore, wish to appeal to the hon. Member to accept the proposal of six months which will put everybody on notice that they have to work hard to beat the deadline without over extending the patience of our population.  

The question has been put - why this Bill first?  I have heard very good explanations given. There is no legal impediment whatsoever and that is a very considered professional opinion.  The matter we are discussing is a mere statute.  It is not a constitutional issue.  

There are no two constitutional issues that are at the moment at stake.  If the lapse of the NRM administration period was to be effective on the 11th Monday; just as the lapse of the CA is, those two issues would be deemed to be concurrent and it would be prudent to deal with the constitutional matter first.  But considering that there are quite a number of days to go, for the life span of the administration - this statute comes as an ordinary statute on the Legislative Programme of this hon. House.  

On this, I will end by saying we have two patients.  One is threatened by possible death in three days’ time. We have one doctor and this is this hon. House and unless medication is taken in good time, this first patient is likely to die by Monday. (Interjection) I am corrected - it is surgery.  The other patient may die in a matter of 46 days from now.  I think, prudence dictates that this House, of very brilliant professional surgeons should attend the patient who is about to go to heaven or hell depending on how he has been behaving.  So, I think, it is only logical that we proceed in the manner we have received this Legislative programme affecting these two Bills. 

Secondly, Sir, the reasoning by hon. Sibo was, I think, was very correct.  I think, we must always bear in mind the kind of politics and the signals we send to the population.  Here we are, we have two matters to attend to.  One is going to be the reason - the only sound reason for the extension of the NRM administration including ourselves as NRC Members.  How would it be received by the population even if we said now we must ourselves and then we deal with the other urgent problem which is actually the case for extension.  I think, we will be getting logic wrongly.  

I am happy to note that the majority of Members are agreeable that the sequence of handling the matters is correct and it is the only logical thing to do. This is a very brief and short Bill, which I think, Members have had ample time to look at and consider.  In fact, the matters are straightforward and hence there has been very little debate on the actual contents - the substance of the Bill.  I only beg to move that we proceed with this Bill and pass it as soon as possible so that we can now attend to other programmes we may have in this House as far as our legislative programme goes. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

The Title:

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled The Constituent Assembly Amendment No.2 Bill, 1994 and passed it without any Amendment. I beg to report, Sir.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Constituent Assembly Amendment No.2 Statute, 1994' be read a Third Time.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is that the Bill entitled: ‘The Constituent Assembly Amendment Statute no.2 1994’ be read a Third Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILL
FOR THE STATUTE ENTITLED “THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY AMENDMENT NO.2 STATUTE 1994”

(Title settled and Bill passed.)

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of the Session until next week.

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 December 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)




 

