Thursday, 2 December 2010

Parliament met at 11.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and inform you that we were not able to sit on Tuesday because I had gone to Sebei to campaign against female genital mutilation. The cutting season was beginning yesterday, so it was necessary for us to go and remind them that we have enacted a law and the community should obey the law. We had also gone to issue instructions to the law enforcement agencies to ensure that the Kenyans who come to Uganda to circumcise women and those who take them away at night would be arrested. That is why we could not sit on Tuesday.

Yesterday, I thought you had to go and attend the World Aids Day celebrations in your constituencies. You are aware there has been a resurgence of infections. Members were expected to go and speak to their voters about behaviour change on this serious issue.

I would like to amend the Order Paper to include the Fish (Amendment) Bill to come for a second reading, but also to add five outstanding loans. You know that we have been busy handling issues of CHOGM for the last one month and we have been unable to address other issues, which touch the social-economic welfare of the population. So, I will amend the Order Paper to include four loans: one from the IDA for the East African Public Health Laboratories Network Project; the second one from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for supplementary financing to support implementation of the District Livelihoods Support Programme; third is the loan from the International Fund for Agricultural Development supplementary financing for ongoing activities under the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP). Hon. Members, this is a very important programme doing wonders for the country. It is providing markets and roads for the farmers. 

Fourth is the one to support education from the Export-Import Bank of South Korea to support five Business Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutions (BTVET) as complementary financing for education for Post-primary and Training Expansion and Improvement Project. I think those are also areas, which touch the lives of our people to improve their capacity and create employment. Thank you very much.

11.36
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Hon. Speaker,  I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to remind Parliament and raise a matter of importance, which I think for some reason, has not been worked on.

For the third time after the Budget, I have been coming to the Floor when you are in the chair, Madam Speaker, and raised concerns about the oil-rich Rift Valley land being surveyed without the consent of the community. Madam Speaker, you directed that in two weeks, the Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Lands should bring a report. It is now four months and we have not seen that report.

I also requested that the pastoralists’ select committee which was given 45 days, three years ago and has not given us a report - because failure to act on those issues of oil wealth being taken by individuals; customary land being surveyed by individuals; the pastoralists’ issue even after we have won cases in court at all levels and nothing is being handled - some of us who raise these issues are being targeted. 

Madam Speaker, you may not be aware that I am the only MP who was not allowed to celebrate my nomination in the country. Every time I go for a function – actually, the other request was that the OC Police, Edison Muhangi, in Buliisa, his conduct, both in the NRM structural elections and in our elections, there are many attempts of trying to humiliate me, arrest me; every time I appear, he comes with an AK 47 and some people. So, this matter – I think any time he can get trigger happy. I am getting scared of the way he is moving. Anything can happen because I have run away from all these provocations. I just do not know what would happen. They have shot at me three times, but I have been running away. What would happen if I told people to resist? I think it is getting too much and no action was taken.

I request that this matter is urgently handled if we really want to prevent a Niger-Delta and an Ogoni in the Rift Valley, because I can see the speculators; the oil sharks moving so fast to even recruit in the security; even to recruit political leaders; even to recruit those who should be protecting the community. That is why, for me as a whistle blower, I am really under too much stress. If an MP cannot celebrate his nomination hosted by the LC III chairman at his sub-county! The OC said, “You have to talk to the DPC. We do not have a written directive.” Am I still living in my country? It is a very big challenge and I would like the relevant organs of government to take action, otherwise we have a very big problem. How can the pastoralists’ report fail to come after three years? How can a policeman harass local leaders, do everything and he is not touched; not even summoned? How can an MP be denied space in his own constituency?

These are matters I should bring to the attention of the country; but what I know about all this is that the oil sharks are taking charge of the Rift Valley and if this – because at one time it was directed that the land surveys be stopped, all the anger is being turned to me. We even want to see these instruments stopping the lease offers because they are arrogantly saying, “You are wasting your time. We are working with some people who are powerful enough to make sure we continue with our agenda.” I really need, in the interest of the country, this matter to be handled urgently.

11.29
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Three months ago, I raised the issue of two Ugandans who were arrested by the Government of Rwanda. Since then, they have been held by the Rwandan Government. The relatives of these people were denied access to them; but yesterday, I was happy that they were released. 

I rise to thank the Government of Uganda because I know there have been a lot of diplomatic efforts for the last three months and the relatives of these two gentlemen: Mr Simpson Mpirirwe and Didas Ndamiye are very happy that Government took the issue that was raised in Parliament seriously and worked on it. 

However, Madam Speaker, we also know that there could be some Ugandans who cannot find their voice here in Parliament who are probably in other countries and I pray that the Government will continue to use their diplomatic efforts to secure the release of such people. 

I want to thank our Ambassador in Rwanda who has been at the centre of this, for the good work that was done. The files of the two men have been handed over to Uganda and investigations are continuing and if there is anything that they did, it will be known after the investigations. Thank you very much.

11.32
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you. I rise on a matter of importance to me and the people of Bukedea. I have shared this with a number of people responsible but I have not seen any response to show that something is being done. 

There is a group, you can call it the Kiboko group or a Kiboko squad named, Hakuna Kulala in Bukedea District. It is operating district-wide. Hakuna Kulala, meaning, “no sleep”. The commander of this group is none other than the RDC of Bukedea, Michael Bwalatum. He was formerly in Kapchorwa. This week, from Monday up to yesterday, they have been camped and training in a primary school, known as Kachumbala Primary School. I asked the DPC whether he is aware of this group and he said he does not know it. I asked RPC, Agaba, and as of yesterday she said she would crosscheck today. I have spoken to the Electoral Commission as to whether they are aware of this group, whose objective is clear: to intimidate the people and ensure that there is a return for NRM candidates. They put on yellow T-shirts with words, “Hakuna Kulala Taskforce: NRM Prosperity-for-All”. None of the people (that I have contacted) have been able to help me.

Two weeks ago, 11 members of the group were in one parish. They are 500 in number; 100 from each sub-county. Two weeks ago, 11 of them went to one parish called Amenit in Kolir sub-county at 8 p.m. intimidating people; telling them that this time they are going to see the men and women who are hard headed who think they have to vote FDC all the time. 

I would like to present here an article, which is an extract from the Etop newspaper. And the title of this in Ateso is, Akapakin Bukedea agolor lu a ‘efaya’, literary meaning that Bukedea has gotten ready to lock out those who belong to the fire. Fire in Teso, ‘efaya’, means FDC, the party. This is how FDC is referred to. Bukedea has prepared to lock out the fire people. Here is the picture of the RDC, Michael Bwalatum instructing his boys at one of such meetings. This is an extract of the Etop newspaper of July 29, 2010.

I have spoken to the Minister for the Presidency, she promised a meeting but she is not giving me an opportunity to discuss this. Madam Speaker, I am raising this because I am already seeing a rigging process in high gear. Nobody knows the purpose of this group; nobody wants to talk about this group. 

When you talk to these people their challenge is that the RDC is the chairman of the security committee in the district. Now, who is going to investigate? Who is going to deal with his group? Is it the DPC under whom they operate? So I need to find out whether Government can help me; help the people of Bukedea; explain this illegal paramilitary Kiboko squad, which is recruiting and training and operating in Bukedea; and the subject of which is Hakuna Kulala - no sleeping until NRM candidates are voted in. They are wielding sticks; they are not a legal group. The people of Bukedea need an explanation on who is instigating this group and why Government is just looking on when people are being harassed at night. I thank you.

11.38
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank hon. Oduman for bringing this matter to the Floor of this House. This is a matter of serious concern considering the period we have entered. You will recall that we raised complaints over the behaviour and conduct of Government in as far as these paramilitary groups are concerned.

First and foremost, MPs were passed out in Kyankwanzi and they returned with green uniforms. It raised suspicion in members of the public and I came here asking whether it was therefore legal for anyone to go and institute his own team and give them a uniform. It looked like it was okay. So today if there is Hakuna Kulala in hon. Oduman’s constituency, I think they are following up on the practice that was not checked that time.

Madam Speaker, you remember I was here contesting the conduct and behaviour of Government especially through its arm of the RDCs who have been training paramilitary groups all around town; in yellow uniforms; passing them out with yellow sticks - and Government continued to insist through both the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence that these were elements, which were simply intended to help in an election time! 

Just a few days ago there was a contestant, Mubarak Munyagwa of Kawempe; he is contesting as LC III Chairperson. Mubarak Munyagwa has also instituted his own group and the problem is to stop him putting up an army because it seems that the practice is not legal but it is acceptable in general terms. 

I am quite sympathetic with my colleague for the problem that is going on in his constituency. But I wanted to warn him that if he had any other way to deal with this Hakuna Kulala group, he could find another way rather than waiting for Government. Government knows that this thing is going on because Government is doing it and supporting it. So, waiting for the same Government to give you medicine would be wasting time. Thank you.

11.40
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much. I rise up on a case closely related to hon. Mukitale’s. There was a committee that was formed in this House in 2007. By then hon. Mukitale had raised an issue in this House regarding the pastoralist question in the entire country. Since then this committee has never reported back to this House. Members were interviewed; very many investigations were carried out but this committee has never reported to this House.

It is coming to five years since this Parliament came into existence but what perturbs me is that hon. Mukitale who raised the same question in 2007, the basis of which led to the formation of this committee (is still unattended to). Then we widened the scope and said, “Let it now expand to the entire country where pastoralists have interests.” In West Nile there was the same question; Bunyoro had similar instances; Maruzi, Akokoro, Teso Wetland, Agu had the same as well as other places of the country.

Since then, this committee has never reported to the House and to make matters worse, the same MP who raised the concern in 2007 has come back with even a wider issue this time. My question is: for how long should a Member of Parliament with a problem in his constituency seek the help of this House and the various committees because the question of land in Bunyoro is even more fragile? One was the pastoralist issue. Now it is the oil-rich territory. How is he going to be helped out of this problem because at the moment they are looking at it as if he is a saboteur and according to the statement he is making, as if many more people have come into play? How are we going to help hon. Mukitale out of this question? 

But above all, I still wish to have the committee of hon. Ochieng report to this House before we dissolve the Eighth Parliament. Otherwise, this question of the Balaalo has never been resolved and now when you bring it back to Bunyoro, Bunyoro has had very many questions. We have the Bafuruki issue in Bunyoro. We again now have the issue of land in Bunyoro and it is the MP’s life at the centre of all this at the moment, with a lot of politics. How do we handle this issue? I feel we should really develop a serious interest in this case. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, concerning the issue of the pastoralists, I must say that my office facilitated that committee to do their work. I do not understand why they have not brought the report. I am now directing hon. Ochieng who is the chair of that committee to bring that report tomorrow morning. (Laughter)

Can the – yes, 2007. It must be ready by now. Can I now ask the Leader of Government Business to respond to the concerns of the Members?

11.43
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have ably directed on the committee on the pastoralists. We are also awaiting the same.

I will start with hon. Kyanjo’s concern and I want to inform this House that when the issue of uniforms was raised, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs did come to this House and clearly explain the various shades and the purpose and they were all presented here. 

I also want to say that these paramilitary groups they are calling Kiboko Squad - and now there is Hakuna Kulala -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I was not referring to the several shades of uniforms by the Police. I was referring to the green uniform, which was donned by Members of Parliament for a cadre course in Kyankwanzi. Thank you.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: So, most of these paramilitary groups are illegal and definitely Government is going to deal with them. I want to request hon. Oduman to give me the necessary information which I will pass on to the relevant -

And this photo here, Madam Speaker, is not revealing. These RDCs do address many gatherings and so from this photo you cannot say that he was addressing this particular group of Hakuna Kulala, the one he is referring to. But that notwithstanding, Government will investigate that group and take necessary action. I know many people are coming up with vigilantes, supporters and morale boosters in various names but what I want to say, so long as they promote violence they are illegal and they will be handled by Government.

The green uniform was also explained. That is the uniform which is used for training and I remember, if you can look up the Hansard, it will be found on record that it is used for training and normally those who finish training can use it with permission from the Army. And the MPs - I remember that time I was still the Government Chief Whip - did get the permission from the Commander-in-Chief to put on or use that training uniform not for military purposes, not for harassment but for mobilisation and other things.

Hon. Bahati, we are glad our people are back. 

Then, hon. Mukitale, there are several things going on in Buliisa and Bunyoro sub-region and I want to put it on record that the situation in Buliisa is not helped by the politics in Buliisa. I know Buliisa very well. Before Buliisa became a district, it was part of Masindi District and at that time I was Woman MP of Masindi who also covered Buliisa. And before Buliisa became a county, it was part of Bujenje County, which was superintended by my father. So, I know roughly what takes place in Buliisa.

Coming to the recent activities, I feel sorry for hon. Mukitale that he could not celebrate but I find it interesting because for us in Masindi we had several activities. We even had presidential candidates and all of us managed to get some kind of venue to celebrate our activities. I celebrated at home, Mr Tugume was in Boma Grounds - that was the FDC candidate - Mr Ernest in the municipality was at the play ground and hon. Beti Olive Namisango was somewhere; hon. Bintu was at the public - but for Buliisa [HON. MUKITALE: “Information.”] What I know, before you give the information, there was a struggle for a particular venue and the information that I have is that that venue had been booked by the other candidate who is not hon. Mukitale - I forget the name; he is a doctor and he had booked that venue and alerted police and had been given permission to be at that particular venue. But hon. Mukitale came later and he did say that [HON. MUKITALE: “Clarification.”] he should be the one to be at that venue for that nomination. I will be answering the other -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am at a loss when the princess, Leader of Government Business and the Princess of the Kingdom decides to defend the misconduct of police who are saying they are on a mission. I did report this much earlier. I am at a loss when my princess who has been sitting with these very people in her office and has even tendered all my complaints on the Floor to them in her office and they are now photocopied in Buliisa and just for respect, I had decided not to say this. We have sat with hon. Matia Kasaija and he says there is nothing wrong with her taking these people in her office. She has sat with these people in Hoima, Kolping Hotel. 

I think what I have been asking for is an investigation into the Police conduct. Why should you block an investigation? What I am asking for is an investigation of land acquisition. The other day the President came to Buliisa, the land grabbers and the Balaalo were the ones being presented to him and not the complainants. This problem cannot be solved when we have a princess from the region blocking the process. Yesterday the police spokesperson was saying that I have never raised this complaint.

I have a police reference by the Director CID. I have written a letter asking for body guards and the police are saying that they are not aware. I have not been given bodyguards for four months. I think hon. Kabakumba should stop speaking about Buliisa matters because she has taken sides. You have sat with Francis Kahwa in your office more than twice and given him the Hansard of Parliament and it is everywhere in Buliisa. The OC police has been talking to you and I know that what is happening in Buliisa is about machinations of some people. I even have a letter where I got information that the Regional Police Commander was going to deploy against my last days of the campaign and I was almost under house arrest.

MS KABAKUMBA: You can see that I was giving information because he raised five concerns. I have only commented on one; I have information on what he is saying. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are here as a Leader of Government Business and I think what we want you to do is to take up the compliant and have him assisted.

MS KABAKUMBA: I have not said that there should be no investigation and hon. Mukitale has given his side but the people he is accusing are not here that is why after this I was going to give a proposal. 

I will tell you that hon. Mukitale is giving this House half the information. The President did go to Buliisa and all these points were presented to him. He made directives including investigating those police officers that are in Buliisa. That directive is on and they are being investigated.

I want to suggest that Parliament or Government be given an opportunity to investigate these allegations.  I am a Member of Parliament and I have the right to be heard especially when I am falsely accused. Hon. Mukitale raised these issues on this Floor of the House and at that time he said that after the police had harassed him, they rang a lady minister to say that they had accomplished the mission. At that time hon. Ezati sought clarification from him as which lady minister he was referring to. This is where I came in and everybody started laughing after seeing me.

Hon. Mukitale changed the statement to say that the only person whom he talked to before the NRM structures were made was me. I went to the Hansard to get the record because after that sitting everybody was asking me about the problem I have with my brother because I was harassing him. So I looked for the record and good enough he had just talked about a lady minister and we are many. Hon. Mukitale has written many damaging letters about me and I last met the Kahwa he is talking about in 2006. It was after that sitting here when he sent me a message. 

MR OCULA: The hon. Minister is on the Floor in her capacity as the Leader of Government Business. It appears that she has abandoned that business and concentrated on her issues with hon. Mukitale. Is she in order to continue explaining her case while leaving Government business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members she has addressed the issue as the Leader of Government Business but along the way hon. Mukitale accused her of holding meetings in Hoima and Masindi to which she is responding.

MS KABAKUMBA: The last time I talked to Mr Kahwa Franco was in 2006. I only received his message after hon. Mukitale had presented his issues here. Franco said he wanted to talk to me. In my mind I was saying that, “Do not drag me into the politics of Buliisa”. I allowed him to come to my office and present his problem. For your information, the wife of hon. Mukitale is one of the staff members in my office and Mr Kahwa’s concern was that there were primary elections where all the people had passed unopposed. To him that was evidence enough that there was rigging.

I asked him when he started co-ordinating with me to harass hon. Mukitale. I asked him why him as a Mugungu should take all this land and leave the rest landless. The man said, “Give me the one who is landless and I will give him my own land, I have not grabbed but bought”. Those were his words which he told hon. Mukitale. 

Hon. Mukitale goes and writes a letter saying that I am in touch with the DPC. I do not know the DPC. Even when the President came to Buliisa, the OC station he is accusing was not in Buliisa but in Butyaba. I do not have their numbers and I can lay my phone here, go print out and find out the people I have been talking to if you must prove a point that hon. Mukitale is not telling us the truth. I have not talked to them and I am not about to. 

What I know is that there are two groups of Bero which is spearheaded by the Chairman LC V and UMOJA, which hon. Mukitale is allied to. Those groups are always struggling and they will want to suck in anybody. For the record, we did meet in hon. Kassaija’s office because of the several letters he has been writing and we agreed on how to proceed but he has not stopped. For the record, I am NRM Member and now in Masindi and Bujenje specifically. I have no business in Buliisa District. If I shall be deployed there to do work on behalf of the party and Government, I will go there. But my brother, hon. Mukitale, I have no slightest ill feeling about you and it should not be me to undermine you. If you win, I will be happy for you; if you do not, please do not blame it on me.

I want to end by saying that on the land surveys, the President directed that those who are surveying now and trying to acquire land titles now shall be investigated. And if they do not get them in the right way, they will be cancelled. Hon. Mukitale knows that because he was in those meetings.

On the Balaalo issue, because they lost all the cases in court, the President directed his staff to handle this and promised to talk to their leaders. That is all I know. But I want to say that an investigation – I am a bit reluctant because we have had several investigations and many times, no reports are made. Can there be another way of doing things? Hon. Mukitale at least could – let it be a directive of Parliament. Let Government investigate these cases because if you say Parliament should do it, I do not say Members who will do this since we are all busy. Moreover, the other report has not come out.

I want to pledge that I am going to bring this to the attention of the Prime Minister and my colleague in the Ministry of Internal Affairs to see if they can investigate and give this House a report on the issues regarding the surveying of community land without its permission; the police officers that are misbehaving; the speculators and oil sharks that are harassing Mukitale and the denying of hon. Mukitale to celebrate his nomination. I beg to submit. (Members rose_)
	
MR MUKITALE: I want to thank the Leader of Government Business when she turned back to that portfolio. It will be very important at this time to bring that report that you directed because it shows which land we are talking about; who applied for it and who surveyed and okayed it. These documents are either applied for at Masindi District Land Board or at the new Buliisa Land Board. If they are laid on the Table, it would reveal whoever is claiming an oil well. By the way even some payments have been made by the oil companies. People have already made claims in the oil company including the Balaalo who lost cases. They have a title of Ngege Well. It is not for hon. Biraahwa-Mukitale; it is about the future of oil in Uganda.

The Rift Valley area has over 100,000 people but the land is about to be claimed by 28 people only. More than 12 oil wells in Buliisa are being claimed by one company, which is an agent of foreign companies. These are the issues I want Government to investigate; it is not a Biraahwa-Mukitale issue. All I am requesting for is that the Eighth Parliament should be on record for having brought out this problem.

I am aware of all the presidential efforts and indeed the President has acted on the issue of Balaalo and land surveys. But you are aware that last time the President directed an eviction but it has taken us four years. It was the Police who were doing the opposite of what others were doing. That is why I am saying Parliament is a different organ of the state – I appreciate the President’s efforts and I hope something can come through that. But as Parliament, we cannot be stopped from making another effort as oversight.

MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to what hon. Stephen Mukitale is saying, there is no one in Buliisa who is harassing him. On nomination day, his opponent had requested for and got a letter from the Police to stage his disco but hon. Mukitale wanted to grab the venue; that is where the issue started. Then the RDC called them for a meeting to see who was right and it was found that hon. Mukitale did not have the permission to stage his disco there. Since they were hurt, they wanted to have the disco in the same place, which would cause chaos. 

Recently, he invited His Excellency to come and intervene on Buliisa issues but the President sent lawyers from the State House to carry out investigations. Hon. Mukitale accompanied them and we are still waiting for that report. Is he now in order to begin deceiving the country that there is someone who is harassing and wants to kill him? If his life were really threatened, how come that he always goes on radio and leaves Buliisa at 9 O’clock heading for Kampala? When you are a leader, it is not good to create –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The contentious issue that started was the question of land. We have now been reduced to listening to quarrels between the MPs from Buliisa and the Bunyoro question. Is it in order for a Member to continue telling us stories of how they are quarrelling in their district and the discos they dance to in Buliisa instead of restricting themselves to the land question, which is a serious issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I think we have – we are directing the Minister of Internal Affairs to expeditiously investigate this matter and give us a report. Parliament is currently busy; I do not think we can have a committee to look into this matter because you all know we are going for elections. I do not know whether Members have time to handle this matter now. So let us ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle this matter expeditiously and give us a report, probably before Christmas. Yes, before Christmas – before we go for recess. No, no, no. I think we have had enough about Buliisa for now; we do not have solutions here. We normally close on 19 December and I am actually saying that we should have this report by 19 December.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I know we are at a critical time and it is difficult because Members are campaigning. But Government has not done enough on this issue; you remember this Balaalo issue started sometime back - I want to urge Government to do something. And to my colleagues here who are given this responsibility, they should have taken it up -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already made a ruling on that; the report will come here tomorrow.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: The point of procedure I want to seek is that I have been in this Parliament for some time and this has been the first time that a mobile phone has been laid on the Table. I am wondering because Members of Parliament always have access to whatever is laid on the Table and if the minister really - if that is the only mobile telephone the minister has then I am wondering how the minister is going to continue working yet she is a government spokesperson at such a critical time. So the procedure I really want is how we are going to handle the mobile phone, which has now been laid on the Table of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The mobile phone is now the property of Parliament.

STATEMENT ON THE CURRENT SITUATION OF HIV/AIDS IN UGANDA 

12.12
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving us this opportunity to present this statement as the Committee on HIV/AIDS.

In accordance with rule 157 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I beg to present to the House a statement on the current situation of HIV/AIDS in Uganda to commemorate the World AIDS Day marked on 1st December every year.

The HIV/AIDS epidemic and its burden continue to grow in Uganda. The epidemic is heterogeneous but also dynamic affecting different population sub-groups hence resulting in multiple and diverse epidemics. For example, women are more affected than their male counterparts. Kampala Central and mid North regions are disproportionately affected while North East and North Western regions are least affected. Generally, there is a higher prevalence in urban than rural areas.

The current national prevalence has stagnated at 6.4 percent in adults and at 0.4 percent among children less than five years but there are indications of a rising epidemic in most at risk populations and some urban regions.

Current estimates indicate that there are about 1.2 million HIV infected people in Uganda, 57 percent of them being female and 13 percent children aged less than 15 years.

There has been a gradual increase in the number of people living with HIV from 1,033,725 in 2005 to 1,140,739 in 2007 to the current 1.2 million. In 2009, there were 124,261 new HIV infections, 20 percent of them among children and 55 percent among women.

Similarly, new infections have continued to increase from 105,965 in 2005 to 119,258 in 2007 to the current 124,261. The country has made progress by increasing the number of people accessing antiretroviral treatment from 51,000 people in 2005 to 220,000 people in 2009.

Whereas there is progress made in provision of ART, the country has not provided ART to the 540,094 people with 350 CD4-count, which means that the country falls short of 50 percent ART coverage and below World Health Organisation recommendations.

In 2009, there were 64,000 AIDS related deaths decreasing from 67,274 in 2007 and 77,780 in 2005.

Madam Speaker, important to note is that the peak of the epidemic has recently shifted from unmarried younger individuals to older people like me and you who are more likely to be married or in long term relationships that is in the age bracket of 30 to 44 years among women and 35 to 39 years among men.

The epidemic is still predominantly heterosexually transmitted with 75 to 80 percent of infections attributed to heterosexual transmission. Mother to child transmission accounts for 20 percent blood born and other infections account for less than one percent.

Recent data shows heterogeneity of HIV prevalence among some population groups with highest HIV prevalence among fishing communities at 15 percent, sex workers at 33 percent, partners of sex workers at 18 percent and boda boda riders at 8 percent while students in tertiary institutions on the other hand had low HIV prevalence at 1.2 percent.

What are the risk factors and drivers of this epidemic in Uganda? The latest data shows that the behavioural risk factors of HIV transmission in Uganda comprise of concurrent multiple sexual partners, inconsistent condom use and unprotected sex, transactional and commercial sex, cross generational sex, lack of male circumcision (those men with intact foreskins); alcohol and drug abuse, infection with a sexually transmitted infection especially HSV2 and discordance and non disclosure of HIV status.

Likewise, the drivers of the epidemic are gender inequality and low status of women and girls that put them at a high risk of contracting HIV, income inequality for example both the poor and the rich are affected, stigma and discrimination, harmful socio-cultural practices and gender norms that sustain sexual and gender based violence and violation of rights of women and girls, governance and civil unrest and policy related drivers such as inequitable access to health services for example access to prevention, care and treatment services.

The burden of HIV/AIDS on the economy is great. Macro-economic impact studies on AIDS indicate that AIDS has a negative effect on the rate of economic growth. The resultant effect is a fall in GDP growth from a projected 6.5 percent a year without AIDS to an estimated 5.3 percent with AIDS. It was projected that by 2025, the economy of Uganda will be 39 percent smaller than it would have been without AIDS.

HIV/AIDS raises overall head count poverty rate by 1.4 percentage points. The impact is greater in rural areas where poverty rises by about 1.6 percentage points compared to 0.9 percent in urban areas.

The estimated average life time cost of ARVs is US $11,500 which is equal to Shs 25,300,000 at an exchange rate of Shs 2,000 per person thus maintaining 540,094 people on ARVs or ART will require US $6.2 billion, which is about Shs 13.6 trillion.

What is the burden of HIV on health and community systems? HIV/AIDS undermines sectors’ ability to effectively deliver services; for example, greatest vulnerability is experienced in education, health, social work and social administration which are all marred with absenteeism due to ill health.

While there is increased demand for treatment and care services, family and community support systems are over-stretched to cope with the ever increasing orphans burdens.

What are the national interventions that are currently in place? The existing national interventions, for example prevention of mother to child transmission, safe medical male circumcision, HIV counselling and testing, medical infection control and blood transfusion have not achieved universal coverage in the country more so in rural areas and among most in the risk groups.

Among the existing interventions, only blood transfusion has 100 percent effectiveness and coverage. Safe medical male circumcision reduces HIV acquisition by about 50 to 60 percent. The effectiveness of condoms is affected by inconsistent use although it has been demonstrated at 85 percent. About 52 percent of positive pregnant women had access to PMTCT services in 2009 while 30 to 40 percent of adults have never tested.

In 2007, less than 10 percent of facilities had all supplies and equipment for medical infection control or PEP, and 60 percent of health facilities had integrated STI case management services. The above interventions are further incapacitated and disadvantaged by almost entirely relying on resources from external bilateral and multilateral assistance thus the need to refocus the national response.

Our committee has taken initiatives in the fight against HIV/AIDS; for example, the committee set up the Parliamentary HIV/AIDS Annual Awards ceremony targeting individuals or groups of people who have excelled in the fight against HIV/AIDS in Uganda. They are recognised and awarded certificates every year. This is a form of motivation for their efforts and an inspiration to others who are deeply involved in the fight against HIV/AIDS. This year, the function was held on 31 May 2010 and it was officiated by His Excellency the President of Uganda. Various Ugandans were recognised and awarded certificates. 

The committee initiated the HIV/AIDS Control Bill and consulted various stakeholders whose views have been incorporated in the Bill. Currently, the Bill is being scrutinised and considered by the sessional Committee on Social Services. The committee works very closely with Ministry of Health, Uganda AIDS Commission, civil society organisations and other stakeholders in the HIV/AIDS field including local, regional and international bodies in the fight against the epidemic.

The committee, in collaboration with the Department of Library, Research and Information Services, set up an HIV/AIDS resource centre, which is located in the South Wing basement of the Parliament of Uganda. Honourable members and staff of Parliament are encouraged to access literature about the epidemic and current trends all over the world regarding HIV/AIDS.

The committee has also been able to conduct oversight field visits in a number of districts and highly vulnerable groups like fish landing sites and internally displaced peoples’ camps. We have been to Kalangala, Masaka, Mayuge, Buliisa. This is, among other things, to check on the situation on the ground, challenges in the fight and the efficient utilisation of HIV/AIDS funds.

The committee has also initiated an HIV/AIDS tool kit to keep Members of Parliament informed about the disease so that they are in position to spearhead the fight against the epidemic in their constituencies. Currently, this kit is under review and members will access it as soon as it is ready.

What is the way forward?
•	We need to refocus HIV/AIDS prevention to combat and reduce increasing infections.
•	We need a national comprehensive prevention plan and strategy - currently, it is being developed - to guide stakeholders and service providers on provision of combination HIV/AIDS prevention.
•	We also need to focus prevention services on the most at-risk population groups.
•	We also need to strengthen linkages between prevention, care and treatment and sexual reproductive health services.

Our recommendations to Parliament, Madam Speaker, are: 

•	The role of Parliament should be strengthened to increase lobbying for more resources for HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment.

•	We also need to ensure appropriate allocation of resources for the implementation of policies, plans and activities and their programmes. 

•	This Parliament needs to expedite the consideration and passing of the HIV/AIDS Control Bill into law.

•	We also need to ensure that HIV/AIDS issues are adequately catered for in sector specific budgets and also provide guidance and oversight to the HIV/AIDS coordinating body, in this case, Uganda AIDS Commission.

•	Finally, Madam Speaker, we need to mainstream HIV/AIDS in policies, plans and activities of Government.

Honourable members, I believe that together we share this challenge. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair of the committee and your members for this update. Part of the work is ours but the bigger part is for the Ministry of Health. Can I ask the Minister of Health to respond?

12.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to give information to Members. When you look at bullet 2.0 - status of the epidemic - the figure we have in the Ministry of Health is about 340,000. At bullet 2.0, the third paragraph, they are saying that the country has not provided ART to the number which is 540,000; the figure should be 340,094 people. That is the record we have in the Ministry of Health. It also affects the costing, which is brought out at bullet 4.0 - burden of HIV/AIDS on the economy. They are saying that we need an estimated average lifetime costing of anti-retroviral treatment of US$11,500. The costing also changes because the figure has changed.

Having mentioned that, I would like to say that the Ministry of Health is coming up with a comprehensive report because we found out that the Uganda AIDS Commission does not have the capacity regarding the research and the data. This report will soon be out. We are going to come out with a statement to give the status of HIV in the country by next week. Also, research is being carried out by our group to find out the prevalence of HIV of every group. By next week, we shall come out with a correct report which we shall deliver on the Floor of Parliament to respond to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Chair.

MRS RWAKIMARI: I do not know whether the honourable minister is trying to say that this report is fake or not. When you say that you are trying to come up with another report next week, it is like the one I have presented has got some loopholes. 

The information I used was both from the Ministry of Health and Uganda AIDS Commission. The Uganda AIDS Commission is mandated with overseeing and coordinating the national response in this country. So, if Uganda AIDS Commission is not working well with the Ministry of Health, then those differences should not come here on the Floor of the House but they should rather go back and organise their house. 

As far as I am concerned and as far as my committee is concerned, this is a factual report and there is nothing wrong with it. If new research has been made, then we shall wait for the results. However, I just want to assure honourable members that the contents of this report are true and have been researched on by the committee members and whatever we have presented is true.

12.32
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Health seems to be convinced and contented with the little that is being done. Yesterday as the country was celebrating and marking the World AIDS Day, the public and Members of Parliament who attended this function were disappointed. The Ministry was not represented at this function –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What?

MR MUWUMA: The Ministry of Health –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No!

MR MUWUMA: We were there and the celebrations were at Kitebi in Wankulukuku. It is really discouraging for a whole ministry with three ministers not to at least send a representative. Talking of the Executive Director of the Uganda AIDS Commission to be a representative of the ministry; this cannot work! So, like the member is saying, in a way the ministry seems not to be serious. We have to appeal to the ministry to get serious as far as the fight against AIDS is concerned. We should not relax or become complacent. I thank you.

12.34
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much. I also want to thank the committee chairperson. I think the Minister of Health was not prepared to respond to this statement because as he says, the Uganda AIDS Commission does not have the required capacity. I do not know whether that is his statement on the Floor here. 

The Uganda AIDS Commission is mandated with the cardinal responsibility of overseeing the HIV/AIDS response in this country including the function of monitoring and evaluation and producing the data. As far as I am concerned, the information provided in this report is basically derived from reports from the Uganda AIDS Commission and also the Ministry of Health and these are authentic statistics which are not only nationally known but also internationally. 

When you look at the Uganda AIDS Commission statute, there is a secretariat but also a board and the vice-chair of the board is the Minister of Health by law. So, I think there are problems between Uganda AIDS Commission and the Ministry of Health which should not come here. 

I thought that maybe the Minister could prepare better to give a better response to this report that has come from the committee. The clarification I wanted to pick from him is: when he says they are going to come with new figures and statistics –(Laughter)- I do not think you can manufacture or produce results within a week. The data on prevalence, for example, is usually got from population based surveys which are periodically done after five years. So, are you telling us there are studies you have been doing and they are now complete and you are going to launch reports, or you are saying that these figures are inaccurate and from here you are going to the ministry and produce tabulations and new figures? What are you trying to tell this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether you should not take time and respond appropriately to bullets one, two, four and six. The third one is for Parliament but the rest are policy issues. I do not know whether you do not need time.

MR KAKOOZA: I think my statement was clear. I said that we are harmonising a position with the figures given on this paper. Currently, with the consultancy, we have been carrying out research and we had not harmonised the position with Uganda AIDS Commission and maybe the social services committee had already come out with a report. 

The report with the figures of 340,094 which I am talking about right now has been decreased because the Round 7 Global Fund of –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR OKUPA: Yesterday was World AIDS Day and that is the day we commemorate HIV/AIDS and look back to assess what has been done and how far we have gone. We reflect on that and see the way forward. That is also the day that always, every year, we do get statistics from the Ministry and World Health Organisation, and they did give us the information yesterday. Is the hon. Minister in order to come here and say that that information, which the country received yesterday, which the world received yesterday, is wrong and inaccurate? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what did you tell the country yesterday? (Laughter) No, I mean as a ministry? 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to inform Members of Parliament that the figure quoted – we put it in the papers - is 340,000 and not 540,000. When you quote 540,000 that means it is not the figure. This is what we read to the public. I am correcting a figure which I am reading here in the statement. That is why I said that I am correcting a figure and when honourable members are debating, they should know that the figure is not right. We have 340,000 which we passed on to the press yesterday and not 540,000 –(Interjections)- on the World Aids Day yesterday. Can I finish my point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish.

MR KAKOOZA: Can I finish my point because if you leave it as it is, that means that you are going to debate on 540,000 of ART, which is not accessed by the public. 

I am trying to correct the figure which we gave out yesterday on the World AIDS Day. The reasons being that after Round 7 of the Global Fund, there are tonnes which we have already imported into the country for people who are suffering, under treatment, which has reduced the current number. This is because of the global renewal of specifically Round 7 because it provides drugs of ART.

Secondary to that, Quality Chemicals was given a licence to give a second line of ARVs and that is why we have a tremendous decrease. This is why we gave out – maybe by the access of this figure, it was not as correct but I remember the statement. You even go to the newspapers, it is 540,000 and when you calculate the costing which is given, if it is 340,000, the costing changes because the figure has changed. 

In addition to that I would like inform colleagues that when the data is updated, we have got a document of research of every data we give to the public. The report I was talking about could have been given in August but it was not given. We are harmonising the position with the Uganda AIDS Commission so that we give comprehensive data of prevalence. The report is ready and the figures are ready. This is what I have been talking about. I am not disputing what is given in the report by the social services committee. I was just saying that we are going to give comprehensive data, which is harmonised between the Uganda AIDS Commission and the report which has been got out of research, so that the public and Parliament know.

On the National AIDS Day yesterday, we sent a whole commissioner to represent us in Kitebi, Dr Ezati. I was in the East, Madam Speaker, with you. Dr Mallinga was in his constituency attending the function there. Dr Nduhuura is out of the country. If we give a statement to representatives in the Ministry of Health, they are part of us. However, we shall give a comprehensive report to Parliament by next week. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking some clarification from the Minister. I do not know where they get their data from. Do you get your data from Uganda AIDS Commission or you have another department within the Ministry of Health where you derive your data? You know that the Uganda AIDS Commission is also under the Ministry of Health and it is the one mandated [MR KAKOOZA: “President’s Office.]” President’s office is in terms of functioning.  

You see, Madam Speaker, we know this. When you talk about the President’s Office, it is in terms of channelling funding. In terms of operation, Uganda AIDS Commission is under the Ministry of Health. President’s Office does not run Uganda AIDS Commission in terms of operations, but in terms of funding it is under President’s Office. So, I am wondering where you get your data from. 

Even if it is under President’s Office, it is the same Government. If it is mandated with that responsibility, where will you get that data from if the data from Uganda AIDS Commission is the one that has been presented before Parliament now?
  
MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report will have the details of what you are asking for by next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I think we should thank the committee. We note the contents and the debate will await the response from the ministry. We shall have a fully-fledged debate then. Thank you very much. Thank you, our committee.

MR OKUPA: Sorry, Madam Speaker, for delaying you a bit but this is something also related to health, and I want to hear from hon. Kakooza. Last week, most of us were in our constituencies but I was surprised at the rate at which the price of anti-malarial has shot up. Coartem has shot up from Shs 13,000 to Shs 25,000; that is the price at which it was last week. 

We know very well that these drugs are tax free; what has happened? Can the poor people afford a dose of Coartem, which has been recommended by the Ministry of Health, at that rate of Shs 25,000 per dose? What has happened? I will be happy to hear from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you aware of that increase and what has caused it? What can the people do about it? 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with my colleague and thank you for that information because I have just got it from here. I will find out and also give the correct information. 

What I know and believe is that Quality Chemicals is functional and is providing anti-malarial like Artemisinin, which we are supplying to health centres at the cheapest cost. I do not know why private enterprises are hiking the price -(Interjection)- I do not know! I am going to find out. This is what I am saying. I will come up with correct information because I have got the information on the Floor of Parliament. Thank you.   

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $120 MILLION AND ANOTHER US $14 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY AND AGRO BUSINESS ADVISORY SERVICES

12.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion authorising Government to borrow SDR 79.5 million, which is equivalent to US $120 million, and another SDR 9.3 million, which is equivalent to US $14 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group and the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) respectively for financing of the Uganda Agriculture Technology and Agro Business Advisory Services.

This loan is very important for this country. It is a loan that is supposed to beef up NARO and the projects of NAADS in this country. It has five components: 

1.	Developing agriculture technologies and strengthening the national agriculture research systems.

2. 	Enhancing partnerships between agricultural research, advisory services and other stakeholders.

3. 	Strengthening the National Agricultural Advisory Services.

4. 	Supporting agribusiness services and market linkages. 

5. 	Programme management. 

We have already made consultations. This loan was laid before Parliament and discussed with the then Committee on National Economy and workshops have been held to explain the details of this loan. I beg to move that Parliament approves this very important loan request touching on the lives of the population. The population of Uganda relies on agriculture mainly and the mainstay of the economy of this country is mainly agriculture. I beg to move.

12.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Madam Speaker, I must thank you and recognise you for motivating some of us and energising us to be able to do this kind of work, more so when you came down to Buliisa and you saw for yourself the problems we are having; otherwise, it would be very difficult to be doing this kind of work. We get the energy and motivation from leaders like you. 

Six weeks ago, we had an e-governance loan where members were very concerned as to why we only have a research loan and not a loan request that serves extension of agriculture and addresses farmers’ concerns. I informed the House that US $120 million of the ATAAS was addressing that. 

Madam Speaker, since the minister has already given the justification, I seek your indulgence to go straight to the observations. However, before that, I need to mention that in our interactions with both NARO and NAADS, we had to get the new NAADS implementation guidelines, aware of the reviews that have been taking place. We provided copies on the table, and I have requested that every member be given a copy of the NAADS implementation guidelines. I lay on the Table the new NAADS implementation guidelines. 

As already stated by the minister, we visited the research institutes and also had a half-day seminar with the four committees of Parliament and with the NAADS Secretariat. Out of those meetings, we came out with the following observations:

1. 	The committee observed that there is still inadequate funding for agriculture, both public and private. The share of agriculture funding in the national budget was 3.8 percent in FY 2007/08 but projected to rise to five percent by 2011/12. Agriculture clearly needs more funding, but it is important to increase efficiency in resource use in this sector as well. 

	The committee recommends that efficiency in the resources allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and its agencies as well as in local governments that are the recipients of the bulk of resources going into agriculture, be improved. 

2. 	The committee noted that since 2003, a lot had happened in Uganda’s biotechnology fields; besides, the science of biotechnology is useful in uplifting the level of development in Uganda especially in boosting food production for smallholder farmers. However, its impact has been hindered by the absence of a Biotechnology and Bio safety Bill. 

	The committee recommends that government expedites the development and implementation of the policy and regulatory framework for biotechnology in agriculture, that is, enactment of the Biotechnology and Bio safety Bill into law. It is through these law provisions that Uganda will enjoy the benefits from the science of biotechnology in national development. 

3. 	The committee observed that agriculture in Uganda is faced with a number of production and productivity constraints; some of these constraints relate to the availability, affordability and adoption of agriculture technologies. Other constraints are the limited use of production input factors such as good breeds, seeds and stocking materials, fertilizers, mechanisation and irrigation among others. 

	The committee recommends that NARO ensures that it generates appropriate, safe and cost-effective agriculture technologies and research services for farming households. This could be multiplied and replicated for appropriate use. 

4. 	The committee observed that there was still a huge divide between research and technology development and advisory services at all levels. We recommend that for the NARO–NAADS linkage to be meaningful, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should place emphasis on empowerment of farmers by involving them. They should also identify and prioritise research, and procure agricultural research services, and give technical and professional guidance to farmers for them to make informed choices. This should be mainstreamed into the project as well.

5. 	The committee observed that continued human resource development through agricultural training and education in universities and agricultural training institutes is important to produce a pool of qualified personnel to provide advisory and technical services to farmers as this will provide long term sustainability to the project. 

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should embark on ensuring that the curricula of these institutions are tailored towards the needs of the farmers especially those involved in the production of strategic commodities.

6. 	The committee also observed that in the short term, much of the agricultural production in Uganda will remain rain fed and therefore it is important to manage and utilise natural resources in a sustainable manner to support present and future generations. 

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should critically and appropriately mainstream sustainable natural resource management in the project intervention since we depend on the weather presently. However, as we earlier recommended, we encourage irrigation and other measures. 

7. 	The committee observed that there is still limited agriculture value addition and agro-processing in Uganda with lack of access to affordable technology (know-how and machinery) among the key challenges. 

	The committee recommends that Government should scale up the attraction of agro-processors and establish sustainable public-private partners in the agricultural sector. The Government should also work on constraints that hinder the private sector to invest more in agriculture and support existing partnerships.

8. 	The committee observed that NAADS appeared to be having more success in promoting adoption of improved varieties of crops and some other yield enhancing technologies than in promoting improved soil fertility management. This raises concern about the sustainability of the productivity increases that may occur since such increases may have led to more rapid soil nutrient mining unless comparable success in improving soil fertility management was achieved. 

	The committee recommends that Government should additionally place more fundamental emphasis on identifying profitable soil fertility management options for farmers in Uganda and improve the market environment through increased investments in infrastructure, reduction of commodity taxes and trade liberalisation in order to help address this problem. 

9. 	The committee observed that under NAADS, post-harvest handling technologies and practices as well as use of market information were lagging behind. 

	We recommend that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that this situation is improved quickly lest the potential gain in productivity and output derived from the increase in adoption and use of modern production technologies and practices during and after the end of this project will cause prices to fall. This would in turn reduce returns to the modern production technology and practice. 

Conclusion

a) 	The committee noted that the proposed ATTAS project is part of the Country Assistance Strategy (FY 2011/14) for the participating development partners in response to the national objectives situated in the National Development Plan namely, to raise agriculture productivity and to promote commercialisation of agriculture. 

b) 	The committee noted that past investment in research and advisory services has yielded significant benefits. Supporting research and advisory services for increased productivity is a cost effective response to potential risk from climate change and land degradation. 

c) 	We also noted that the future of Uganda’s agriculture will depend on how the country takes advantage of what science has to offer. There is capacity in the country to develop appropriate technology to boost production and productivity. This needs more support especially for funding agricultural research that is aimed at addressing the needs of farmers. Biotechnology has a lot of benefits to farmers and holds promise to solving Africa’s food problems. However, while the potential for biotechnology exists, more is needed in terms of having the right policy framework and legislation as well as scientific work.  

As I conclude, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow SDR 79.5 million and SDR 9.3 million from the IDA of the World Bank and IFAD respectively for the Uganda Agriculture Technology and Agri-business Advisory Services. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to request, with those committee observations and recommendations, that the report be adopted and the request be granted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your committee. The report has been signed; you are free to debate.

1.02
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, chairman, for the report of the committee. I just have a question concerning page 8 of the report. Who is managing this project? I notice that there are components to be implemented by NARO and then there is a component to be implemented by NAADS. That is implementation but who are the managers? The statement on page 8, under component 5, states that, “This component - that is programme management - will be jointly managed by NARO and NAADS.” The moment you leave a lacuna in management, you have a problem. We need someone to blame when things go wrong. Implementation of components can be distributed to the respective agencies but the specific agencies, the specific institutions, must be responsible for the management aspects of the project.

The other aspect is that this is a serious motion; it is a motion about borrowing on behalf of the people of Uganda. As you know, Madam Speaker, you amended the Order Paper, as authorised under the rules, to include more loans. We were not ready to deal with these loan requests that were introduced when we were coming here. These are very serious motions. We are saying these are good interventions we are intending to make, but we need to add value to them. We appreciate the committee met the institutions, met the ministry, and they had workshops but this House must approve. 

Can we who are seated here - from my count, 25 people - approve this motion and other motions on behalf of over 300 MPs? I am raising a matter of quorum. I suggest that since I can see a long line of loans - it is a very long line and we have just introduced four more - let us first have these reports. Let the reports be brought here and then we gazette a day and come and deal with them. You cannot do it today with 25 people. The rules will not allow you. You need quorum to pass these serious motions. 

We need to debate. We must debate this. It is not a matter of passing. There are serious issues here. We must add value to the proposal. 

Madam Speaker, I can see our hands are already tied by the rules. We cannot move with this unless we say let us debate, debate, debate and we do not put the question. We can do that. These are very serious motions. My proposal is very simple; let the committee help us download all these reports here and then we all go and do our homework. We can then declare a day, whether there are 30 loans or more, we come and clear them once and for all -(Interjection)- otherwise, we will be seen to be simply passing these loans, and we are being watched. It is not right. It is not going to be right. It will not help the people of Uganda. We thank the committee for the work they have done but we, as the House, must do our part properly. That is my proposal. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I gave notice on Monday that we shall sit today starting at 10 O’clock. I gave Members two days to do their other work and be available today. 

The committees of this House have Members from both sides of the House. If the Members have failed to do their duty, they should not punish the people of Uganda; not at all! Absence of the Members is their problem but I gave them time and I gave them notice. They are supposed to be here, otherwise, it will mean that each time Members disappear; the House adjourns to look for Members at the cost of the people of Uganda who are waiting for these loans.    

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I need your guidance. What is the recourse to non-attendance? If Members do not come after being summoned to come and attend to very serious business, which according to our rules is a mandatory requirement of quorum, what do we do? (Interjections) Is it an option of the recourse to proceed as is? Shall we be in order? Procedurally, we will be challenged.

I appreciate the challenges of this time. It is a challenge but I do not think that the remedy is to proceed with 25 people in the House and borrow on behalf of the people of Uganda. I think we need to address ourselves to what we should do then. You call Members, they are not coming and you call them, they are not coming; what do we do? (Laughter) The option, in my view, of passing these serious motions with the Members we have is not available. (Laughter) I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what we can do is to continue with the debate. We are optimistic that in the afternoon Members will turn up in big numbers and we continue with the debate. Once we find out that the numbers are enough, then the Speaker shall be obliged to put the question. The few Members who are willing to debate should debate and then in the afternoon, I think Members are going to turn up. I thank you.

1.09
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have clearly indicated the challenge and the dilemma we are in. I would like to propose that the minister moves the five motions and then the chairperson presents the reports and we debate all the reports. When we get quorum in the afternoon, we can vote on each report. Those who will come late - because hon. Oduman was seeking for your guidance - will have no right to open the debate after you have closed it. I thank you. 

1.10
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I am not sure I understood what the acting Leader of Government Business said because I think we cannot have an omnibus debate. I am ready to proceed with the debate on this motion, which has been presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, proceed.

MR KATUNTU: For the record, I support this motion. You see, we are talking about the population of this country and around 70 to 80 percent are involved in agriculture. They are the people we assume we represent when we always stand up here. This facility touches them directly. 

There has always been this song, and I think Ugandans are getting tired of it, where we always say our people are engaged in agriculture and yet when it comes to priorities, we do not take agriculture as a priority. This point has been made over and over again when we are discussing the budget. In most cases, many colleagues have always emphasised that the budgetary allocation to agriculture is not enough. So, interventions like these are very crucial for the benefit of our people. I think it would be criminal on our part to dilly dally with this sort of facility or intervention when our people really need it very urgently. 

Having said that, let us go to the substance, and I would like to talk from a layman’s point of view. I do not want to engage in a very sophisticated debate. When we were growing up in the rural areas during those regimes which people say were backward, we used to have extension officers moving from farmer to farmer, touring their gardens and farms and advising them on how to improve production and productivity. Here we are – I represent a rural constituency and I know what I am talking about - how many of these farmers today have this sort of assistance from Government? 

If we really are to get these people out of poverty, out of what we call subsistence agriculture, and make them produce for the market, we need more emphasis to be put on extension services. This applies whether you are talking about ordinary farming or complicated farming. I can see there is this component on page 7 - strengthening the National Agricultural Advisory Services; technology promotion and farmer access to information/knowledge and technology. I think this should be emphasised where farmers will get access to this knowledge and they are assisted. 

I heard a colleague seated across say they are there. If they are there, why haven’t our people produced for the market? The majority of them produce just to feed themselves. Look at what we call subsistence; it looks like there is some missing link which I hope NAADS can come in to sort out. 

To even raise this debate to another level, as long as you do not have a proper land policy, then we are also in trouble. For effective utilisation of land in terms of productivity, you need a proper land policy. Well, there could be some agriculture on verandas but much of it is on the land. Do we have a land policy in this country? The Minister of Lands was here and we are putting this point to him; you may bring these laws and you want to amend this and so on, but what we need is a thorough debate on the land policy. That is the one thing we need. 

Where I come from, people are involved in a quarter of an acre farming. They do not know how to utilise this land. We have huge chunks of land in this country lying idle. How do you talk about enhancement of agriculture when you do not have a clear land policy in this country? I know this particular minister of agriculture has made some attempt to come up with a land policy; his predecessors did not. So, I encourage him to make sure that we thoroughly debate this land policy, adopt it and make sure that we increase agricultural productivity. 

On component No. 5, we need to be very careful here. Once you have this joint management, chances that you will have conflict are high. I do not know whether they worked on this NARO-NAADS joint management of this component. You need to have the rules set out clearly otherwise you will have both organisations pulling from different ends. You will instead have conflicts in this component of programme management.

I also see what they call ATAAS. How different is this from NAADS? Is this agribusiness advisory services also now a component of NAADS or it is a different programme altogether?

I need clarification on these, otherwise I support the motion.

1.17
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you. Those of us who are interested in agricultural development see problems that we have to handle and sort out. As far as food production is concerned, it is declining. Cash crop production is declining. Fish production has declined. The only sector that has improved or registered an increase is the livestock sector, and that is good. When you look at agro-processing, it is extremely behind schedule. When you look at post-harvest losses, there is also a problem. When we identify those problems and you look at page 10 on allocation of funds - I beg that you move to page 10 and you look at how funds have been allocated - you will discover that they are disproportionately allocated. They are not answering the critical problems that we have.

Component No. 1 addresses research and that is fine. If we look at component No. 3 it supports extension. Component No. 4 supports business people who may not necessarily be farmers but are interested in agribusiness. Move back to component No. 2, which is actually talking about the triangle of technology transfer, which in this case, for those of you who do not understand it, is that linkage between research, extension and farmers. Clearly, the farmer is missing in this equation. 

When you look at the allocation on management, which in my view should be a smaller cost, it is taking a very big figure of US $54.6 million. In my view, this fund should be reallocated to reflect a problem that is at hand. In my view, one of the biggest problems in the present circumstances would be value addition because many crops are produced and there is so much post-harvest losses and loss of value which in fact should be the issue to address at this moment in time.

My suggestion, therefore, is that this reallocation should be looked into so that the farmer is given a big proportion of this money, followed by agro-processing or value addition, and minimise administration costs. Also, remove component No. 2, which in my view does not make sense. If you have taken care of No. 1, research; No. 3, extension; and No. 4 agri-business, maybe we could put that money of component No. 2 to support farmers. 

Otherwise, with those adjustments proposed, I support the motion.

1.21
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. We are all aware that Uganda is an agricultural country and when you analyse who are the stakeholders - I think this one is trying to put it clearly that we have to go for commercial agriculture. 

But, Madam Speaker, I am on the Committee of Science and Technology. We have been touring the NARO offices throughout this country and the reports from each station are really disappointing. Research cannot be carried out because of lack of funds and I wonder whether this is going to address this for the first time because unless the research department, under NARO, is paid due attention, then still we are not moving at all. The impact of these loans should be seen to improve the quantity and quality of these crops that we are talking about. 

Unfortunately, also we have not prioritised which crops should be produced in each region because at the end of the day the farmers will produce expecting the price to also be rising and yet to their dismay, prices always fall, discouraging them drastically. Recently, we have had the experience of maize in Lango. A lot of maize has been produced but because of the price, I think this season very few have taken up hoes to produce more maize. 

Worse still, when you take an example of Uganda’s Spinning Mill in Lira that one has been one of the most serious sectors that have been discouraging our farmers from producing crops that should go through that defunct mill. I wonder whether the committee or the Government is concerned about this big and now idle-lying factory, which should be encouraging production of various crops in Lango or Northern Uganda and in particular this is an area known for cotton production, especially organic cotton.

Unless something is done about NARO - because recently we visited Ngetta which is in Lira and the state in which they are trying to work means that Government should really try to follow up the recommendations that we on the Committee of Science and Technology are trying to put forward. Those we met are always disturbed. They are complaining about accommodation and some of the inputs that are necessary for carrying out the research. So, unless as we are going to approve this loan this one is put into consideration, still we shall not realise the quality and the quantity that we need to boost the farmers’ incomes because the objective is nothing but to ensure that the household incomes increase.

And a very big challenge which we have been facing is the land fertility. Madam Speaker, when we look at the land which has been put to effective use in this country, it means that serious agricultural practice should be put in place because once the land has become used up in a year or two then we need fertilisers. I do not know what is being done to address this and then the price that may follow it when farmers need this.

I remember last year I raised the issue of Mukwano providing farmers with seeds that did not grow and when it was brought to the attention of this House it was supposed to be followed up. That one still has very serious repercussions for our farmers who bought these seeds and planted them early this year. Nothing was done about it and yet they were aiming at commercial agriculture.

So, Madam Speaker, the results of this motion should not just rest in not following it up because usually after discussing and then giving our recommendations, we end up there and nothing follows to address the priority of this agriculture, which actually is known but to the farmers themselves. Thank you very much.

1.26
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just like hon. Katuntu said, I rise in support of this motion. Those of us who come from areas where there is still some land for people to engage in serious cultivation would like to see Government even coming up with more as far as the rural local farmers are concerned.

My concern comes from page 2 on the background information tackling the issue of yield versus decline in production and the crops mentioned here are cotton and maize. I think it is not just a matter of decline in production. Farmers are getting demoralised because of producing what cannot be marketed, what cannot be consumed, what cannot be - even if they get any market at all it is at a low and give away price!

When I address rallies, I always give the case of my brother who is suffering with over 50 bags of maize. If he calculates what he put into the production and what the current market price would be if he sold, what he would get out of it is a serious loss! How do you expect farmers to continue putting in much and yet at the end of the day even what they sell is not a quarter of the costs incurred?

So, I think it is not a matter of low productivity; it goes far beyond that. What we expect Government to do is to help to market these products. Help the local farmer to get market because it does not pay for someone to toil. The cost of production is high: you have to buy fumigators, you have to spray, and you have to engage in very many other things if you are to get a good yield but at what price do you sell the product at the end of the day? This year, people from Kaberamaido have not cultivated maize because they are still suffering with the maize of last year. The same applies to this cotton that has been quoted on page 2. At the time when they are cultivating they are told, “You will sell at Shs 1,200 a kilogramme,” but let the crops yield, they sell at Shs 300. Farmers in Uganda are being exploited right under the noses of the very people who are supposed to protect them. So, it is not just about the pests and diseases as given on page 2 and 3. It is more than that.

This brings me to another concern on page 6 of this report: “Covering NARO’s top priorities”. I am happy cassava has been mentioned here. I want the Ministry of Agriculture to take keen interest. Cassava in Kaberamaido, apart from that which has been affected by the floods, is just rotting away in the gardens. You uproot one stem of cassava that is ready for consumption and that has really grown to maturity and you find the whole cassava tuber has rotten away and it begins rotting right from inside the middle point. So, now that this is part of your areas of interest I feel you should take keen interest in cassava. Otherwise, if we lose all the cassava under our charge, what will remain will even be worse than these other disastrous floods and what you saw taking place in Teso.

On page 14 of the report, I keep on seeing committee recommendations: “The committee observed that NAADS appeared to be having more success in promoting …” and it continues. What makes NAADS fail is that it is working almost as if it can solve all the problems! It is working as if it dreamt about its programmes, leaving behind the Ministry of Agriculture. The issues of soil erosion were being handled by the ministry but now NAADS takes most of the funds leaving the ministry with nothing. 

All the issues that would boost productivity have been left behind. All this is about lack of proper planning. This is why we say that the National Planning Authority should come up and plan for this country so that ministries operate in guided principals. We are tired of seeing the problems in NAADS and yet they come back to the Ministry of Agriculture. Why should NAADS get all the funds and yet the parent Ministry of Agriculture is suffering?

Talk about the fisheries department; this is completely neglected. These are not lamentations that we want to see continuing. The Ministry of Agriculture should sit with the National Planning Authority and plan properly. The ministry should not leave all the money to projects like NAADS.

I got an opportunity to interact with an official in the Ministry of Agriculture attached to Kaberamaido District. If you follow the releases from the ministry, a whole district gets less than Shs 200,000. This is so dismal an amount compared to what other departments get. How do you expect such an officer to be motivated to carry out extension services addressed to farmers yet a NAADS official goes there once and claims hundreds of millions of shillings!

I find myself at a loss because there are some loans that were passed in this House. Between 2008/10, we passed something to do with cassava. This was sometime back. There was also a loan under Ministry of Finance related to stores and infrastructure. We also passed a loan on marketing and structures. Who is taking stock of this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know some months back, I tabled a grass here which was destroying crops in Busoga and it is still going on but I have not got an answer. There is also a wilt hitting the coffee and other crops.
 
1.35
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): I thank the committee for the well-researched report. On page 15, the committee observes and talks about the post harvesting technologies and practices that NAADS intends to handle. We have had a bumper of cereals but the storage is not good. We had stores that were sold off; can we be assured that we shall get them back for us to help the farmers in storing these cereals?
 
As we speak now, the maize is rotting yet we are now entering the second season of harvest and they have no where to put them. They do not know how to store the maize by measuring the moisture or temperature. Even the prices are going down because the market is not there.

The committee has observed that there are productivity constraints such as good breeds of seeds and stocking materials. 

We have been warned about some seed companies, which are coming to developing countries. I want to get an assurance from the minister especially about the Monsato seed crop. What is our take as a country about these seed companies, which intend to introduce the GMO crops?

The committee has talked about irrigation as one of the problems that farmers are facing. Farmers out there are trying small scale irrigation such as drip irrigation using the mineral water bottles. I thought that we as Parliament should interest the ministry to go and help these farmers because if they can venture by their efforts then they would do well with some help. These farmers should be assisted. I want to ask the committee why they did not include this one on the agenda when you knew that these things are working. I support the loan and I think it should be passed.

1.40
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): I rise to support the motion but my problem is that I would like to see us passing these monies and they go into real transformation of people’s lives. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether my problem is because I am a scientist but I would like to see figures. For example, NAADS and NARO have existed for sometime but as much as we get the statistics from UBOS about the poverty levels in Uganda, I want to see a situation where NAADS can tell us that, “Before we intervened this financial year, there were so many poor people and they were at this level. But after our intervention, the people who had their lives transformed were so many.” However, I have not seen that. 

In this agricultural sector, we are emphasising issues like technology, value-addition and so on. But if people are still producing and their products are actually rotting in stories, how well are we really doing with value-addition?

The other question I have is, if actually there are some advances we are realising with these interventions, how much are we realising from local sales, exports and how much income are these interventions bringing to this country in terms of GDP? Those are some of my questions.

I have also seen some of the committees and ministries demonstrating to us the kind of, for example, technologies they are talking about. Maybe we also need to know if they are talking about various technologies, how are they; are they labour-intensive? My colleague hon. Jalia is talking about irrigation using mineral water bottles. Are all Ugandans able to use this labour-intensive technology to realise what is intended?

I would like to support this loan but I would love to see – maybe during the implementation of this programme – reports on the kind of improvements we are realising. The reports should go to the citizens of Uganda whom this programme intends to support. Why am I saying this? NAADS can always say, “We have realised this progress.” But if you go to an area like Masaka, they will always be bringing one example of Madam Kizza. When you go to northern region, it is so-and-so always. We should see more Ugandans actually coming up and benefiting from such programmes. Thank you.

1.44
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and would like to thank the committee for the report they have presented. I am extremely happy that we are discussing a loan in the agricultural sector. As we are aware, the majority of our people are in that sector. 

We have been told year in and year out of the impressive GDP, oscillating between five and 10 percent but that is not felt in rural areas. This is because GDP is derived from the service industry, which is not directly related to our people. So with this loan, I am sure it is going to go down to our people and the per capita income will become impressive. It is the per capita income that will assist our people more than the GDP we are talking about. So I am very happy that this loan is in the agricultural sector; it is addressing all sub-sectors, including food, cotton, fishing, timber and fuel. We should therefore support this loan to ensure that our people’s lives improve.

Not only that, when we improve in the agricultural sector, this is an area where Uganda has an upper hand compared to our neighbours. Uganda cannot compete in the textile industry that we are trying to drive but in agriculture, we can become a hub. Uganda will benefit a lot from all the countries that are surrounding us if we improve this agriculture.

When I went through the report, I was very happy to learn that soil management is also being addressed. Our soils have been overused and cannot now produce. There has been an introduction of spraying grass and others, killing insects and consequently our soils are no longer productive. So when we look into soil science and engineering through this loan, we shall have done well.

One thing about apportioning the money - I am not comfortable that in such a sector we need a 10 percent contingency. I think that is too much and they should go back and reduce it to maybe five percent. This is straightforward and it is not engineering where we need 10 percent. 

I also support the recommendations of the committee. I think the ministry and Government should take serious note of them because they are very good.

Finally, I appeal to my friend, the acting Leader of the Opposition, to be positive. Before we are done with the debate, you cannot start saying, “No, we are not going to pass …” You wait; when we get to the bridge, we shall cross it. Whether there is quorum or not, I do not think we should be legalistic.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I am very shocked at what hon. Byandala is raising. He is discussing the subject of Rules of Procedure and looking at the acting Leader of the Opposition. So is he in order to address a matter of Rules of Procedure to the acting Leader of the Opposition rather than to the Speaker, who is the authority as per the Rules of Procedure? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Byandala is sitting directly in front and you have attracted his attention more than the Speaker. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: You see, Madam Speaker, as I have always said, there are certain things which are illegal but acceptable. (Laughter) So this is what I was trying to tell my young brother that because of the importance of this, maybe when we break off and before we come back, for those of us who will be here early enough, we shall pass it so that our people can benefit. Thank you.

1.50
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this loan request because it is a people’s programme we are discussing. I am sure that is the reason it has not met any resistance so far. Both sides are in support of this loan and we should commend Government for sourcing a people’s programme.

Just like you have echoed the statement to do with the rotting cassava tubers, which was earlier raised, I remember the Member of Parliament for Budiope, hon. Balyejjusa, in his maiden speech raised the same issue. Hon. Ibi Ekwau has raised the same thing. Last week when I attended hon. Balyejjusa’s nomination, this was the issue his opponent was capitalising on; that he has never delivered on this issue because they have not got feedback.

It is in this respect, I am also appealing to Government and more so the ministry to begin attending and responding to Members’ issues. If something is raised, kindly take keen interest and do something as far as such issues are concerned.

I want to also support this loan request because it is addressing agri-business and marketing. Most of the agricultural products that we have are perishable. They have been rotting and losing value within the areas of production so if such a loan is looking at securing markets and processing our agricultural products, we feel it should be blessed with two hands so that our farmers get value from their sweat.

With the coming of the new regulations and guidelines, I feel that NAADS is taking shape. Initially it used to follow the Bible that he who has will be added to but now this is a programme that has been amended and adjusted to address the issues of the people. When you come to identifying the farmers that will be benefiting from the programme, they are directly identified from the village implying that the local person, however poor he may be, is bound to benefit from this programme. So, I feel we all need to support this programme and this loan request so that our farmers benefit from whatever is being produced. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

1.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members for supporting this noble motion. I do realise that this project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and most of the questions that have been asked have been towards implementation and they are more technical to the agricultural sector. I would, therefore, like to advise that the Minister of Agriculture, seated with me, take on those questions. I thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before the Minister of Agriculture comes in, there was this issue of these other loans that I reflected on; something on cassava and most of them came under the Ministry of –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Agriculture to also respond to this because it has attacked my personality and good enough I also see that the director of NAADS is also here. When the President was campaigning in Kasilo the day before yesterday, he attacked hon. Alice Alaso and I that the two of us have failed and eaten the Shs 10 billion that is given to Soroti District under NAADS annually. It was also reported in the papers.

In the Financial Year 2007/08, Soroti got Shs 807,254,000; in the Financial Year 2008/2009, Soroti got Shs 1,416,625,220; in the Financial Year 2009/2010, Soroti District got Shs 2,009,074,396. The total budget for Soroti District in the year 2007/2008 was Shs 13,043,685,375. The total budget of Soroti District for the Financial Year 2008/2009 was Shs 15,399,074,179. In the Financial Year 2009/2010, Soroti District was allocated Shs 18,102,031,522. This is a percentage of 6.2 percent of NAADS in 2007/08. In 2008/09, the percentage was 9.2; in the year 2009/10, the percentage was 11.1. 

So, it is not right for the President to use lies to try and de-campaign some of us. If the ministry or NAADS is giving the President wrong information, they should correct these statements which the President made in Kasilo County, Pingire sub-county. It is Shs 10 billion annually and that is why there is no money; that is why NAADS is failing in Soroti District. I don’t know whether the money is given to me so can the minister help the President?

1.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank Members for the enormous support you have given to this facility. I am really very happy that the House is appreciating that most of our people, almost 80 percent, are employed in agriculture and this loan is actually addressing some of the challenges they are facing.

Maybe I should start with the last one by hon. Elijah Okupa that there is an allegation that they ate Shs 10 billion. I don’t have the details and I don’t know our President as a liar as he tried to put it. All I can say is that I will try to find out. During campaigns, so many things are said and I don’t know whether this one is also factual because I was not there in Soroti; I am not a witness to this. I think I will investigate and find out or ask the relevant person to communicate but I don’t have the details of the communication. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I don’t want us to dwell on this matter because I know that Members of Parliament do not receive NAADS money.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, you know our papers here can report all sorts of things, which are not correct and it is not the first time we have had wrong information in the papers. We are on record in this House for having some people, actually from the Opposition, who have challenged some of these papers very seriously so I don’t have the details and at an appropriate time, I will investigate and inform my honourable colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think you will inform the House because this may also touch other Members. Please, establish quickly and report back to the House for the sake of the reputation of the Members of this House.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

Hon. Okello, you were asking who is managing the loan: I want to inform you that both NAADS and NARO are statutory bodies. As a ministry, we do the oversight function. We have a co-ordinating committee, which co-ordinates all the projects under MAAIF and its agencies but in this particular project, component one is managed by NARO, part of component two is managed by NARO and the other one is by NAADS and if you read the details of the components, they indicate which agency is managing what.

You also went on to say that we do not have a quorum. I have noticed that but you know when we passed the other loans, you said that you wanted this loan very quickly now we have brought it, so as a Leader of the Opposition today you should help and organise your Members of the Opposition so that we can pass this loan.

Hon. Abdu Katuntu actually supported the loan; he was only not comfortable who is managing what and exactly whether ATAAS was replacing NAADS. ATAAS is a programme - this programme is going to, in a sense, be phase two of NAADS but also managed by both NARO and NAADS. The challenges we are trying to address in this programme is that, previously, research was not locally based and was not actually addressing the issues that concern farmers. So, we are bringing research closer to the farmers. We had a challenge which was also to do with market access by promotion of agro-business. We are actually trying to add value to what we produce so that we can access the market.

Hon. Bucyanayandi; cash crop production has gone down but the livestock sector has registered an improvement. While it is true that some cash crops have gone down, it is also true that production of some cash crops has gone up. Cotton has gone down because of two reasons: One is that people have shifted from growing cotton in some traditional cotton growing areas, to rice. You will notice that predominantly, east was actually growing a lot of cotton but now there is rice production and it is both a cash crop and a food security crop.

The other one is about fluctuation of prices. Cotton has had unprecedented fluctuation of prices and this has affected production of cotton because farmers have tended to shy away from it but we have seen cocoa production moving from 3,000 metric tonnes to 15,000 metric tonnes. We have seen palm oil production growing from zero to almost satisfying the entire country’s needs.

We have also in the last two years registered an increase of coffee export and coffee export earnings. You will notice that we have registered a growth in tea production and so is cotton. But what is very interesting is that previously, we were not consuming our coffee but now the local market is there. So really, I would not say that we are badly off producing less than what we are producing save for cotton.

Now your concern is that much of the percentage is going into administration rather than the input - if I got you clearly. Yes, you know research is - I do not know whether you would qualify research to be purely management but those services are very important and I think we have done the best in this regard.

Hon. Ekwau you are concerned that farmers are producing what they cannot sell and the problem is about markets. Yes, in some cases we have registered some of these experiences but in most cases we have had problems of post harvest handling. But what I can say is that in the previous year which ended, we registered a lot of produce and we supplied a lot of our produce to the United Nations. Actually, we are the second largest supplier to the World Food Programme after Canada in the whole world so I think -(Interjections)- we collected about US $56 million from our produce here and that was a record in the region. Most of our products are going; the challenge we have is post harvest handling, which we are trying to address in other programmes but also this one tries to do part of it.

Why we are adding value in this programme, hon. Ekwau, is actually so that we can access distant markets. In a sense, this loan is going to address some of those challenges.

Cassava is rotting and we have not done much about cassava. Recently, we passed a loan which is a regional loan and Uganda was selected to be a centre of excellence for cassava. I want to inform you that we are doing much about cassava. We have done more research previously on cassava and I want to assure you that the issues of cassava are now very adequately being addressed. We also need to note that previously, there were some of those diseases that used to attack cassava and this was mainly because of drought conditions. But now we are trying to develop varieties which are resistant to some of those diseases.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I speak with a lot of pertinence on cassava because so far it is what we have remained with. I am of the view that we cannot handle the issue of cassava specifically in this sitting. Let the Minister come with a statement specifically on cassava. What you have done, what you intend to do especially on handling and some of these other varieties you are talking about are failing. What is the way forward? I think that would be far better.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If that is the case, that even gives me ample time to prepare comprehensively on cassava. I pledge to —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We expect a reply from you because we approved that money here so we need feedback to know what you are doing.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: In two week’s time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two weeks?

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes. Madam Speaker, you mentioned coffee wilt and cassava wilt. The issue of cassava will be covered in my statement but for coffee, we have developed eight lines of varieties which are resistant to coffee bacteria wilt and we think we are doing very well on coffee.

Hon. Bintu, can we go back to the silos? Now we have a challenge that when we privatised, we allowed private people to do much of this work. They have done but we have now as government identified that there is need to actually go back to address some of these issues. We have a Wire Receipt System and it is working and we are trying to strengthen it so that it can take care of what hon. Jalia Bintu was trying to bring up. The ministry that is handling this is the ministry of co-operatives.

In Tanzania, when they met this challenge, the Ministry of Agriculture is the one which is handling the co-operatives at the same time. But here, we are working very well with the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry and we are working together on the Wire Receipt System to take care of post harvest handling to avoid waste.

Fake seeds on the market; well, we have advised people to use agricultural officers when they go to buy some of these technologies that need a professional to identify whether these seeds work, they are right seeds or stocking material. We have tried to regulate the seed companies but somehow we advise farmers to use special subject matter specialists whenever they indulge in bulk purchase of planting or stocking materials.

Hon. Nalule said the money should go to transformation. I think the loan is trying to precisely address this.

The last one was from hon. Okupa. We have been instructed by the House to prepare a statement and make explanation to your concern. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I want to give you time to digest what has been said but also to remind hon. Members of Parliament especially those who represent farmers like me that you must stand up and be counted this afternoon. So, I shall suspend the House until 3.15 p.m. I want to see all those who represent farmers here at 3.00 p.m. The House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 2.13 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.35 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $120 MILLION AND ANOTHER US $14 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY AND AGRO BUSINESS ADVISORY SERVICES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the morning we had debated this motion and the ministry had responded and I indicated that we are coming back to take a decision. I now put the question that this House do approve the loan request by the Government to borrow SDR 79.5 million and SDR 9.3 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing the Uganda Agricultural Technology and Agro business Advisory Services (ATAAS) loan. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 6.6 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO US $10.5 MILLION APPROXIMATELY SHS 22 BILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES NETWORK PROJECT 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to present a request on behalf of Government to this august House to borrow SDR 6.6 million equivalent of US $10.05 million and approximately Shs 22 billion from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the East African Public Health Laboratories Network Project. I beg to present. 

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Ministry of Finance presented a report to the committee and the committee captured the procedure we followed and the terms and conditions of this loan. I would like to request my colleague, the chairperson of committee to present their report. 

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We had two loans in the request from the health sector. One was strengthening the health systems which we disposed of the other week and the pending one was this, of the regional health laboratory. We scrutinised the two loans together and even the field trip was jointly done. I would also like to thank the members of the Social Services Committee including Prof. Anokbonggo who helped members who went to the North and East.
   
I thought that since we looked at the Health Sector the other week, I could be allowed to go straight to the components. The components of this project if you go to page 7; bullet 6.1, you will realise that component 1 of the Regional diagnostic and surveillance capacity worth US $44.9 million is a component, which will provide targeted support to create and render functional and regional laboratory network. We got this chart which shows how the different countries in the region will interact. 

The diagnostic services on page 8 for vulnerable population cross border areas will take US $21.2 million and the list of satellite site centres of excellence will include: One, Arua in West Nile, that is, the Regional Referral Hospital for Trypasonomiasis, Plague and Meningitis; Lacor in Gulu; it is also a university teaching hospital for Ebola and Meningitis among others; Mbale Regional Hospital in the East for Cholera; Mbarara University Teaching Hospital for Malaria, Cholera, Dysentery, H1N1; Mulago Hospital as the National Referral and University Teaching Hospital  for H1N1, Cholera and Ebola. 

The other subsection of component 1 is reference and specialised services and drug resistance – US $21.2 million.

The other component will finance rehabilitation, construction, lab equipment and materials for the Central Public Health Laboratories including PB and reference laboratories.

There will also be acquisition of computers and video conferencing capacity to facilitate sharing of information and linking to existing tele-medicine solutions.

The other is technical assistance to support accreditation.

Disease surveillance and preparedness will take US $ 22.5 million.

Component 2 - Joint Training and Capacity Building; US $9.9 million.

Component 3 - Joint Operation Research Knowledge Sharing/Regional Coordination Programs and Program Management, US $8.7 million. This is a good programme especially since it comes at a time where we are in the process of East African Integration.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, on page 14 we give the project costing and financing. The financing terms and conditions this being an IDA facility it is a long term – 40 year period including 10 years of grace. 

If you allow, I want now to go to the observations and recommendations. 

The committee observed that laboratories are critical for supporting disease surveillance and sharing information with our neighbouring countries, key to complying with international health regulations which aim to improve early identification public health emergencies and are important for accurate diagnosis, guiding treatment and managing the growing problem of drug resistance.

The committee observed the availability of qualified laboratory staff remained a critical bottleneck to service provision in this country. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should scale up the training of laboratory technicians to ensure that the national capacity to implement this project is strengthened with realisation of better project outcomes for the nation and region as a whole.

The committee observed that there was increased risk of communicable disease, transmission and pandemic due to global and regional trade, international travel and refugee movements which require a harmonised approach to mitigate negative spill over effects and maximize positive externalities. 

The committee observed that improved laboratory capacity will enable health care workers to deliver more effective treatment and enhance efficiency in the use of resources and improve quality of care.

Conclusion
The committee has noted the government efforts to improve health outcomes in the country and in the sub-region. The project will contribute to the achievement of MDG No. 6 (Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases). It will also contribute to poverty reduction, MDG No. 1 as the poor are disproportionately affected by communicable diseases. At the regional level, the proposed project provides a vehicle for implementing key disease control strategic priorities of regional institutions. The East African Community partner states are fully committed to utilising a regional approach as highlighted in 2007/2012, regional plan for prevention and control of human and animal trans-boundary disease. 

Further more the committee noted that the project is consistent with the health sector strategies which recognise the burden of communicable diseases and their regional nature, national laboratory policies and strategies and the 2008 Maputo Declaration on Health Laboratory Systems, the country assistance strategy which aims to strengthen health systems and promote regional integration and the National Development Plan which is now the guiding economic and social development framework for Uganda.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government request to borrow SDR 6.6 million (US $10.05 million equivalent and Shs 22 billion) from the International Development Association of the World Bank (IDA) for the financing of the East African Public Health Laboratories Network project.

As I conclude I would like to remind the Members that at the time or request we worked on the much wanted World Bank Health Systems strengthening which had a component of maternal health and we had requested the two to be passed together. Unfortunately, due to other issues on the Order Paper, the question was not put, but that was our earlier arrangement. So, I would like to request that the Members do adopt the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe you had a lengthy debate when we were dealing with maternal health – do you have anything that you would wish to add? 

3.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I support the loan request here, but I hope the Ministry of Health scales up now that you are setting up the laboratories. But also there are things that need to be handled. Recently, during last week when we were in the constituencies, I was surprised to learn that the laboratories do not have reagents for testing Malaria. So, I wish this was also incorporated in this loan so that we do not just end up having the equipment there but when the reagents are lucking. I do not know what is happening now at the moment, because in Kasiro and Serere there are no reagents for the laboratory technicians to test for the diseases. So, I would be happy if that too was added here. But I support the loan request. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I rise to support the loan. The diseases mentioned here are recurrent and they kill many people in Uganda. Let us take the example of Trypanosomiasis – that is Sleeping Sickness, it is rampant in West Nile, particularly in Koboko in a place called Bamure. But the challenge we have is that we have only one centre that is in Omugo in Terego County. And due to transport problems, many people fail to go there. 

Therefore, I would expect more centres to be opened using this loan; at least three in West Nile, especially in Koboko so that people do not have to move for a very long distance. I request the Ministry to introduce more centres; one is not enough for Koboko.

Then for Malaria, the most recent scenario is the distribution of nets. Nets have been distributed but we need to educate the people on how to use them. I think some people misunderstood the facts about the medicine in the nets; they thought they have to spread the net outside overnight for the rain to wash it so that the medicine does not kill them. So, we need to educate our people when giving them these nets. And when you consider – many children sleep on a mat spread on the floor, how protected are such children? 

So, I think the net is a temporary measure and they should be give often because after a month or two, they are already old and cannot help. So, this money should not be used much on capacity building, especially the staff but for building the capacity of the people in the prevention of these diseases and also other facilities required. Thank you very much.

3.54
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to borrow this money but also to caution the Ministry of Health that it is not only borrowing money and training laboratory assistants; you must also improve the conditions of these people because we might train these people and they look for greener pastures. The working conditions of these people are very poor. They go to the hospitals for about two-three hours and they find their way out into private laboratories. The Ministry of Health should do something to improve the services of laboratory technicians.

I was in Bududa Hospital after the landslides; but people who had broken limbs were lying in that hospital for three days without x-rays. They did not have the surgeons. They had to wait for x-ray papers and chemicals from Bombo Military Hospital. Can you imagine? Somebody with a broken limb, waiting for three days and there was nothing in the hospitals? We are going to borrow this money, fine, but then, you must do something to make sure the laboratory technicians are in the hospitals. Thank you.

3.55
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that we should borrow and improve the services of our hospitals.

However, there is this portion of capacity-building for laboratory technicians. Laboratory technicians are lacking in most of our hospitals. And now here, we have got four countries. I do not know whether Government is going to put something in place to ensure that those who are trained are bonded so that we do not have brain drain because we might be training these laboratory technicians for other countries.

We have got x-ray machines in many hospitals but I do not see it as capacity-building for radiographers; these people who operate the x-ray machines. You will find most hospitals with x-ray machines but they are lying idle and there is no provision in this loan to have these people trained. Can the Ministry of Health ensure that these people also get trained and get posted to the hospitals that we are budgeting for? I thank you. 

3.57
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you Madam Speaker. I see a list of satellite centres here handling various diseases, but I also note that some diseases are replicated. A disease like Meningitis being handled in Arua will also be handled in Gulu in Lacor. Cholera handled in Mbale will also be handled in Mbarara and Mulago. I would have preferred for a centre to specialise in one disease -(Interjections)- yes, because what you call a centre of excellence cannot be a jack of all trades. If Arua is good at handling Trypanasomiasis, let it handle that. Another centre will handle Cholera. Another one will handle meningitis because if you crowd many diseases in one area, you can do half jobs and that is not going to live up to our expectations. This is what I wanted the ministry to consider. It also gives an opportunity for these centres to be spread around the country. Why should a centre handle three and another centre, which could be developed, has none?

A place like Kisoro might also want to benefit from this. A place like Fort Portal might want to benefit from this. Why should we crowd it in one area?  Thank you.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, hon. colleagues. First of all, this is a timely loan because as we passed the other loan of health strengthening systems, which created infrastructure for reproductive health and now we are saying it is very necessary to put laboratories at the lowest centre and even surveillance of the outbreak of diseases because what is important as we go into East African federation – you find that there is a lot of interaction and these outbreaks across the border - and there needs to be sharing of knowledge and even surveillance of borders. Why this loan – we had given an appraisal report sometime back, which was highlighting why all this is needed within the East African region. 

When you go to the eastern part - I was in Bukwo recently – you find people – there are no borders, there are no laboratories; but the communicable diseases are plenty and the facilities are lacking. So, when we pass this loan, it is strengthening us to create more laboratories in the health infrastructure and even train more technical people to deal with those communicable diseases along the borders and also across the country.

In addition to that, under the long-term institutional arrangement, this project is going to be implemented within the Ministry of Health. That means building up capacity to train more technical clinicians in the laboratories and buying more reagents where there are outbreaks of diseases. 

I agree with hon. Baba Diri that there is lack of information about the nets we are supplying currently. Even others - I went to the extent of finding out that people are using them for squeezing malwa. Others are using them for weddings; but as a ministry, we have tried to put public information -(Interjections)-others are using them for fishing. So, we are really going into a campaign and we are sensitising the public that these nets are supposed to be used at night. The programmes are ongoing on the radios.

Then, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, yes, it is true; training and welfare of nurses is very necessary. When we passed a loan for health infrastructure, we even looked at putting more houses up for nurses to be staying at the health centres. We think if we put that in place we shall train more midwives to be allocated to Health Centre IIIs so that reproductive health is also addressed at the lowest centres and when a mother goes to a Health Centre III, there is a midwife who is already trained and stays in that place to address maternal health and reproductive health.

Hon. Grace Oburu, long-tern institutional arrangement is what is emphasised within this loan and even training more clinical officers in these laboratories. 

Of course, hon. Arumadri, diseases are emergencies. With the interaction of people, we are putting across that every country now as we are going into the East African federation should collaborate and we put up a centre of excellence. Right now we are collaborating with our neighbours, the sister countries. For instance, the diseases which are very communicable like polio – that when we deal with a programme like polio in Uganda, also the neighbouring countries like Kenya, Southern Sudan or Tanzania are doing the same along the border areas. When we pass this loan, we shall deal with the problem of the outbreak of these communicable diseases and the laboratory initiatives. Thank you. (Mr Akena rose _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has sat down.

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, I think this is very important. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Akena.

MR AKENA: Hon. Minister, I was hoping that you would mention that this is a component within the wider scope of the ministry, looking at laboratory services across the country; and I was hoping that you would mention that in future we are going to be looking at the regional referral hospitals to each be able to have decent laboratory services. As you may know, the people of Lira have for a long time been going to Gulu for tests like CD-4 count. In these circumstances, I am just trying to find out from the ministry whether you have a wider scope of how you are going to be dealing with the laboratory set up and not just looking at this loan; in that, what does the ministry have as far as developing laboratory services and other facilities within regional referral hospitals is concerned? Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much, hon. Akena. You remember in December last year Uganda did not have a laboratory strategy policy, but it was since passed. There is a detail within that policy on how the laboratory strategy policy is going to work. In addition to what you said, we are trying to operate with other new technologies, which are currently coming in. We have got rapid testing kits whereby now the ministry is training village health teams whereby immediately you submit those kits and those trained people in areas where there are no services, they are ready to test for the diseases and we get the answer. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 6.6 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for financing the East African Public Health Laboratories Network Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $18 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) AS SUPPLEMENTARY FINANCING TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DISTRICT LIVELIHOODS SUPPORT PROGRAMME (DLSP)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the Minister moves, I have a death announcement. Our colleague, the MP for Okoro, hon. Simon D’Ujanga, has lost his mother, Mrs Racheal Lemu D’Ujanga. She died yesterday in Parombo, Kaya, Paidha sub-county in Zombo district. Burial will take place on Saturday, 04 December 2010 at Parombo. Hon. Akumu Mavenjina is co-ordinating the funeral arrangements. You can contact her on 0772516991 or 0772506317. I am requesting that we observe a moment of silence in her honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance.

4.08
MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Just before the minister of finance comes. In the last three weeks, Mulago Hospital’s CT scan machine has not been working and patients there have to go to Kampala hospital for the scan and it costs Shs 180,000. Now that we have been talking about the equipment and labs, can you look into that as well? In fact, I have just received a message that up to now, the machine is not operational. That is what the patients in Mulago have to go through. Poor people cannot afford to pay the Shs 180,000. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. colleague. Since I have got the information, I am going to take immediate action. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to move that Government be allowed to borrow US $18 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) as supplementary financing to support the implementation of the District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, seconded by the Minister of Health. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we followed the procedure by presenting our brief to Parliament and we appeared before the relevant committee. What I have to add is that the DLSP was designed within the government Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) and the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Since we launched the National Development Plan which takes care of PEAP and PMA, this project falls under the National Development Plan programmes. I would like to request the chairman of the committee to inform this august House what the committee decided on this request. 

4.11
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to inform the House that DLSP, CAIIP, AMP have been ongoing projects. So, the loan request we are looking at now, DLSP, is a top-up loan; I thought I could mention this from the onset, and the CAIIP loan. With your indulgence, Madam Speaker, I would request that we present both reports because these are community sub-county roads which are very popular out there. Our concern has been how we can make these possible in all other sub-counties. Wherever they have been, there is a demand but what is available currently is not enough. So, as we go through this, the next report, which is for CAIIP, is also a related project but with different titles and financiers. 

With that I would like to confirm that we did move with the committee of local government to beneficiary districts where these projects have been tested. We also saw the state of some of the paths they will be opening. Because these are places where there were originally no roads; they were footpaths but they were opened and handed over to sub-counties. 

We have requested the ministry, if you look at page 3 of the report; the committee has made it a tradition to try and have a national outlook. How do these projects operate? You will find AMP was in south west; CAIIP is in central and some other regions and DLSP is in parts of the East. We were trying to inquire the distribution pattern of these projects.

In the components on page 4, the DLSP first component is access to road and water infrastructure. The activities under this component include construction of community access roads; as I have said, construction of water sources, supervision and monitoring of works activities, training of roads and water use by committees for its intended purposes. 

The second component is agriculture and land management where activities include providing mulching and poverty grants to farmer groups and poor households, value addition intervention, training of farmer groups, community mobilisation, sensitisation on land tenure, surveying of land in pilot sub-counties.

The third component is community development with functional adult literacy classes, identification and mentoring of poor households, training of trainers in households, quarterly reviews and monitoring and evaluation.

The fourth component is the district and sub-county support, which includes conducting quarterly reviews, providing logistic support for implementation, conducting monitoring and supervision activities.

Component 5 is programme co-ordination which includes financial reporting, ensuring programme implementation, procurement and staff training. I would like to request that Members are given copies of the brief to Parliament. We actually have enough copies, if they can be given to Members for further analysis. So, with that I can now move to page 10, the components.

As you can see on page 10 in the chart, community infrastructure takes 22.9; agriculture development, 10.6; community development, 2.9; district and sub-county support, 5.2; programme management, 5.2 giving us a total project cost of 46.9 plus fiscal contingencies of 1.2 and price contingencies of 2.8 giving us a sum total of 50.9.

I think with that we can go to page 11. IFAD is also long term financing of 40 years including 10 years at 0.75 percent service charge and this is a concessional facility. 

On page 12, the committee did observe that there was visible impact in the beneficiary districts under the programmes that were visited especially the rehabilitated roads that had opened up previously in accessible rural areas as I have said to market. These were foot paths.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should expedite the process of rolling out this programme to other districts that are not beneficiaries of CAIIP, DLST or AMP.

The second observation is that very few contractors under this programme were able to complete the work in the stipulated six months which affected the pace of the implementation of the civil works. This problem is not unique to this programme but cuts across almost all donor funded projects as well as Government road works. 

This problem is compounded further due to the fact that the road construction industry in Uganda is still very young yet the demand for contractors is very high due to increased Government focus on road improvement. There is a lot of road work going on by local governments, UNRA, and we need to build the capacity of our local contractors. 

Of course, some reference is given to the PPDA details but we take the contractor’s capacity to be more primary than the PPDA red tape bureaucracy. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Works should scale up the building of more capacity of local contractors.

The committee observed that much as a number of roads had been opened up under this programme, the chances of their deterioration after completion were very high as districts lacked adequate funds for their maintenance. For example, in Masindi and Bugiri districts, the committee observed that some of the opened-up roads had already been narrowed by thickets of grass that was growing from the sides of the roads which led to water clogging on the road especially during heavy rains and the absence of proper drainage channels. And that is why you see in the component there are these maintenance committees which are supposed to be trained.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Local Government scales up the road management committees under this programme in order to ensure that post construction road maintenance issues challenges under this programme are  addressed.

So, you will find some of the recommendations we make may not be corrected by this very loan but if we advise the districts, for example, to build capacity at sub-counties and the much-talked about district road equipment which is expected, it could address some of these problems.

The committee also observed that there was low absorption of funds by districts owing to procurement delays especially for agriculture inputs. I have already mentioned this and we recommend that the Ministry of Local Government should strive to ensure that the beneficiary districts plan all procurement early in financial years to avoid unnecessary delays and improve absorption funds.

We believe that with good procurement plans and work plans you could still, much as we are talking of the PPDA amendment, beat up the time. 

Training of the procurement staff in the districts should also be scaled up to build their capacity. 

The fifth recommendation on page 13 is that the committee observed that the Ministry of Local Government did not involve the sessional Parliament committees for oversight at implementation – the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and the Committee of Infrastructure. The committee recommends that these committees should step up the monitoring of these programmes at implementation stage.

Hon. Members, as we have always said, borrowing is not a problem, after all we are financing part of the deficit. Finance has already approved in the budget but if the implementing ministries do not bring on board the sessional committees during implementation then we miss out on our oversight functions to make sure that the sessional committees - and here we are saying Public Service and Local Government should be able to do their work.

In conclusion, the committee has noted that Government needs to put more efforts into facilitating the development of agriculture services infrastructure by developing and promoting transport services that will support increased agricultural production and promote trade and increase investment in all farm water development; empower communities to participate in planning, demand for better services; and manage sustainable community investment, and promote farming as a business.

Furthermore, there is evidence of households being able to slowly transform from purely subsistence producers to market oriented farmers as a result of mentoring and support with some agricultural input.

The newly rehabilitated roads are already making visible changes in livelihoods of locals through opening up previously inaccessible areas thereby easing access to health units, schools, markets and other centres.

In addition, acquisition of this supplementary loan financing will ensure that the concerns that arose from realigning of the programme to suit the current needs and the demands by the stakeholder beneficiaries are addressed.

Madam Speaker and Members, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow top-up of US $18 million from the International Fund for Agriculture Development as supplementary funding to support the implementation of this livelihood support programme.

I must also add that the issue we thought is not of our committee’s mandate is that there was an attempt to say that how much of Local Government is this loan and how much of Agriculture is this? I thought this is a policy issue - the sessional committees can handle the line ministries so that we avoid hegemony about who should be controlling what, like the one of CAIIP which is coming, which has some cooling facilities and some markets but I think that could be realigned at that level. But the ministries have to work together with the experts of the other ministries to make sure that the project is well done.

With that, Madam Speaker, I beg that the Members do adopt the report. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, did you say you also wanted to present the CAAIP as well? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The copy of the report I have does not have any signatures, not even of the chairman, on the report that he has just presented. 

MR MUKITALE: I realise that we have these copies may be they are in the printery. I have my file copy of all the signatures that I can lay on the Table and request that the reports of CAIIP be given to Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there anything else as we wait for CAIIP?

MR MUKITALE: I now want to present another top up. The problem is where a district has got more than two sub-counties and wanted to roll out to more sub-counties. That is why we are moving from CAIIP I to CAIIP II. We have tried to show the CAIIP I beneficiary districts on page 2.

The components of CAIIP include rural infrastructure improvement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the report is not here yet. 

MR BIRAHWA MUKITALE: The Leader of the Opposition should be given a copy, the only Leader of the Opposition on the front bench and my neighbour from West Nile. I was saying that on page 2, we took trouble to request that we are given a map indicating the beneficiaries of CAIIP I and II, which had been approved by this Parliament.

On page 3, component one is rural infrastructure improvement, it has details of outputs like improvement of 1600 kilometres of community access roads in 26 districts, rehabilitation of additional 1602 kilometres of community access roads in 26 districts, procurement of contractors for rehabilitation of 582.5 kilometres, construction of 77 rural markets in 77 sub-counties so the project has clear outputs.

The procurement and commissioning of 39 maize mills in 19 districts, 33 rice hullers in 11 districts, 14 coffee hullers in 9 districts and 37 milk coolers in 14 districts is ongoing.

The procurement process of extending the national grid to 34 rural markets is ongoing. This is to power the agro processing equipment.

The second component is community mobilisation; the third component is programme facilitation. You will see the loan disbursement chart below on page 5. We have a table of community infrastructure programme project on page 6. We have the proposed supplementary funding for CAIIP on page 7, thus justifying the top up. US $17 million is required by the project to be able to achieve its original target of 468 kilometres.

The committee observes that there is a visible impact in benefiting districts, and roads have opened up previously inaccessible rural markets. 

The committee also observed that the continued depreciation of the Uganda shilling against the US dollar increased the cost of construction. There was some volatility in the exchange rate during the implementation period. You remember moving from Shs 1,700 to 2,000 per dollar. That volatility affected the implementation. 

The committee further observes the need for the local governments to plan and provide funds for continued maintenance of facilities as we did mention because these sub-counties are opening these roads for the first time and they need to build capacity for maintenance, lest we lose the roads.

The ministry recommends that the Ministry of Local Government ensures that Local Governments provide adequate funds for maintenance under the annual budget in order to be able to maintain the infrastructure and facilities under this project. 

The committee further observed that the financial and contract management capacity of some of the contractors was very low.

The committee recommends that ministries of local government and that of works should scale up the building of capacity at local levels.
 
The committee also observed that there was low absorption of funds by procurement delays especially for agricultural inputs.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should strive to ensure that the beneficiary districts should plan for procurement early in the financial year to avoid unnecessary delays and improve absorption of funds. Training of procurement staff at district level should be scaled up.

There is need to harmonise with related ministries like that of energy for rural electrification and that of agriculture where they are putting in value addition agro processing facilities like coolers.

With that, the committee realises that CAIAP is a critical strategic investment intervention in enhancing farmers’ access to markets, attracting competitive prices and increased income through improvement in rural infrastructure development and management. CAIIP contributes to the fight against poverty and uplifting the standard of living of the people.

What we got while scrutinising CAIIP II and this top up is that Members from districts that have not yet benefited would wish for it to go to them. It is a very popular programme; we need to see how we could reach as many more sub-counties in all the districts of the country.

With that, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow US $17 million top-up from the International Fund for Agriculture Development to support the on-going activities under CAIIP. I beg to move.

4.35
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for both reports because they are related. But my concern is that our minister should be keener; much as we are trying to cater for these roads, we should think of looking at the water transport as well. The moment you have a road in an area, you must also look at the areas that are using water transport. 

We cannot talk of getting big and expensive ferries; we can think of medium-sized ferries that can enable areas near the water to access transport. 

Local governments should also liaise with the Ministry of Works. The Road Fund has been sending money to sub-counties, with each sub-county all over the country having between Shs 8 million to Shs 15 million for community access roads but they do not have equipment. But only these ones are going to be given money will be given to contractors. We would want to see that the Government should be able to see that if some roads are being done by CAIIP in a certain area, the Road Fund should divert the money to other areas that were not covered. At the end of the day, we do not rely on the loan to cater for other areas because we might find that we are sending money to the same areas and it cannot be used.

The committee also mentioned about the procurement: Our people are taking a very long time to plan. They wait until the money has come and by the time they go into the procurement process, it is too late and it is the end of the financial year. So, we would wish that the beneficiaries should prepare early enough so that they know that the road from A to B is supposed to be done.

It is then tendered out and people bid, waiting for the money to come and immediately it comes, work starts. But the Ministry of Works waits until the money has been approved in Parliament to start the process. Eventually, they will not be able to complete the work. By the time the financial year ends, they are almost half way to procure a contractor.

Another point which should be taken seriously is the way we are making roads without leaving room for maintenance. We open roads but relegate maintenance to the back seat. So, what we want to see is that if we are putting an investment in a particular place, we must ensure that it is protected; we must maintain our roads. The road gangs should be encouraged so that we always have people who are always on the roads so that the roads remain motorable. Since we cannot afford to have tarmac roads all over the country, this is a good project.

So, the beneficiaries should be able to utilise this particular opportunity and get the roads done so that our market services can be improved. I thank you.

4.38
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. I would like to say that this CAIIP project – in the report on page 4 – it has been shown that about 1,600 kilometres were opened. But my concern is that Government should come up with a programme because when you talk of 26 districts benefitting – a very good example is the old Mukono whereby four sub-counties were chosen out of 28 sub-counties and five town councils. So, in my constituency, Buvuma, which is now a district, it is only one sub-county that benefited. People are asking, “Hon. Nsubuga, how can you bring a good project and put it in one sub-county?” And I have no answer. 

Whereas we acknowledge that these are good projects, Government should come up with a plan which says that in year one, we are covering this sub-county – because so far 76 sub-counties have been covered out of 1,400. We need a programme, even if it is ten years such that sub-county X which has not benefited will be rest assured that in future, it will also benefit. But all in all, these are very good projects. In my constituency, they opened up roads where there have never been any roads. This has resulted in the improvement of household incomes because people can now take their produce to markets.

On page 5 in the project, there was civil works maintenance but when it came to actual maintenance, the disbursement was zero. What annoys me is that after opening and getting a very good road, within a year of rain, the grass overgrows and the road becomes bushy. Eventually, some of the bends become black spots due to poor visibility. There is need for the maintenance of these roads because the sub-counties cannot maintain them as a result of poor capacity. In fact, even some of these new districts do not have road units. For example, Buvuma district was promised a road unit but when will it come? The grass will not wait for it to arrive. So, I want to urge the minister to ensure that the Ministry of Works and eventually UNRA will take up these roads since rehabilitating a road is very expensive. Moreover, these are loans which we shall pay for forty years. But if we are going to be repairing roads after every two years, that will be very dangerous.

Madam Speaker, there is also the issue of building markets. I would have loved the ministry to liaise with the local governments to ensure that after completion we do not have management problems. This is because land was given free to the project for construction. But when the market is handed over to the local government, there is need to come up with a procedure on how the market will be run to avoid politicising it. When we talk about “community” who will repair the project if there is any defect after the handover? We do not want this infrastructure to get spoiled within just two years. I think the ministry should come up with the mechanism so that after completing these projects there is a clear way they will be run. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know this programme is so good that I was caught up in crossfire when three of my sub-counties wanted to be considered at the same time. So, you can imagine all of them looking at me to make sure that they get the programme.

4.43
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the ministers. I rise to support the motion. I just have a few comments to make: I always read through the documents regarding loans but I think there is a problem with the write-up of most of these loan requests. I do not know to what extent the ministers actually provide the political supervision in terms of ensuring that the loan documents, which are written by the technocrats answer what we would want our people to receive in terms of services. More often than not you find the components which are put in these loan requests are probably not those which we feel will answer what we need. For instance, when you look at the CAIIP top-up request; you look at the major component on rural infrastructure improvement, which is okay; then community mobilisation in programme facilitation. When you read what is contained in programme facilitation and mobilisation, you find these are software activities, which probably will not result into the impact, which you would want to see. 

My question and call is that the ministers, as political heads of our departments, should always ensure that when these loan requests are written, you provide guidance to ensure that there are tangibles, which will translate into meaningful interventions. That is why at the end of the day, in some of the projects that we always approve, you can’t find the impact visible or palpable.

Talking about that, these two loan requests have a lot to do with roads. I don’t see the Minister for Works here but this Parliament has always raised a question of the performance of the Ministry of Works in terms of maintaining our roads. I think last time the minister pledged to give us an update on the roads, which the central government took from our districts and I don’t recall him giving us an update and the situation in most of our areas is quite pathetic. Therefore, we want to urge the minister to take the issue of road maintenance and sustainability of some of these interventions very seriously. 

For instance in Kanungu, we had the AMP programme and some of these initiatives are successor projects to that. The AMP programme opened some roads but right now they are impassable meaning that as these projects are designed, the issue of sustainability and maintenance of some of these roads is not captured. These are crucial elements, which must be reflected in some of these documents otherwise there is no point in opening up roads and you don’t provide for maintenance and eventual sustainability.

The other comment I just wanted to get from Government is on the issue of borrowing for a project that is implemented in very few districts. Right now we have 112 districts. When you look at DLST programme, I think it is in about 13 districts. What is the direction of Government in terms of funding given the many districts? At one point, Government was pushing for what we call SWAPS, the Sector Wise Approaches. 

The intention was that the partners who support Government would be bringing resources and at some point Government would have the capacity to have all the resources in a central basket and then it would look at priorities and fund the country depending on where the challenges are. But when we look at the way we are now borrowing, it seems we are still stuck in the project mode where you borrow to finance four districts or two districts and this will continue raising the question, why? Why Western Uganda? Why Northern Uganda? Why these districts and not the others?

So I would like to ask Government, what is the direction? Eventually would you want to continue with these projects in two or four districts? Will you ever get impact when we talk of 112 districts in Uganda? Why wouldn’t we reach a point where the money from our donors comes together? If it is the issue of roads then there is equitable distribution of resources to cover the entire country. If it is rehabilitation of health services then you look at the entire country but just borrowing or designing projects for two districts or four - I think at the end of the day it will be difficult to realise the national impact in most of these areas.

With those few comments, I support the motion but Government should take note of some of those observations. Thank you.

4.48
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua):  Madam Speaker, for this afternoon’s sitting, I am the Leader of the Opposition and therefore I would like to speak like one. This afternoon alone, we have passed four loans in quick succession. These loans are going to be paid by all of us whether you are seated this side or the other side. 

The presidential candidate for the ruling party is out there promising everything to the country. Citizens obviously are excited but one thing they are not being told is that we are borrowing to deliver the services, which we are promising and you will be responsible to pay for this. This is the information, which is lacking. 

As Leader of the Opposition in this House -(Laughter)- I would like to inform my fellow country men that all promises being made by the sitting Government are going to be paid by you in due course and that is what we are doing today. We are borrowing on your behalf and so everybody should take credit for what is being promised and not one side of this House. I thought I should put this in perspective, I thank you.

4.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I was just looking at both reports; the DLSSP programme loan and then the CAIIP. Why did the committee decide to just have a map so we have to look through instead of listing the beneficiary districts? It would have been easier if you had just put the list of the districts. This will ease the follow up by Members. 

When I look at the CAIIP programme on your page 2, 2.4 (v), you have given half details saying the procurement, installation and commissioning of six maize mills in 19 districts. I wish you had named these 19 districts. Regarding the 33 rice hullers, I wish you had named the 11 districts such that when I get back to the constituency, I am able to follow them up. But the way you have left it here, I can’t know whether it is Isingiro or Serere -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Okupa for giving way. This is very important. When you look at the districts and one sub county chosen in each, it doesn’t make any sense. I think the ministry has the chance to rearrange this. We would rather have all these in one particular region so that it is spread fairly in that region. We can then deprive that region of the Road Fund money and it goes to another region rather than picking one sub-county in Oyam and another in Kamwenge. It doesn’t really make sense. We would rather go into an area, do it perfectly and know we have covered it that is if it is possible within the ministry. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I thought this is an ongoing programme.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, there is an ongoing programme but there is a new one CAIIP II, which is taking on new districts. That is why my mother district, Soroti District came in. It is a beneficiary of CAIIP II.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the new one of Serere doesn’t?

MR OKUPA: We are only advantaged in that they took care of the new Serere District. In Kasilo County, two sub counties are beneficiaries in terms of infrastructure. The roads, Pingire is going to get 45 kilometres and Bugondo also has 45 kilometres of community roads. Bugondo sub-county also has the markets. I have been interested in this and that is why I was able to get the details of the beneficiaries in Kasilo County under the Soroti District. I feel this is the type of information other Members should have presented here such that they are able to follow it up and monitor the implementation. That is what I felt should have been included in here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much honourable colleagues for those issues. One is that both projects are on-going but when it came to the procurement stage, they realised there was a shortage and that is why both loans have a small top up; the DLSP is 18 and CAIIP is 17 so basically they are top ups.

We also gave you copies of the brief to Parliament and it starts by mentioning - like the page 1 of DLSP starts by mentioning that DLSP which covers districts of Apac, Bugiri, Bundibugyo, Buliisa, Busia, Kyenjonjo, Kamwenge, Luweero and Masindi. So, the districts are mentioned and then in the project document, the details are given but it is important that is done.

The other point I wanted to make is CAIIP I is already completed and CAIIP II is the one which is seeking this top up but they have been at procurement and that is the one you say, it will even go to some of the new districts.

But while inquiring as the hon. Byanyima has said, why these two: because the challenge we had is that those without any sub-county in the district are yearning for the project but even those with eight sub-counties but in two counties are also complaining. So, it is out of this demand that the Ministry of Local Government has found itself going to other places and actually, what we expect the Ministry of Finance to bring soon - what they undertook is the CAIIP III which addresses most districts. We pray that CAIIP will actually address both the concern of hon. Byanyima -

MR OKUPA: I was saying if you like have under Soroti - you would give those sub-counties and what are they going to do in those areas such that we are able to monitor. I know you have this information in your office that is why I was able to get the information I have. I do not know why you were not able to give us the details here such that hon. Byandala can go to Luweero and say, “This money came under this project, how far have you gone with it?” That is the information I was thought you should have had here rather than just summarising the way you have done here. If it is about maize mills and about the markets, which sub-county was supposed to benefit? That is the type of information I wanted, which you have and should have given to the Members but you can still provide that to Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe chairman, when you are coming with CAIIP III, perhaps you need to give a report first of CAIIP I and CAIIP II and then justify CAIIP III and include all those details. Yes, Minister of Finance.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank colleagues for supporting a noble cause. 

Hon. Byanyima urged us to think about water transport and I know that there are other programmes which take care of water transport. I know water transport is very expensive but I know that there are some ferries which have been procured. What we can do is to inform the Ministry of Works and Transport to make sure that they put in more money to take care of that.

Secondly, hon. Byanyima was also advising us that the local governments should liaise with Ministry of Works in terms of making sure that the sub-counties that are receiving money without machines to work on the roads are given equipment to work on these roads in the sub-counties.

I have hope that if we go by what we have planned  in our budget namely that each district is going to have a road construction unit, these sub-counties will be in a position to maintain these roads because they will not be hiring the machines.

The issue of maintenance as mentioned by colleagues; hon. William Nsubuga, hon. Baryomunsi and hon. Byanyima, I have taken note and I think it is a noble cause that we do not waste money by opening roads which we cannot maintain.

On the issue of people taking long to plan as it has been raised by hon. Byanyima, I wish to inform this House that the Ministry of Finance has very stringent guidelines whereby we do not release money to any ministry without plans. We sit with the money until the ministry produces the implementation plans then we release it. So, we need to urge ministries to make sure that those plans are available otherwise the Ministry of Finance will not release the money without implementation plans.

Hon. William Nsubuga is concerned about the small coverage because almost every village and sub-county is yearning for this project but there are other programmes, which are being implemented in some areas. Maybe we need to find out all these programmes, which are happening in different parts of the country because when we negotiate this project, there are considerations, which the ministry takes and if we are to go by the status of the district, districts are not at the same poverty level and coverage of road network, water and other areas. That is why we sit and say, “Let the district decide so that they can catch up with the rest”.

And about the small number of districts - before I go to that, hon. Nsubuga also raised the issue of markets that why is it that the Ministry of Local Government is the one building the markets? These markets are managed by local governments and they are sources of income and we thought that the Ministry of Local Government will be the one to construct the markets. But when I appeared before the committee, there was concern which was raised that we need to do more harmonisation between the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Works and Ministry of Local Government.

There is some infrastructure which you may call infrastructure belonging to the Ministry of Local Government yet these are agricultural in nature. A feeder road, which benefits the farmers in that area, can be a road for the Ministry of Works or Ministry of Agriculture because that road is an agricultural infrastructure because it is assisting farmers when they are marketing their produce.

About whether politicians in the ministry help these technical people when they are negotiating these loans to make sure that the loans are answering our needs on the ground; we have three checks. We begin with the Cabinet. The ministry presents to Cabinet then Cabinet authorises the Minister of Finance to go ahead. After that, we table to this august Parliament through the committee. The committee goes through the loan request and from there we come to plenary.

All those are checks and I believe that where we find that the loan is not answering the need on the ground, then we do the needful. I do not know whether we have any other checks but I just want to pledge to my honourable colleagues that, yes, we follow programmes, we follow the National Development Plan and we do not want to borrow money which Ugandans are going to pay yet this money is not benefiting the people.

Borrowing for the project implemented in very few districts, I hinted on this. You know some of these projects started eight years ago; we may find out that the number of districts was different from what it is now. We are talking about 120 but eight years backwards, we were not having 112 districts. So, districts will continue growing maybe to the extent of having a sub-county –(Interjections)- no, we are now beyond a county –(Laugher)- some counties have been divided into districts. So we cannot use the number of districts in some of these projects when we are programming because the number of districts changes any time. 

Again, the Leader of the Opposition is cautioning us that we are borrowing and it is Ugandans who are going to pay. I just want to ally his fears that Uganda was rated B+ due to our macro economic polices, our economy is growing and we are credit worthy. We are always rated and when we reach a point of not absorbing or not being in a position where this country will not be able to pay back, we shall not borrow. I am telling you that we are doing well and we are about to even move out of that category that benefits from debt relief. 

Very soon you will see us tabling loans here with terms which are not concessional terms like now. We are now given concessional terms because we still need it but as we are moving, I want to tell you honourable colleagues that we are doing well but it comes with a disadvantage of not benefiting from that bracket. So, the Leader of the Opposition, help me assure Ugandans that our economy is doing well and that we are credit worthy and we are managing our debt burden.

Hon. Okupa has raised a very important point of informing this august House the detail the sub-counties that have benefited from this programme, and I think we shall work with the Ministry of Local Government which is the implementing ministry so that they submit these details to the committee so that the committee informs this august House. I want to thank the House for supporting me and also thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I thank you very much. Hon. Members - Minister just for the record, the issue of water transport, for those hon. Members who represent people who have rivers, lakes and so forth that is their road. The water is the road. So, attention should really be put on water transport.

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion that this House approves the government request to borrow US $18 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) as supplementary financing to support the implementation of the District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP).

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow US $17 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) as supplementary financing for on-going activities under the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP).

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION FOR PARLAIMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $26.8 MILLION FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF SOUTH KOREA (EDCF) TO SUPPORT FIVE BUSINESS, TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (BTVET) AS COMPLEMENTARY FINANCING FOR ADB EDUCATION IV-POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING EXPANSION AND IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister of Finance.

5.08
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I would like to present a request for Government to borrow the equivalent in Korean Won US $26.8 million from the Export-Import Bank of South Korea (EDCF) to support five Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutions (BTVET) as complementary financing for Education IV-Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded by the Minister of Education and the Minister of Agriculture.

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes. We followed the correct procedure. My ministry prepared a brief, which was presented to the committee, and in the project I only have one thing to mention that this is also in line with our National Development Plan where we mentioned key strategic areas for support and education is one of those key sectors mentioned in the development plan for support.

So, this loan will go a long way in helping this Government to implement our National Development Plan. So, I want to request that the chairperson of the committee informs this august House of what they decided when we presented our brief to the committee. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair of the committee.

5.11
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I thank you. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow the equivalent in Korean Won of US $26.8 million from the Export-Import Bank of South Korea (EDCF) to support five Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutions (BTVET) as complementary financing for Education IV - Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project. 

This report of the committee – we went to the field. I personally went up to Kanungu and Mubende areas but unfortunately the hon. Member of Parliament was away but he sent his apologies. Good enough, we also attended hon. Amama Mbabazi’s mother’s burial while on that trip.  

Brief Background

The introduction of the Universal Education in 1997 has since resulted into increased enrolment in primary schools while demands for post-primary education of the graduates from primary schools increased; only few of them are currently given the opportunity of post-primary education due insufficient number of educational facilities for post-primary schools.

Still on page 2, education in Uganda was formally oriented towards white collar jobs. The Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET) on the other hand was limited and designed to produce manual workers who were predominantly drawn from the under privileged section of society and hence the stagnation of the technical, vocational education training. 

The evidence that Technical, Vocational Education and Training is critical for economic development and poverty eradication is less well publicised. However, as evidence that those with technical education and training in general increase their chances of both formal and informal sector employment if publicised Technical, Vocational Education and Training skills are in demand valued by the population and are capable of contributing to income generation. 

For gradual poverty eradication, the Government is making the best efforts to deliver high lever education and suitable skills that will increase production in the nation and community by creating the job opportunities and increasing the productivity. 

So now I shall proceed given that this project is very popular. As I have mentioned above, five technical schools are going to be considered: Iganga Technical Institute located in Iganga, East-Central region; Arua Technical Institute in Arua, West Nile; Kiryandongo Technical Institute in Masindi, Western region; Mubende Technical Institute in Mubende, that is Central region; and Nyakatare Technical Institute, which I went to, in Kanungu.  

Components of the Project

1. 	Intensification of capabilities of technical institutes through facilities’ improvement and expansion, that is, the hardware. All the technical institutes shall be given implements.  

2. 	Improvement of school management and teaching quality including software aspects.
 
3. 	Project management: the consulting services to support the project executing agencies provided to ensure efficient management and successful achievement of this project. 

Project Scope

i. 	Construction and rehabilitation of the five technical institutes that I have mentioned.

ii. 	Supply of necessary equipment, experts dispatched and overseas training of the people involved.

iii. 	Review and improvement of the curriculum, development of job sheets and supply of textbooks, which is very relevant; 

iv. 	Provision of consulting services for construction and operation are also in the summary below.    

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that the technical institutes under this project were in poor environments with obsolete buildings. The institutes had only a few facilities for only lessons purposes while others were useless and lacked ICT related equipment. 

The committee further observed that due to the obsolete facilities in these institutes and lack of equipment, students from these institutes graduate without sufficient skills and hence contribute negatively towards Uganda’s industrial development. 

The committee also noted that the teachers in these institutes were not equipped with capabilities and abilities necessary to provide technical education that meets international standards, despite the fact that the training quality depends on the capabilities of a teacher. 

The committee noted that issues of land ownership by the beneficiary institutions had not yet been finalised by four out of five beneficiary institutes - Iganga, Kiryandongo, Arua and Nyakatare. That means that they did not have the land titles of those institutes but I think that most of them were being processed. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should liaise with the leadership of the affected districts to expeditiously resolve this matter to ensure that the affected institutes have land titles in order to avoid delays when the project commences. 

Furthermore, sensitisation should be carried out to enlighten both the district leaders and the local populace on the importance of these institutions in order to get community support. 

The committee noted that the financial impact of the project on the beneficiary institutions will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for the maintenance of renovated facilities and repairs and replacement of equipment. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that the recurrent costs do not only benefit the BTVET projects but even the other projects.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should additionally encourage BTVET institutions to engage in income generation activities for financial reliance in order to supplement the meagre operations and maintenance funds that have been availed to them from the national budget. We found out that most of these institutions have too much land which is unutilised. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee noted the challenges that Government is facing in meeting the growing demands for educated and skilled manpower as well as equity to quality education to meet the dual goal of sustainable economic growth and poverty eradication. 

The committee further noted efforts that Government is undertaking to revitalise the business, technical, vocation education and training to provide demand driven skills through mobilising resources for the purpose of supporting the BTVET programmes in the country with the ultimate aim of increasing the supply of skilled manpower to the economy. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee supports and recommends this House to approve the Government’s request to borrow the equivalent of Korean Won of up to US $26.8 million from the Import Export Bank of South Korea to support five BTVET institutes as complimentary financing for ADB Education IV Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report has been dully signed; you are free to debate it. 

5.21
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of the committee for a good report. I rise to support the motion as this loan request addresses a very clear and necessary area of development, that is, the BTVET, which is definitely a priority to this country. So, I would like to thank the Ministry of Education and Government for looking into this area.  

I just want to plead, however, with Government that we need more investment in this area. As you know, a huge segment of our population is young. We must invest in these young people in order to give them skills. The easiest way to know that our biggest population are the young people is to just look at the presidential candidates. All of them are dancing before their audiences or rapping before them because they want to appeal to the young people. Therefore, a request like this one, which aims at building the skills of the young people, requires support. 

I only want to request Government and the Minister of Education to look for more resources to rehabilitate other existing BTVET institutions and also construct more institutions in various communities which we represent, given that not all the young people continue with formal secondary education. We need to see that we strengthen this sector and attract many young people into BTVET training.   

My second and last comment is on observation No. 4, which the committee raises on the issue of land ownership. I think a number of cases among these institutions, like the one in Kanungu, are church based. Nyakatare Technical Institute is a church founded institute. I have talked to the leadership of the church and it seems there is an unresolved issue with the Ministry of Education on these church founded institutions, which were taken over by Government. Where does the church start and stop and where does Government start and stop? I just wanted to get a comment from the Minister of Education on what your policy is in terms of exercising oversight in terms of controlling these institutions when they are traditionally church founded and then they are taken over by Government. I think that is the problem with some of these institutions. 

On the issue of land, for example, you find the church does not want to surrender the land to Government and yet Government is putting heavy investments in these institutes to help the people. So I would like to know what Government is doing to ensure that there is harmony because we would not want that kind of misunderstanding to delay the commencement of this important project in our communities. Otherwise, I thank the committee and I support this motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Muwuma comes in, I have a general question, hon. Minister of Finance, concerning land. In Buyende we had a long delay to get a cattle market because the local government could not afford to pay for the land. Even now, there is a delay for the market in Ibyaya and Irundu for the same reason. If you are putting so much money in the community, why can’t the loan have a component for the local government to pay for the land? They really get frustrated raising money to pay for the land so that Government can put a project there. I think you need to look at that. Think about it because it really bothers me whenever I go to the village. 

5.25
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I want to support this motion. I have a very big stake in this loan request; in fact I should declare that there is some bit of conflict of interest because I am a beneficiary. 

As the committee has reported, the facilities on the ground are really wanting. If this loan is approved, it will give a very big boost to the institutes that have been taken care of. Iganga Technical Institute has got very dilapidated structures. Some of them were put up by students who were just doing their practicals. Imagine a structure put up by students doing their practice and you take that for a classroom! So, quality is still lacking and when Government comes up to boost them directly, it will be of great impact.

The other issue worth mentioning is that parents have been paying exorbitantly for the students in these institutes to try to develop the infrastructure themselves. They have been charging them to the tune of Shs 100,000, Shs 200,000 as development fees. So when Government comes up to construct some structures, we feel this is great support and I pray that we support this loan request wholeheartedly. 

Madam Speaker, we have nothing much to argue about this loan. I just request honourable members to pass it wholesomely. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.27
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion and I thank Government for going in this direction - training our people in vocational and technical education. 

I hope Government will not move in the direction of turning this into something else at other levels. When we consider those who were offering diplomas, they have been turned into universities and that is very dangerous. That is why buildings are collapsing in Kampala because that level of technical people is no longer being produced. 

As an engineer, I need ten of those behind me. I cannot be the one attaching bricks together; that is not my work. My work is to advise and tell them what to do. The issue of the ministry turning technical schools into universities is very bad; it must stop and they must provide more. Even the ones from Primary 7 should be left at that level. In my district, I have a few church based institutions but those kids from P.7 who go through those institutions progress faster than the others. 

From what Dr Baryomunsi said, this issue of church land must be solved. We should not invest money in structures were land issues are not solved. Even in USE, Government has lost schools; they invested in structures for schools and then the owners came and took them over. So we should only go into partnership and take over paying their salaries, for example, so that they can take care of the technical education because it is very important. 

With those few words, Madam Speaker, I support this motion and it is overdue. However, I should also say that maybe the next loan request should consider Luweero because we are badly off. 

5.29
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I want to take off from where hon. Byandala has left. This is a very important loan, which needs to be supported. 

I have one observation, on selfish grounds, which I need the Minister of Education to answer before I give endorsement to this loan. What programme do you have for my region? When I look here, I do not see Bukedi, Teso, Karamoja, Lango and Acholi. Why were these areas left out? Do you have a programme for them or it has already been taken care of? This is a good programme that we cannot afford to miss. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.31
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is exactly my concern. We have the East, Central and Central, Western and South West and West Nile. There is a huge chunk of Uganda which does not fall within those geographical locations. I think our people also should benefit from such facilities. 

Further to that, I was wondering whether the ministry is aware that Kyankwanzi was set up with a component which was supposed to deal with these matters, apart from the political component which to me in some way has misguided some of our young people. The original objective of the Kyankwanzi facility had a component on vocational training and also training in agriculture. Kyankwanzi was the first of four regional centres intended to build the capacity of the young people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would like to say a few issues regarding the locations. It is said that the five institutions will share facilities. I would like to know from the ministry how these facilities will be shared taking into account the fact that Nyakatare is so far away from Mubende and Kiryandongo. I wonder which facilities are going to be shared among these institutions.

Secondly, we used to have vocational training in Lugogo, where ministry people would get training and then they would go there for upgrading to master craftsmanship and so on. I wonder whether this is still in BTVET.

Another issue is about Katwe. We have got so many craftsmen in Katwe; is there any provision for these people to make them specifically trained? Yes, they train on their own, but now Government must come in to uplift them. They already started and they only need to be uplifted. Thank you.

5.34
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion but when I looked at the distribution of resources, I was wondering why the Shs 1 billion is not allocated to textbooks but to contingencies. The allocation of textbooks is very low yet contingency is so high. To me the priority would be textbooks not contingency. That is an observation about the loan.

Many people have complained about the geographical location of these services; I think every Ugandan needs to have these services. We need to distribute them fairly. Why should the North be left out completely? Why should the eastern region be out? Remember I am a national Youth Member of Parliament and I know that there are so many young people in the northern region who would want skills and there are so many technical schools there. 

The report has emphasised the issue of ICT-related services. I am not sure how they are going to differentiate between the services of this loan and the services being given by the Government of Uganda under the NBI Project. Uganda is already implementing IT in form of the broadband network, which is providing most of the services we need in institutions, hospitals, schools etc. There is duplication in most of the ministries. When ICT is doing a particular project, the other ministry, which is doing a service related to an IT service, duplicates and sometimes accounts for the money which they have not really spent on a service but ICT has already done it. We need to know the services they are procuring here under this BTVET Project which we are not doing in the ICT Ministry. 

I am okay with the loan because I need the institutions to get the services, but you must be very specific and clear on what services you are giving as a ministry so that we do not duplicate and waste resources. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.36
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I want to thank the minister for thinking it wise that these vocational institutes need to be rehabilitated. On page 8, I want to agree with the committee that the selected technical institutes should become solid-based institutes in which training of the technical personnel should work. 

However, I want to be guided with reference to Kiryandongo Technical School. Some of these technical schools have been limited to certain specific courses, like Kiryandongo Technical School has been offering carpentry, brick-laying, tailoring and electrical installation. I wanted to find out whether the minister has thought it wise that after the rehabilitation, since these technical institutes are going to become the basis for training the technical personnel, they are going to open up even for other courses which might be on market. 

As we speak now, there are courses like plumbing, ICT, oil refinery, metal fabrication that are on market; also look at what is being innovated at Uganda Industrial Research Institute at Jinja Road. When I visited the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, I was so impressed by their innovations because they concur with the demands on the market, for example making toothpicks. You know, we have been importing some of those things from China and yet we have bamboo. We can grow bamboo. Mbale has got a lot of bamboo, Kisoro and Bundibugyo have got bamboo but we have not been adding value to our local raw materials. I want to find out whether the minister has thought about that as we are going to rehabilitate these vocational institutes. I thought these are some of the issues we can look at.

Also, as we rehabilitate these few vocational training institutes, there are other vocational schools, which the ministry has just taken on like Kiyema Vocational School. This school, which is based in Masindi, was built by BAT as its corporate social responsibility. Now the ministry has taken it up and it is going to offer diploma courses. I want to urge the ministry that since our focus is on imparting life skills to young people and creating jobs for those people, they should take keen interest in facilitating these schools and funding them; otherwise, they will be redundant and yet we have so many young people out there who could have benefited from these services.

Lastly, I want to correct the chairperson; Kiryandongo Technical School is now in Kiryandongo District and not Masindi District. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. 

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank all my colleagues for the support they have given to us. This is not the first loan request. We have come here with different loan requests, which you have approved. This is the third one. 

I will start with hon. Baryomunsi who said there is need for more investment in BTVET. We are already doing this. The other time we had the Saudi loan under which we had five institutions, which are going to be constructed, that is, in Adjumani, Bukedea, Kiboga, Lyantonde and Kyenjonjo.

South Korea also has five, which we are just considering. Time allowing, we shall come with another one next week if the committee is ready and that is under OPEC. This OPEC request now answers my brother, hon. Okupa, who said, “what about the Teso region?” Under this one, we shall have Lango –(Interjection)- I am answering you. You are also on this one, hon. Akena.

Under the other one, we are going to construct nine institutions in the following districts: Namutumba, Nakasongola, Yumbe, Hoima, Masaka, Mukono, Amuria, Kamuli and Pader -(Interjections)- Now for your case, hon. Akena, you are a giant among the giants. You have our Uganda Technical College Lira, which is being rehabilitated now. You should really thank everybody, every Member of Parliament here, because on yours even as I talk now rehabilitation is going on. So, you have the biggest, a college - this is an institution just at a different level. Kasilo -(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. We are passing a loan request for rehabilitating and equipping the new technical schools. In Koboko, we have a private technical school with the structures, the teachers, the equipment, everything, but up to now you have refused to take it over; just a gift. Why is it taking long to take Koboko Technical School as government-aided? Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: The minister should help us. What we have agreed with the Minister of Education as a committee is that as you have been getting big money for UPPET, US $300 million, we have one hundred and something districts; we want to see that policy direction, which gives that big money. We appreciate the piecemeal but that is why you are getting complaints. I thought we had agreed that the next time you are going to get big money – because when we analysed the drop-out rate of our children, those who reach university and those who are dropping out at O’ Level and after USE, we really need a lot in that and I thought the Minister should concede to Members that more money should be found for more BTVET, business colleges and not just the four, six or three because this cannot address the national –

MR BYANDALA: Information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are you informing?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, hon. Mukitale is making a bad statement. This is not for drop outs and that is why this thing is having a problem here. This is essential and don’t label it for drop outs, please. 

MR MUKITALE: I am saying that our education system has high enrolment at UPE but low completion rates; that is a fact! Even USE has slightly better completion rates than UPE. The challenge is that we have few Ugandans going to university and the education system should target these very useful citizens. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the information they have given. First of all, the five we are talking about now are among the 34 institutions, which we already have. 

You remember, Members raised the issue of land with churches but there are other five, the first ones, which we first mentioned, the land has no problem. I think hon. Nankabirwa is a beneficiary. The local leaders there had to provide land. Because they are in bad state, these five were chosen to begin with but we as Government have a programme to put an institution of this nature in every district. So, Members bear with us –(Interruption) 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, let the minister be fair to us. Recently, we saw one constituency with three institutions next to each other in Bushenyi. And there are some districts that do not have any. So when you talk of districts, do not tell us lies here. I have to be honest! Honourable minister, we have 112 districts and you have one constituency in Bushenyi, Igara East, with three colleges. Let’s spread things fairly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe to add to what hon. Byanyima said, when I was still in Cabinet we had a big battle over closure of PTCs. Some of our districts had our institutions extinguished, like Kamuli. There is nothing there; they were extinguished. So we want our things back. 

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I want my colleague to get me clearly. He is talking about the three technical colleges or institutions in Bushenyi. Those have been there but I am saying that the government policy now is that we are going to put a technical institute in every district. Forget about the three in Bushenyi. I have to tell you that we have 34 under government; we have 16 community institutions; we also have 29 and some schools in some of these districts but it is the policy of Government that we have in every district a technical institution once resources permit. This is what I am saying.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification. To the best of my knowledge, at one point the policy was a BTVET institution per sub-county. Now the honourable minister is telling us that it is per district. Can we get the position of Government on the distribution of these BTVET institutions? Have we shifted from per sub-county to per district? For the record, can you tell us what the current position is exactly? 

DR BATARINGAYA: What I have to say on that dear colleague is that we have what we call technical colleagues which take the A’ Levels, for example, Kichwamba Technical College, Elgon Technical College, Lira and another in Bushenyi. And then we have the technical institutions; these take senior four leavers. And community polytechnics which you are talking about were supposed to take P.7 leavers. And that is why the policy of Government was saying that in every sub-county we would have these community polytechnics. For example in my district, Bundibugyo, we have Hakitengya Community Polytechnic; it takes those who have just finished P.7. 

Here we are talking about technical institutions which will take the senior four leavers because of the USE programme and even those who have finished P.7 we are going to change because I remember my colleagues talking about carpentry and joinery, brick laying, there is also motor vehicle mechanics but even plumbing and ICT would also be introduced in some of these institutions once they are established. And some of these institutions are already offering those courses, for example, ICT. Apart from the oil related courses – hon. Jalia Bintu talked about us offering such courses. We already have Kigumba Oil Institute so we cannot have every technical institute having a course on oil. Students are there doing certificate and diploma courses. But with ICT, plumbing and other courses, those will be offered in those technical institutions that we are talking about.   

Hon. Byandala talked about the Ministry of Education turning these institutions into universities. We are not going to do that otherwise we would have already turned Elgon Technical Institute or Kichwamba into a university. So you should not be worried about that hon. Byandala.

You said the next loan should consider Luwero, your district. I have already told you that it is our policy to provide technical institutions in every district. That we shall do as resources allow.

Hon. Okupa, I have already told you that at least Amuria is there in Teso region; Kasilo will also be there; the policy will cover you.

Hon. Akena, you are a giant. Uganda Technical College Lira is there –(Interruption)

MR AKENA: Hon. Minister, I am well aware of the Uganda Technical College and my gratefulness would actually be to those who had the foresight to set it up. I can also give thanks for finally considering it for rehabilitation but my thanks go to those who provided UTC in Lira and in other corners of Uganda. (Laughter)

DR BATARINGAYA: Thank you for the information. 

Hon. Grace Oburu talked about the vocational institute in Lugogo; that one is there and the one in Nakawa. As for the Jua kalis, we already have a programme where we have partnered with almost all these vocational training institutions. Some of the Jua kalis are there. Most of our girls who are not able to continue with their secondary education have been able to get some training. I think you even saw in the papers. In every district we had to choose one. So the Jua kalis are also covered.

Hon. Grace Oburu talked about sharing of facilities. These are public institutions therefore they can share the facilities.

Finally, the issue of church, I told you that these five we are considering today already had a foundation: Church of Uganda, Catholic and what but the other five which I mentioned like Kiboga, Lyantonde and Kyenjojo, the land was acquired by the district authorities. Those have no problems but I want to assure this august House that we shall sort out the issue of land with those religious organisations to ensure that the project is implemented. There should not be a worry. That one we shall handle it as a ministry.

I would like once again to thank my colleagues for the support they have given us and we are coming with another one. As I told you, Kamuli is there, Amuria and the rest of the districts I mentioned. (Laughter) You support and after the elections we shall come with a very big one which will cover the other districts and which you will support as Members of Parliament. So, I request you to continue supporting us so that we can turn this country of ours from a country of job seekers into a country of job creators. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay hon. Members – yes, chairman?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Maybe I should give some little information. When we went to these institutions, what we discovered was that there were low numbers of people who are attending these schools. So, it needs Government first of all to popularise it as an alternative kind of education.

Secondly, on the question of fees, we want Government to at least take it up. If somebody has not gone to USE at least you can pay for him to go to these institutions. Payments and fees was a problem.

And lastly, these institutions should be categorised as national. Somebody from Kisoro should be willing and able and free to go to one in Lira such that they are all inclusive and they are not based on boundaries. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that this House approve the request by Government to borrow the equivalent in Korean Won of up to US $26.8 million from the Export-Import Bank of South Korea (EDCF) to support five Business Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutions (BTVET) as complementary financing for Education IV -Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded by Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Finance.

MR MUKISA: This was presented here and the object is to amend the Act to provide for the retention, by the Department of Fisheries, resources or fees received from the issuance of licences and permits and other activities under the Act. Also to require the key fisheries officer to establish and maintain a register of all persons issued with licences and also to require the fish vet identification plate to be displayed on every licensed fishing vehicle and to provide for the establishment of a register of licensed fishers.

Madam Speaker, this has been presented to the committee, which has discussed it and the report is ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, Agriculture.

5.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Juliet Kabonesa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is a report for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010. It is a short report of only six pages so I beg that I go through all of it.

The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was presented to the House on 28 June 2010. Consequently, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for consideration and scrutiny. 

The committee met and had discussions with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, reviewed other related laws which include: the Fish Act, the National Agriculture Research Act, 2005 and the NAADS Act, 2001.

You can see the objectives of the Bill. I will go straight to the observations. The committee observed that:

a)	The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is in line with the intended output of the National Development Plan 2010/11 to 2014/15 under the strategy of increased agricultural production and productivity through enhanced efficiency and effective service delivery.

b)	The Department of Fisheries was collecting fees through the local governments and MAAIF realised that money collected was not benefiting the fisheries sector as it was being used to pay local government workers.

c)	The vessels involved in fisheries activities had no certificate and no number plates.

d)	During the initial registration of fishing vessels, there was misinformation and as a result a few people registered. The commissioner needs to be given authority to register other persons involved in the fisheries activities.

e)	The fees to be collected by the commissioner Fisheries or any other authorised licensing officer who would be performing a delegated duty on behalf of the accounting officer of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will be retained for purposes of defraying the expenses of the fisheries resources/activities.

f)	For the first financial year, the department expects to collect Shs 15 billion. This will be money raised form permits and fees which will be ploughed back into the sub-sector to revive good supply of fish to the local market and fish processing factories.

g)	Retention of fees received. The committee noted that retention of funds as envisaged in the Bill is governed by the following laws: 

(i) 	Article 153 of the Constitution provides for a Consolidated Fund in which shall be paid all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purposes of, or on behalf of, or in trust for the government. However, these monies do not include revenues or other monies -
(ii) That are payable by or under an Act of Parliament, into some other fund established for a specific purpose; or 
(iii) That may, under an Act of Parliament, be retained by the department of Government that receives them for the purposes of defraying the expenses of that department.

This position is further duplicated in Section 9 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. It provides that all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of the Government, not being revenues or other moneys that are payable by or under any law into some other fund established for any specific purpose or that may, under any law be retained by a department of Government that received them for the purpose of defraying the expenses of that department, shall be paid into and form part of the Consolidated Fund.

In view of the above illustrations, the Department of Fisheries can retain the funds.    

h) Accountability. The committee further noted that the chief fisheries officer who is the technical head of the fisheries sub-sector shall perform a delegated responsibility on behalf of the permanent secretary who is the mandated accounting officer of the ministry. 

Delegation of the powers and duties of the accounting officer does not affect the personal accountability of the accounting officer. Furthermore, under the Budget Act, 2001 the minister is mandated to make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds retained at the department are spent. This report must show value for money on the expenditures involved.

General Observations and Recommendations:
The committee observed that the Fish Act, Cap 197 is inadequate to cope with domestic and international changes in fisheries administration and development. The Act is neither comprehensive nor flexible enough to provide proper management and conservation of fisheries like it is done in Tanzania and Kenya. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should expedite the process of overhauling the Fish Act, Cap 197 to take care of the following:
·	Streamlining the relationship between the MAAIF, local authorities and fisheries management authorities.
·	Establishing a fisheries development fund to promote and develop the fisheries sector whose resources may consist of -
a)	any sums appropriated by Parliament;
b)	any sum or property which may in any manner become payable;
c)	any income generated by any fisheries related projects, grants and donations.

The objective of the fund should be to:
a)	Promote awareness of the importance of protection, development and sustainable use of the fisheries resources through public education and training;

b)	Promote and develop research in fisheries sector;

c)	Enable the country to benefit from international initiatives and international funds directed towards conservation and protection of biological diversity and promotion of sustainable development of fisheries resources;

d)	Assist groups of persons and individuals engaged in the promotion of restocking natural water bodies;

e)	Facilitate fisheries data collection and promoting such other activities of the same nature.

The committee, in addition to the above, recommends that the department of fisheries should be elevated to attain the status of a directorate. I beg to move.

6.07
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I support the spirit in which the Bill was brought in that it exposes certain issues that we lay people would not have known save for reading in the papers that there have been clashes between fishermen and RDCs over license permits. I think the idea of introducing number plates on fishing vessels and a register would be something that is worth supporting.

However, I have one concern. I wonder why the committee started being defensive on page 3 before anybody raised a question on the issue of finances. I appeal to this House not to accept the money raised locally to be retained by the ministry. We had problems with Posta Uganda Limited; they were raising a lot of local fees through stamps but the money was not coming to the Consolidated Fund. Parliament realised late after about five executive directors had resigned from office on their own. 

The Uganda National Bureau of Standards has been lobbying this Parliament extensively that they allow them to spend the money they raise at source. I think this one should not be accepted by this House because the sum we are talking of is Shs 15 billion for a ministry which is budgeted for by this Parliament. If it were an authority like Uganda Revenue Authority we would accept because there would be a law that regulates the system but for this Parliament to accept that this Shs 15 billion be managed at source, would not help this Country.

Since it involves getting number plates and licenses we also want them to go to Diamond Trust and pay the necessary fees so that when we come as Parliament, we can always budget for the Ministry of Fisheries the way we have been doing. We are going to create so many power centres and this Shs 15 billion is just estimation of how much can be raised.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I want to give information to hon. Otto. The issue why the committee agreed of retention is - the Shs 15 billion is an estimate - because the sector has been mismanaged. When we you look at the whole Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, you realise that fisheries is like a subsection. This Parliament has appropriated very little to the fisheries sector. When money is retained at source, it can be ploughed back to the fisheries sector. We want the fisheries department to become an authority but we cannot demand it now.

6.11 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I have some reservations. Can I be assured that there will be better performance? We passed a loan here for 29 landing sites but money was mismanaged to the extent that only nine landing sites were put in place.

With that background, it makes some of us have reservations about the management of the money to be retained. They were supposed to be three landing sites in Kasilo, three in Kamuli but only one has been built in each. The commissioner of fisheries was the one handling the loan and only used his family to do it. We have not got the accountability and no one has been sacked because of that.

The loan has only performed at about 20 percent. Where did the other money go?

MR BYANDALA: I am just seeking for information from the chairperson of this committee. This fisheries, isn’t it a decentralised function? I did not know because what I know is that local governments were collecting this money. I fear abandoning our people – Central Government, Local Government – and then it becomes like a burden.

MR ODONGA OTTO: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I would really call on the hon. Minister to shelf this Bill for a while because the prescription you are giving is not related to the problem hon. Nsubuga has just been stating. If the sector is being marginalised, we are not going to cure it in such a manner. We are not going to cure it by saying, “Okay, retain the fees collected.”

My main concern is about leaving fees with a body which is not an authority; we will be giving them a lot of powers, the same way we did with Posta Uganda Limited, and then we shall hit a snag. So, I would really appeal to the honourable members that the first objective of the Bill which reads, “To empower the department of fisheries to retain fees received from licenses and permits and other fisheries activities”, must be deleted at an appropriate time. For heaven’s sake, this cannot be the first objective of bringing a Bill and then you cover it with ebigenderako like “adding number-plates, identification of fishing vessels.” 

I would really think that we give them the powers they deserve but the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. In case they have any cries before this Parliament, we can always stay here to say, “Let us give this particular money for Fisheries.” Given what hon. Elijah Okupa has said, failing to manage the ADB loan to construct landing sites for a huge sum of money, I would not advise this Parliament to risk giving them the powers to manage this little Shs 15 billion which is collected annually. Otherwise, I support the Bill, save for that provision.

6.16
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I said before, I do not have any problem with the retention of the money but again our current law says that the money that will not have been spent at the end of the accounting period should be sent back to the Consolidated Fund.

But here, our amendment is silent on what will happen to the money that will not have been utilised at the close of the financial year. Because it is silent, we may end up losing it. Thank you.

6.17
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. But to me, when you look at the way we are collecting revenue in this country, we have improved tremendously because we now have a central place. For example, if you want to have a search for a land title, you first pay money to the bank and get a receipt. You want a passport – you remember we used to collect Shs 300 million for passport in a year but now we collect Shs 15 billion. Why is that so? It is because they give you a payment advice form, you go to Diamond Trust Bank, pay the money and it is put in one account.

With Fisheries, I agree with you entirely; as a minister, you have failed to impact yourself within the ministry to take charge over of the ministry. Now you are at a loss; I know all the money being collected is being put somewhere else. This would be a good idea but I agree with hon. Odonga Otto on forming a fisheries authority or agency. In the meantime, you can see the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the passports; we recently gave them Immigrations Authority, although they have taken a bit of time to form it. But we said they can 20 percent of the collected money because this is untaxed revenue.

The moment we allow different bodies to use money at source, it will be dangerous. The Government allowed Makerere University but you have seen what is happening there. They were allowed to collect a lot of money on tuition fees, which nobody knows how much it is. And yet they come again to the Treasury to ask for more money. 

I would like us to take a middle position because we have a problem now. The committee has been able to identify the problem within the fisheries department. Now what do we do before we form the authority? I think we need to do a lot of amendments but not to give you powers to spend at source; that is very dangerous. We would want to see the real accountability of every penny that is paid into the government coffers. We want to see this Parliament voting money for the department of fisheries. I have heard that the President is giving a ministry to Teso and Northern region but we would rather give the ministry to animals and fisheries. We used to have that ministry before. Hon. Mukisa can then be a minister and ensure that he can foresee his ministry. [HON. MEMBER: “But he is already a minister.”] Yes, he is a minister but there is no money for him. His is a small department, which is not easily recognised. All the money goes to agriculture yet fisheries would like him to work.

So, I request that as Members let us take a middle position of how we can get fisheries out of the doldrums they are in. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, before we proceed, I have not understood why you want this money to be retained. Are you funding your budget separately from the Ministry of Finance? I have not understood why you want that money in your department.

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to explain myself. Hon. Members, this position was reached after a very long study of the fisheries sector in this country.

Hon. Okupa, it is true that the money for the landing sites was mismanaged by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. And the problem with fisheries is that it is marginalised in the ministry. The money that is appropriated here does not go to the fisheries department. It may be allocated to the fisheries sector but the money is controlled by the PS in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. And the tradition is that money has always been diverted without doing anything for fisheries. So, the department has been left marginalised, undeveloped and extremely backward.

All the Members here who are near lakes – even you hon. Okupa, are aware of this – know very well that unless we take this move, your landing sites and the fisher-folk plus everybody else in the sector will never be developed because fisheries has not been a priority. And unless we keep this money and spend it under guidance of the Ministry of Finance, there is no way we shall develop aquaculture. Our sister-countries have taken this step; Tanzania has done it and its fisheries sector was developed as a result.

I am appealing to you, hon. Members, you either save fisheries now or leave it to continue the way it is. This has been a lengthy discussion and we have discussed it with many Members. It is unfortunate that those who are from the lake areas are not here – because we have held over two workshops on this issue.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just a rejoinder question. Hon. Minister, we apparently appreciate and understand your plight. We seemingly appreciate and understand your plight. When you raised this matter in Cabinet that your ministry is not getting the attention it deserves, what was the response? What is the probable response to those concerns?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I am getting confused. Who is going to be the accounting officer for this money, which is retained?

MR MUKISA: The accounting officer is the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who shall delegate his work to the head of the Fisheries sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But under the Public Finance Act, is the PS of Agriculture allowed to delegate that work?

MR MUKISA: We did consultations with the Ministry of Justice and we were given clearance. When we were in Cabinet, they allowed it because of the problems that they saw were unique about fisheries. In fact, we started in Cabinet before we came here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, this is getting more complicated. Every financial year, this House requires that the Ministry of Finance gives us an indication of who the accounting officer is for every ministry. Now, how can a person delegated by the PS of Finance also delegate to somebody else, to the head of your unit?

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Those questions were raised by the committee members and we carried out many discussions and consultations on this issue. That is why when hon. Odonga Otto asked why we talked about it before we were asked it is because we thought we had to explain it as it had also become a contentious issue in our committee. After consultations with the legal officer in Parliament and the responsible people, we came up with this position, which they feel the Fisheries officer can be an accounting officer in this department and – (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, the PS of the Ministry of Agriculture will be the accounting officer but what this committee wants is that all the revenues and fees from the Fisheries sector will be ring fenced and ploughed back to the Fisheries sector. That is the only thing. The issue of who the accounting officer is will remain the same but he can delegate. There is no problem.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and the intention but as many have said, when you began by explaining financial implications, you complicated the Bill. What I would recommend, now that we are not going to pass this Bill today, is that we include a Fisheries Authority in this Bill to create a cost centre that can be supported by the Finance and Accountability Act and also the Constitution. There is no harm, everybody will support you. Just put an authority and nobody will debate this provision, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if the Leader of Government Business agrees then Article 93 will not apply. It is only when they object that it will apply.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think there are technical issues as you have tried to guide. This will be the first of its kind where we are going to have a department controlling money. The way we see in others is through authorities or statutory bodies. We have seen with Finance that we have Uganda Revenue Authority. It is an authority but originally the money was collected under Finance. 

There is no way we are going to have a commissioner collecting money without forming an authority. The same thing applies to when we had a problem with immigration. Hon. Byanyima has just left. That is what Internal Affairs wanted but it could not work that way until we had to create that body. I sympathise with the minister, I see that he feels passionately about the Fisheries department but we need to help him. We are not just opposed to it but we need to establish a Fisheries authority if it cannot be an independent ministry from Ministry of Agriculture. However, for us to have the commissioner going to be just there controlling the money yet he does not have the authority of being an accounting officer, the PS who has been marginalising the ministry will still continue marginalising and diverting the funds. So, hon. Minister, we can help you and move forward and create an authority. That is the only way to go and in that way, we shall be able to help the Fisheries department.

We the people who come from around the lake feel that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had marginalised the Fisheries Department. That is why we see all this mess as stated here but otherwise, technically and professionally, there is no way we are going to give authority to a commissioner under the ministry. It cannot work. We need to establish an authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to assure the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Fisheries that this House understands your predicament and we want to help you but we want to help you legally. So, I want us to adjourn, ask the Leader of Government Business to consult with the Attorney-General and see how he can solve his problem. He has a problem but we must solve it lawfully.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. Let us go and do more consultations. By tomorrow maybe we will have got a position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the House is adjourned to 10.30 a.m. tomorrow morning. We shall only work up to 1.00 p.m., do not worry.

(The House rose at 6.31 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 3 December 2010 at 10.30 a.m.)
