Wednesday 6th December, 2000

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. WAMULONGO ALUPAKUSADI (Bunya East, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
The Civil Service Reform Programme was launched in 1990 to inter-alia reduce on the workforce to enable Government pay a living wage to a small motivated and equipped service.  

Could the Minister inform the House: 
    (i) whether the Reform exercise is still going on or complete? 
    (ii) whether it has been a success or not? 
    (iii) what has been the total expenditure on this programme to-date? 
    (iv) whether all the retrenched civil servants have been paid fully?  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega): Mr. Speaker, the Public Service Reform Programme was a result of Government effort to improve the efficiency and delivery system of the Public Service. This resulted from a commission that was established to study the shortcomings in the Public Service then, and recommend ways and means of improving its efficiency and performance. I will go straight to the questions.  

“Is the Reform exercise ongoing or complete?” It is ongoing. “Has it been a success or not?” It has been a success. “Have all the retrenched civil servants been paid fully?” Yes, they have been paid fully. “How much has been expended?” That is actually a bit more complicated, and the question implies that I should give some figures. 

The total expenditure on paying the retrenchees is so far 38,900,779,096 shillings. The wage bill has tremendously gone up from 47 billion in 1991/1992 to 473 billion in the current budget year. We have spent 138 pounds on retraining and recruiting the public servants, and this exercise is ongoing. I thank you.

MR. WAMULONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would appear that the Minister just came to say ‘let me just go and say yes’. If the Civil Service Reform Programme were to reduce the civil service, I would have expected him to tell this House what the size of the civil service was then and what it is now. What stage has it reached? He says it is still ongoing, but to merely come and tell the House that this exercise is still ongoing, I believe, is very inadequate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are the one who asked this question. You asked, ‘was it a success?’ He said yes, it was a success. Maybe you should have asked, ‘why do you think it was a success?’ But you are free to ask supplementary questions arising from the answers, which the Minister has given, if you have any, but if you do not, then another person will ask.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very happy to hear the Minister say that the reform has been a success. One, I would like to know whether the retained civil servants are now getting a living wage, since the reform has been successful.  

Two, I wonder whether an ongoing exercise can be a success before it has come to an end. Is it a matter of percentage, degree or what is it?  

Three, I would like to know from the Minister how the reform affects new recruitment into the service. I am asking this because new civil servants are recruited, and it takes a very long time before they are paid salaries, and yet they are working. What is the problem? I thank you.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I must thank the Minister because he has been very witty in his answers. I now want to pose the following supplementary question: Can the Minister tell us the basis of his answer to question one, two, three and four through facts and figures?  I thank you.  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you. To supplement what hon. Musumba has just asked, I would like the Minister to tell us how many civil servants have actually been retrenched, since the exercise started? Two, could he tell us how many have been recruited since the exercise started and on what basis have they been recruited? What were the reasons for recruiting the new ones when in fact many were laid off?

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Sir, just two supplementary questions. Would the Minister inform us as to how long this ongoing exercise is going to take? Two, what is the established number of posts in the civil service now?

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The supplementary question I am asking is in relation to the delegated staff in the districts. They do get money from the central Government, but if I look at my District, Kamuli, it is the most disadvantaged. The exercise that is quoted as being so successful, according to the Minister, has left my district under staffed, and in effect it has compounded poverty. My district a poor district as it is, without a hospital, without schools, without so many of the resources that many of my colleagues enjoy, but it does not have adequate staff.  We cannot afford to recruit a planning officer, for instance, of the right standard in order to compete with other districts for conditional grants and such other funds like the poverty action fund.  

So, I would like to know how far this successful reform program can assist or has assisted in rationalising staff. I do recall that when the present Prime Minister was then Minister in charge of Public Service, he did mention in this House that there were plans to make sure that all delegated staff would be the same number per district and would be facilitated in the same way. So, would I know why Kamuli, for instance, is not benefiting from this successful program?  Thank you.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not know why my colleagues are not happy with my being precise and to the point, instead of engaging in lugambo and taking a lot of valuable time of the House. But I will answer the supplementary questions. 

On the success of the reform and the restructuring, as far as the central Government is concerned, the delegated services and the decentralised services are not a direct responsibility of the central Government. My Ministry goes as far as assisting the districts in terms of policy formulation, guidance and monitoring to ensure that programs are successful. But we have embarked on a programme, after discussing with the districts concerned, to assist the districts in carrying out restructuring of their own civil service. This is with a view to knowing how many civil servants they need, because they are not equal in all districts. For example, a district like Mbarara cannot have the same number of primary schools as Kinkizi. So, when you are talking about inspectors of schools or people to handle the salaries’ office, obviously Mbarara District is likely to have more members of staff than Adjumani or Bundibugyo. 

So, we are going to assist the districts to restructure and to see what adequate staff they need and the staff they are able to take in. It is not only a question of how many people you need, it is also a question of what resources you have and at what levels you want to reward. 

As far as the success of the story is concern, I can give some few more details. Actually, I was prepared for that, incase the need arose. In 1992, we had 38 Ministries and currently there are 17 Ministries. One of the reasons for this was to rationalise and co-ordinate activities of Ministries. For example, one time Meat Packers in Soroti  was under the Prisons. So, part of the exercise was to ensure that departments go under the Ministries they belong to so that they can efficiently co-ordinate and deliver services. 

The budget for paying civil servants, as I have already said, was roughly 47 billion shillings, currently it is 473 billion. I will mention salaries. A senior consultant in 1990 was getting 15,074/-, brain surgeons and heart surgeons were getting 15,000/- but the current salary is 1,535,080/-. A nursing aide was getting 2,710/- but now they are getting a fair pay of 58,941/-. The Inspector General of Police was getting 18,000/-, but now he gets 1,800,000/-. A graduate teacher was getting 11,700/-, but now they start at 217,000/-. A medical doctor’s salary started at 16,000/-, but now it starts at 330,000/=.  

The size of the Public Service was 320,000 people, but it is now 180,663. There is a lot of training that has gone on. I mentioned £138,000 that is for training people. The secretaries are undergoing training, and civil servants are going for masters programs in the relevant fields. There is a lot of training and facilitation of the public servants that is going on. So, that is what I call success, in the answer to yes or no. That is how I measure the success. 

“Is it ongoing or not, and when will it end?” Of course; reform, like Parliament that makes changes and amends all laws, never ends. If you want to improve to a better position, it is a permanent exercise. The question is at what degree do you proceed. For example, after reforming the departments, some come back. And seeing that the staff who were established were actually not adequate, what do you do? 

We have a sub-committee of Cabinet, chaired by the vice President, on which the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Finance sit as permanent Members. The Ministry concerned presents its programs to this committee and they review them. If you said that three staff were adequate, but you may find that you need four or you may find that you need two, because you would not have established a law, suddenly everything is in line. So, those exercises continue to ensure that efficiency of the service goes on.  

The retained civil servants are now 180,663, and that is why we say that it has been a success. On the recruitment of new civil servants, when the exercise of restructuring was going on, there was a fleece. What happened in the 90s and in the 80s is that, because of lack of other opportunities everywhere, Government parastatals and Public Service became the areas of retreat or refuge for those who had no jobs. So, the civil service ended up being bloated. You would find that 10 people were handling form filling, and this became inefficient. There were also inadequate resources to pay those who bloated Public Service. As a result, salaries became meaningless, services became hard to come by, and there was overall deterioration in the country and in the Public Service. So, a halt was put in place while the reviewing exercise was going on. Now that exercise has been completed, there is recruitment of:
    1) the staff needed 
    2) the staff the budget can afford to pay for. 

And to ensure that we do not create new problems, it is ongoing. If you have been reading the papers, you should have noted that recruitment to fill up the established posts is taking place and is ongoing. Recruitment is taking place in the police, the prisons, the public service, and the health service. Even in the Judicial service, they have been approving Judges here and there. So, it was not a question of saying yes, I was answering the question as it was put, which I think should have been appreciated by the hon. Member who raised the question. 

On the recruitment of teachers, when UPE was put in place, the establishment of teachers has moved from the 94,000 ceiling to 125,000. Actually, the problem now, in places like Kamuli, is filling up the posts. It is some areas, which are difficult to reach, which do not have adequate staff. While we have an excess of teachers in Kampala, we have a shortage of teachers in Kalangala. 

Our colleague, the Minister of Education, brought the matter to the committee and it was approved. In areas where it is difficult to get trained teachers, we can now, as a temporary measure, recruit those who have passed A'level and those who have passed O'level. Meanwhile, the exercise to shift people from areas of excess to areas of shortage is going on, and we are going to pay an incentive to teachers who go to those districts that we consider disadvantaged or that do not attract teachers immediately. 

So, how long will the exercise take? I think it will take longer than the life of this Parliament. I can say that with certainty, but I cannot put the rule of the thumb and say that on this date the exercise will end. We are helping the districts, as I mentioned.

On the question of the calibre of planning officers to the districts, the districts are free to choose. I have a schedule that I could show you when you have time at a later date. It shows that in districts where we expect to have graduates as CAOs or DEOs, you actually have S.4 leavers, because they were not able to contact the best calibre available. Secondly, some of the districts were insisting on employing a child of the soil. We think that with time, you will come to learn that the son of the soil or the daughter of the soil and delivery of services are not always in consonance. They are in the process of learning, so we are encouraging them to advertise and recruit the best person they can lay their hands on for the time being, and open up their hearts so that as many Ugandans as possible can apply. You have seen a lot of shifting, where public servants move from one district to the other. 

‘Those who have been recruited are not being paid on time.’ Yes, this matter has been brought to my notice, and my senior staff, together with the departments concerned, the Ministry of Finance, and those who handle the computer systems, are looking into this matter to ensure that everybody is paid adequately and on time.  As to whether the salary is adequate or not, I really cannot answer that now, but what I can say is that the salaries have been improved, but there is still room for further improvement. And if you can improve on the revenue and tax collection, we should not be found wanting. I thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi Apolo): Thank you. I do totally agree with what hon. Mushega has said, but I wanted to clarify on the point about success. When you are dealing with success, there are indicators of success. One of them is that you deal with the framework. 

According to the Sixth Schedule of our Constitution, most of the functions which were at the centre were decentralised, and the centre is now largely dealing with policy. So, it was essential to reduce the people at the centre, and that is the process of right sizing. He has given you figures to show you that there was right sizing of the Public Service. That was achieved, and people did not even commit suicide in this country, whereas in other countries, I think was it Ghana, some people committed suicide. So, I would argue that to the extent that there was right sizing of up to 50 percent plus, it was a success. Also, it was a success to the extent that there is an external assessor, Dr. Langseth, who has written a whole book to show how successful Uganda is. 

It is a success according to other assessors, because we are not supposed to be our own assessors. I remember addressing a thousand people in New York. They wanted to know the miracle of Uganda, and people have been sent from Southern Africa to study our model. Time management has also been addressed, although a lot remains to be done, but as opposed to what was taking place, it is a success. Assets were hardly managed, but now those things are being managed. On the whole question of remuneration, we used to have ad hoc increases, but now we are using a job evaluation instrument as a basis of handling matters of remuneration. There are factors like the credentials of a person, how crucial a job is, and there are also hazards. Those are elements of the job evaluation instrument, which is a basis of remuneration. 

We also agreed on the comprehension ratio to be 1:20 within a period of 10 years, so that if the highest paid person is getting 3.6 million shillings, in 10 years time the lowest paid person will get at least 180,000/=. So, all those are mechanisms at hand, and all these are indicators of objective methods of handling a public service. Of course there are other issues, which concern value, like the values of the people. Those are larger issues, but I want to assert that it has been a success, and other universities like Cornell, where I have given lectures, have admired Uganda.  

In short, I want to say that whereas miracles are taking place in this country, people are not realising them. There are problems obviously. Problems are also there, for example, some of the wars, which have taken place. We had to recruit some of the people, who had been retrenched, in order to address the skirmishes taking place. But by and large, I would argue that considering where we are transiting from, we are transiting from lethargy and other problems, I think a lot has been done. And I want to thank my colleague, the Minister of Public Service, other Friends like Donors, and all of you, for having made this a success. I thank you.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I did not have a supplementary question when the Minister was speaking, but the Prime Minister has said that among the many successes that this programme has had, properties are now better managed.  That is what the Prime Minister mentioned as one of the successes. There are properties that are being managed in Mombasa under the department of Privatisation. I would like to know what rent is being collected, how much is being spent on managing them, and who is managing these properties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not think that is really related to the main question. I think it should be put to the Minister in charge of Privatisation.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday I said that hon. Okumu Ringa will speak first, followed by hon. Alleluya, but I know the case of hon. Okello-Okello. Hon. Okello-Okello will speak and then the chairperson will wind up. Who is ready?

MRS. IKOTE ALLELUYA (Woman Representative, Pallisa): I would like to begin contributing to this Bill by thanking the Government, most heartily, for bringing this Bill at last. Rumours were rife within the House and outside that the Government was having a problem streamlining this Bill and getting it to the House, and that it would possibly not come in the life of this Parliament. So, I am very happy, and I want to congratulate you for managing to bring it to the Floor. 

Today we are debating the regulation of political organisations. Recently, during the referendum on the political system we would like to adopt, I was very active in campaigning for the Movement system, and we had quiet a good turn out in Pallisa, and a good vote for the Movement. But there were a minority who did not want to be part of the Movement system. They are in Pallisa, they are in other districts, and they are all over Uganda. So, today, as we debate this Bill, I would like to call upon my colleagues to handle this Bill with caution. The Movement system has prevailed, it won with what others claim was a landslide victory and others disagree, but whatever it was, the Movement took the day. And with that victory, I am calling upon my colleagues to be magnanimous. Let us be magnanimous. 

One of the Movement’s principles is to share. We have always condemned this idea of winner takes it all. Once you win, you push out the other person and you take everything. Our friends, who are in the minority, are there, and they have thoughts, and they want to express themselves, they want to associate. I call upon my colleagues to be magnanimous. Let us be magnanimous and give them operative space to do this without feeling that they are being crushed or tied down. I call upon my colleagues to open up the space for political organisations to operate. At the time we passed the Referendum Act, my views on this were very clear. 

I also want to call upon all of us in the Movement to look inwards at ourselves. We have been managing this country in a transition for the last 14 years. The catchword has been, ‘this is a transition programme’, ‘this is a transitional system’. But when children go to school, they must graduate from one class to another, otherwise there must be a problem with that child. So, let the Movement not stay in the nursery school forever.  After 14 years, the Movement should graduate to another level. If you are always contesting against yourself, you will never lose, you will never develop, and you will never grow up.  

Again, I call upon my colleagues to exercise caution as they debate this Bill. Let us be magnanimous and also allow the minority space to operate. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA  (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion and the report of the Committee on the Political Organisations Bill, 1998.  This Bill is coming at a very opportune time, in that, in June there was a referendum on political systems, and this has been in compliance with the constitutional provision. In the referendum, the people spoke, endorsing the Movement system to be in place. And during the time when this political system is in place, other political organisations should be regulated by law. Indeed, Article 73(2) of the Constitution is very clear on this particular case, but more importantly, Article 72 of the Constitution enshrines the right of political organisations to exist. 

Article 73 (2) reads as follows: “Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate.”  

In other words, as we provide regulations on political organisations, these regulations will be provided in such a way that the Movement system, the system which was adopted, will operate and the political organisations, which will be in place, will be regulated.  

This brings me to the point that politics the world over is the same in principle. The practice differs, depending on the level of development of society. The sophistication depends on the level of development of society. That being the case, we cannot blame political parties wholesale for the wars of this country. We would rather look at the influence of the formation of political parties at the time of independence and how these political parties operated.  

Organisations are founded by people, and people by nature have inclinations. Those inclinations may depend on environment and on inheritance. In our case, our political organisations had a strong influence from our colonial masters. The British never allowed Uganda to be led by any other individual unless he was a Protestant. This is what we inherited from the Westminster type of Government, and yet we even hear today about bombs in Northern Ireland and in the main land. So, organisations are influenced by people and other factors.  

In our case, it is a known fact that UPC was dominantly a Protestant-based political organisation. And due to some pressure, the Catholics also came up with their own political organisation called the Democratic Party. That was in 1954. So, this being the case –(Interruption) 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Patrick Okumu Ringa. I just rose to make history right.  Uganda Peoples Congress came into force in 1961. The Democratic Party came into force in 1954. So the first Prime Minister here, as we know, was Benedicto Kiwanuka, my cousin, a Catholic, in 1961.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank the Minister for Justice, and my very senior colleague, for the information. But the fact remains that organisations are formed by people and people are influenced by certain factors. This is a debate I may not prolong in this august House, but if we were at a seminar, I would have demonstrated this further. If organisations were not influenced by other factors, why was the late Benedicto Kiwanuka, a fellow Muganda, not able to agree with the system then? So, there were other factors that influenced the existence of organisations like the Democratic Party and the Uganda Peoples’ Congress. 

This argument leads me to the very important fact that we need regulations. We need this Bill to regulate the existence of political parties or political organisations. Without regulations, we would end up in the kind of chaos we have had before. Let us look at another example. NRA was formed by only 27 men. These 27 men, now the gallant heroes, went to the bush and influenced events from a different perspective. From 27 men, the entire population of Uganda has now embraced the Movement, because of the philosophy of the Movement. So, organisations are influenced by certain factors.  

I support this motion because I would be very comfortable to belong to an organisation which has rules, which has perimeters for its members, and which has guidelines.  The provisions in the Political Organisations Bill, when passed, will enshrine those cardinal points. So, if I choose to belong to a party or any organisation, it should be like buying shares in a corporate entity. I should know my right, I should know what that organisation can offer, and I should be able to ask many questions. I should also know that when my legs are broken in the process of pursuing the interests of the organisation, maybe there will be an insurance policy to take care of me. 

What makes the Movement Government appealing to many people, at the moment, is the basic internal democratic system, which is in-built. That is what makes it superior to the other political organisations for the time being. When we have this law in place, it will bring discipline and create what I may call, ‘democratic principles’ within the organisations.  Without democratic principles in the organisations, you have nothing but chaos.  

I know I have limited time, but my last point is, as we debate and pass the Political Organisations Bill, we should take into account any of those existing laws, which may inhibit the proper implementation of provisions of this Bill when passed into an Act. I am saying so because it is important to operate on plain ground, so that at the end of the day, when you are the winner, you feel proud of having won. I belong to that school of thought which believes that if you have an opponent in a contest, you should win in a transparent manner and defeat them thoroughly, and then you will enjoy the victory and your opponent will lie low for a long time.  I have enjoyed that in my political career. 

I would like to thank the Minister and the Committee for this Bill, and at committee stage, I hope to bring one or two amendments.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum): Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few remarks on this Bill, which is almost stale. I would like to thank the Committee, and I do agree with them that the registration and management of political organisations cannot be the business of the Electoral Commission. In addition to the reasons given by the Committee, I would like to mention a reason, which the Committee seemed to have been shy to mention, and that is the Electoral Commission, which we are happy with today, does not belong to everybody. It belongs to some people and it could not, therefore, be fair to everybody.  

I would like to come to the registration of existing political organisations. The Bill is not very clear on whether existing political organisations will be subjected to the same procedure as the new ones. I would like to say that political organisations, which are recognised by our laws, should not be subjected to the same procedure as new or upcoming organisations. 

According to the First Schedule of the Constituent Assembly Statute, four political parties were spelt out, namely the Conservative Party, the Democratic Party, the Uganda Patriotic Movement and the Uganda Peoples Congress. If our laws do recognise that these organisations exist, it would be a contradiction to say that they should also go round and collect signatures from districts to prove their popularity. I think the fact of their existence should simply be recorded on the register. They should not be subjected to the same procedure as the new ones, because some of these parties have ruled this country and they are known. To pretend that they are not there –(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, my time does not allow me to accept any information. (Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to follow hon. Okello Okello’s logic. He is saying that anything that is in existence and is recognised by law, need not be forced or compelled to register. I have a problem with that. I am known to exist by law, I am also a Member of Parliament, and everybody knows I am above 21 years, but every time there has been registration of voters, I have been required to go to my constituency and register.  That is not because my existence is not recognised. So, how would he reconcile these two things?  

We also require people to register, even when we know that they exist. Why wouldn’t the same thing be applied to existing parties? This is simply because, when you look at the Bill, parties are going to file who their office bearers are and who is running what. And if you do not register them, you may have a problem, because you could end up with Dr. Rwanyarare having to register his faction and Cecilia Ogwal hers. Or sometimes Bwenje goes to register his, and my greatest fear actually lies with hon. Ken Lukyamuzi also trying to usurp a party we know. So, why can’t we have the whole thing redone and everybody registers? I just want to be clarified.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: I would like to thank hon. Kutesa, and what he said is precisely why I did not want my time to be wasted, Mr. Speaker. I never said that political parties should not be registered. I said that they should not be subjected to the same procedures of going to the districts to collect signatures. If you are talking about a split, I think this is not the time. I am sure the Movement has about three groups now. Besigye could register, UPM could register, and the actual Movement could register. It is not the monopoly of any organisation. I will try and bring an amendment so that the existing political organisation -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okello Okello for giving way. The information I would like to give is related to the intervention advanced by hon. Sam Kutesa. It is a felony for anyone to relate the status quo of an institution with an individual. Institutions are there to stay. You cannot relate an individual to an institution. The ideas embedded within institutions are sustainable. The individual can collapse today and you can no longer relate the ideas with what he stands for. So, I think it is wrong for one to assume that an individual should be related to an institution. 

If the institutions are recognised as institutions, like CP, DP, UPC, they were recognized as bodies that have been registered to carry out a mission, which mission is there to stay.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Member. I have seen conditions for registering political organisations like tribe, religion and so on. I really do not know whether we need these conditions. If I want to start my party with the members of my family only, how does that offend the state? What is the problem with that? Political organisations start in a small way and then they grow.  It is incorrect to assume that they must grow first before they come to register. Should they be in two thirds of the districts first before they come for registration? I think it is the other way round. 

If I want my party with members of my religion only, what offence is that? How does it offend anybody? I really do not see the need to put so many unnecessary conditions on the formation of political organisations. If we are talking about the unity of our country, the unity of our country cannot be brought about by law. It is the state of our mind. You can make laws, but if we are not willing to unite, you will never unite us.  

I would like to agree with the Committee that clause 32 be deleted because the gist of this Bill is to set free political parties that have been suppressed for a decade and half. Anything short of that, we are wasting time. Clause 32 should be deleted so that Article 269 of the Constitution automatically goes out. Since a referendum of sorts was held here, as far as I am concerned, actually 296 is no longer an issue. I think the purposes have been served, and it should be laid to rest. 

We normally come here and keep some important amendments secret, and at the committee stage all the good things that have been said are nullified by such amendments. I hope that this time the Minister responsible is not going to do the same. If there are any amendments from Government, I think they should be circulated to Members before then, so that when we come to the committee stage we know which amendments are coming. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Members for the support they have given to the report of the Committee. I would like to make comments on only one issue. This issue seems to have run through most contributions by hon. Members. This is the issue of chains or kandoya.  This was raised by hon. Kyemba, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Ongom and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. They were asking, to what extent does this Bill retire political parties? It is only that issue which I will address.

Article 269 of the Constitution reads as follows: “On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with article 73 of this Constitution, political activities may continue except – 
    (a) opening and operating branch offices; 
    (b) holding delegates’ conferences; 
    (c) holding public rallies; 
    (d) sponsoring or offering a platform to or in any way campaigning for or against a candidate for public elections; 
    (e) carrying on any activities that may interfere with the movement political system for the time being in force.”

It is apparent from this provision that parties could do and can do anything else that parties ordinarily do, apart from those that I have mentioned. But with the passing of the Political Organisations Bill, those restrictions are no longer applicable. Article 269 requires this Parliament to make regulations under Article 73. So, as Article 269 falls by the way side, this Parliament should now be guided by Article 73 of the Constitution. This Article, and the regulations, which Parliament will pass, will then determine to what extent political parties will be restricted. This will now be for the House to decide. It is this House which will make that decision and no other authority.  

Article 73 of the Constitution reads as follows: “(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 29 and article 43 of this Constitution, during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe.  

(2) Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate”.  

The emphasis here is not to exceed what is necessary for enabling a political system adopted to operate.   Accordingly, since the Movement political system was adopted, this Parliament should now make regulations allowing political activities, but not going beyond what makes it impossible for the Movement system to operate. So, the issue now is, in addressing the restrictions, we must go back to Article 269, because those were the only restrictions imposed. Article 269 presupposes that political parties could do any other thing apart from those restricted. So, in addressing the kind of restrictions this House should place on political activities, we have to go back and look at Article 269.  

The first restriction I would wish to address is the holding of delegates’ conferences. The question then we should ask ourselves is, does the holding of delegates’ conferences by political parties in any way make it impossible or does it interfere with operation of the Movement system, which has been adopted? If we see that it does not, then this House ought not to make any regulations restricting political parties in respect of delegates’ conferences.  

The second one is sponsoring or offering a platform for a candidate during campaigns. The question we should ask here is whether at the moment political parties have been offering platforms and have been campaigning for candidates. If they have been doing so, then is it necessary now to make restrictions on that. If there are party candidates standing and professing that they are multi-party candidates, and they come here to Parliament as multi-partyists and that continues, will it interfere or make it impossible for the Movement system to operate?  If the answer is no, then this House should not make regulations restricting political parties in that respect. If the answer is yes, then the House will have to look at what kind of restrictions could be made in respect of that.  

The third issue is the opening of branches. Does the opening of branches by political parties make it impossible for the Movement system, which was adopted, to operate? If it does, then this House should address itself to that point. If it does not, then it should not make any regulation in this respect.

Lastly, I would like to caution you. As we make these regulations, we should keep in mind the provision in Article 29 (1)(e), which reads as follows: 
“(1) Every person shall have the right to – 
(e) freedom of association which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organisations.”  

The issue I want to raise here is that the regulations we make should not be such as to contradict the provision of Article 29. If we do so, then we shall label the law as being unconstitutional.(Interruption)  

DR.KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, I regret having to interrupt the chairman of the Committee when he was just winding up, but the point he is just winding up on is very intriguing. When you read Article 73(1), it says, “subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of Article 29…” It says “notwithstanding”. How does the hon. chairman interpret “notwithstanding Article 29 (1)”, which he referred to? It says “notwithstanding” that Article. So, you apply Article 73(1) in light of Article 29 (1) (e). I would be grateful if I got some clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are saying “notwithstanding” is not subject to. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO: I thank my Professor for seeking clarification. Actually, my interpretations are taking into account what he taught me. The Bill we are going to pass will be an Act of Parliament under the Constitution or subsidiary to the Constitution. The issue of this being subject to the provisions of the Constitution but notwithstanding the provisions of those Articles is true in Article 73, but that is in respect of Article 73(1) of the Constitution. If there is to be any interpretation about that, it will be in respect of 73(1). What I am concerned with is that these regulations, which are supposed to be made by Parliament, should not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate.  

So, the issue now is whether this Parliament will pass this based on the interpretation of the law. It will not be based on Article 73(1), but it will be based on the Political Organisations Bill, which will now be law. So, in interpreting that law, the courts will hold the law, which we shall pass here, against Article 29. That is all I am questioning. In passing that law, you should take into account Article 29(1)(e), because 29(1)(e) gives that right over assembly. It says that you can assemble and it is your right constitutionally. Now, can Parliament make an Act of Parliament negating or encroaching on that provision?  That is all I am saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, the issue is that you raised the issue of Article 29(1)(e) when you were explaining Article 73. And your explanation seems to have subjected the law to Article 29 of the Constitution. But I think he is saying, notwithstanding or being aware of the existence of Article 29(1)(e), you can make a law to regulate the activities of another system. He was asking you whether your understanding of “notwithstanding” means it is subject, because “notwithstanding” is not in the existence, but in spite of the existence of the provision, you make a law. So, if you make a law notwithstanding that provision, the question is, will it be unconstitutional? I think that is the question.  

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Speaker, if you make a law notwithstanding the provisions of Article 29(1)(e), my interpretation is that, that law you will be making is a substantial legislation to a Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is a law permitted by that very Article of the Constitution. There is an Article, which allows you to make that law.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Correct, Mr. Speaker. That is why I am raising it as a caution, because it is a matter, which needs interpretation. It will go either way. That is why I said that I must raise it as a caution. As you make this law, take into account the fact that it is possible, when you are interpreting, to hold that the law is unconstitutional because of Article 29(1)(e). So, with that caution, I advise hon. Members to keep this in mind at committee stage, so that we do not run into legal problems. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members who have contributed to this debate. I thank them very much because they have made very elucidating remarks on the Bill.

First of all, I would like to say that one of the reasons for this Bill is to free the political space. Although there are political parties recognised as existing under Article 270, new political parties now will be able to come up and also enjoy this political space under Article 72(2). I think that is good. We shall have more people, more parties, and I think this will be good for the health of our political system.

Law is a terrible thing because, as lawyers know, and other people know, we say on the one hand or on the other hand, but I would be grateful to speak to the hon. chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The issue he is raising is, what is the constitutional relationship between the authority given to Parliament under Article 73(2) and the rights to the individuals under Article 29(1)(e)? That is actually the right thing. This really brings out some of the internal contradictions in this Constitution, and this is why I say that in Government we have agreed to appoint a constitutional review commission.

As of now, even Article 43 itself says that under Article 29 we may enjoy certain rights, including rights of association, but there are limits to this enjoyment. You may not enjoy it to a certain extent. So, 29(1)(e) is not absolute. It is subject, under the Constitution, to certain limitations. And the limitation in this particular case comes under Article 73(2). Article 73(2) is simply saying, yes, associate yourself, but associate yourself in such a way that the association does not operate in a way as to make it difficult for the system adopted by the people to function. So, these are limitations. I agree of course that the ability of contradictions is here and there. I was a Member of CA, but this is a problem, and we have to be careful, of course.

Now let me go straight to answer points raised by some hon. Members. Hon. Baku said that, at any rate, this Bill is there to regulate the existence of political parties.  I am saying, no, with due respect. The existence of political parties is not an issue. Their existence is guaranteed by Article 72(1). According to that Article, a  party shall be formed if anybody wants to. It is not the existence that is the issue. What is the issue now are the activities the parties are carrying out, it is not whether parties may or may not exist. This was in Article 269, which says, “On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of Political Organisations in accordance with Article 73…”  

So, among other things, this Political Organisations Bill is interested in regulating political party activities, which may not be existence per se - (Interruption)

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, when I said that the purpose of the Bill was to regulate the existence of political parties, I was quoting Article 73. Article 73 says, among other things, "…during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe."  

When I insisted on existence, I was using the constitutional words under this particular Article. So, if we are also using others Articles, which talk about the functioning of political parties, there is a difference from the emphasis I was putting yesterday.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has said that the worry before him is not that political parties should exist, but the issue is what they should do. With reference to the registration of NGOs in Uganda, with which I am conversant, before an NGO is registered, the initiators of the NGO must state what that NGO is going to do. You do not come into being to do nothing.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Incidentally, I am not dealing with the NGO Act, and so I can forgive him for not reverting to it. 

As for hon. Baku's explanation, the word 'exist' is found in Article 73 (1). The Article says that during that time when a system has been adopted, a political party “may exist". Simply meaning, if anyone wants to form a party, he may form one or she may form one. That is what it says, no less, no more. So, the existence is not the issue now. The existence is guaranteed under Article 270 and Article 72 (1). So, what this Bill is addressing here is that we have got parties, how are they going to open up their activities? - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, they are asking you that if it is a question of activities, then why do you put in a requirement for registration? Before a party has registered, will it be a party? That is what is bothering people. It will become a party after it has been registered, and it starts existing after it has been registered. So, the Bill covers a wider area than controlling activities. It is also controlling how you come into existence. The existence is provided for by the Constitution, agreed, but for party ‘A’ to come into existence, it has to be registered. Therefore, this is also facilitating its coming into existence.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Yes, with due respect, Sir, but what I am saying is that the issue is not the existence of parties, the issue here is Article 269 and Article 73.  Article 269 depends on Article 73, and Article 269 says that these activities may not be carried out until a system has been adopted. Once it has been adopted, then Article 73 comes into existence.  

Having said that, much has been said about Article 269, and since I am a product of this country's political history, let me just something at least. This Constitution, imperfect as it is in some respects, at least allows political parties, such as the Conservative Party and others, to exist. At least it does, in some circumscribed way, authorise them to exist. But I said being allowed to exist politically is better than being banned, as was the case in 1969. At least we can breathe when we exist. The 1969 statutory instrument in fact banned political parties. I think we should not have a short memory of our history. (Interruption) 

MR. WACHA: I am sorry for interrupting, but I think the clarification I am seeking might help. I am sorry, Mr. Minister, but it does seem to me that Article 269 and Article 73 are talking about different issues. Article 269 says: "On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with article 73 of this Constitution, political activities may continue except…” 
Let us assume they continue acting with activities except those mentioned. Unfortunately Article 73, which is referred to in Article 269, has this to say: 
"Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 29 and article 43 of this Constitution, during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist…"  

To me, Article 73 is talking about existence, while Article 269 is talking about regulating activities. I do not know how the Minister reconciles the two.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I think we should become a little more serious when we are looking at the role of a political party. Article 72(1) of the Constitution of Uganda reads as follows:"Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisations is guaranteed."  

Why should a whole Constitution state that the right to form political parties is guaranteed? Forming political parties to do what? In ordinary circumstances, if an individual has too much laxity surrounding him, according to our laws - you can consult the penal code – that individual can be charged for being idle and disorderly.  Are you creating political parties that will be charged and be sent to Luzira because they are idle and disorderly? In the circumstances, after being too stationary for too long, they may be forced to do certain wrong things, and in the process they will be taken to Luzira. Do you want that kind of scenario to occur?

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, particularly rising from the explanation sought by hon. Ben Wacha. Hon. Ben Wacha, when quoting Article 269, conceded that Article 269 talks about parties continuing, which presumes their existence. Article 73 of the same Constitution also says that political parties may exist subject to other conditions. I find no contradiction at all between Article 269 and Article 73, as is being alleged by hon. Ben Wacha.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s question, when that Article says, “subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right to form political parties…”, I think here the Constitution, although they do not mention, refers to the laws made under the Constitution for that purpose. So, you look at the text of Constitution and the laws competently made under the Constitution. So, you should read the two together.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. My own advice to the secretary general of the Conservative Party is to make sure that you keep to the law –(Mr. Wambuzi rose)- It is almost lunch time and if you keep on interrupting like this-(Interruption)

MR. WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker, it is very important to get clarification on the issue of politics. The way the Minister has drafted this definition of a political organisation leaves a lot to be desired. I request the Minister to clarify this definition further. What does he mean by a political organisation? What is politics? 

My original understanding of politics, some 20 or 30 years ago, was that politics is something to do with the good of the people. But the way this thing is drafted, it seems to mean that a political process, whether it is good or bad, is a political process. So, I would like to be clarified as to whether he actually intended for it to be as it is, or he actually left out the actual meat of what would have been desired to be put in this law. What do we mean by politics at the beginning of everything?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: As soon as we come to the committee stage, we will be able to have the answer to that one.  And if you really want to move an amendment to that, please do, we shall entertain it.

Going back to hon. Ben Wacha’s objections, let me paraphrase Article 269. Political party activities, which existed in 1995 at the commencement of the Constitution, may continue, except for some activities, which are mentioned. This is what 269 is basically saying. So, whichever system has been adopted by the people, political parties, if they wish, may continue to exist. The Constitution does not say they shall exist. Nobody is saying there have to be political parties. It says if they are there, they may exist. So, that is why this word comes in. We are not necessarily creating parties, but it is saying that if they are there, they may exist, but if they are not there, they may be created under Article 72.  

In Article 73 (2), the issue of regulation comes in. If they exist, they have to be regulated. What do you regulate, but the conduct of something! So, this is why I am saying that 73 (2) does not talk about existence per se, but simply says, ‘you are there, if you want to be there, you may be there, but once you are there, you have to be extremely regulated.’ This is what the Bill is saying.  

The acid test in Article 73 (2), as the hon. chairperson has said, is, if you want regulation X, does it go beyond what is necessary to enable the system adopted by the people to operate?  If it does, drop it. You may have it if you know it does not exceed what is necessary for the system adopted to operate, if it does then you may not have it. So, really, every regulation has to be tested under that particular law. So, to me it is clear, and I think everybody can see this. I think we can really deal with it.  

I said that I am a product of the history of this country. I have been forced into exile because of the activities of some political people. But you see the time now is not so much backward. It is time now to build this country, and if you look backwards and walk backwards, you are going to have problems. If I may take it in Biblical terms, there are times of ignorance but it is the time of repentance, which will lead everybody, including my self. Everybody should be able to look forward and bring into existence such laws as will help our political system to advance. Our colleagues should not forget the history of our misdeeds.  

Having said that, hon. Lukyamuzi asked what Government has done to create political institutions. As far as I know, Government has not funded political parties, although it has funded the Movement system. But this is a matter, which can be raised at another time, but not necessarily in this Bill.  

Hon. Karuhanga said ‘I want the Minister and the chairperson of the Committee to satisfy me that there will be no anarchy with the re-introduction of political parties.’ We really cannot be expected to become prophets, either of doom or of general happiness of this country. What we can is to legislate. You, Members, should legislate and then we see what is going to happen. The anarchy or lack of it will depend on the operators in the political sphere, the people themselves.

Hon. Omara Atubo talked about a source of conflict. He said that the parties are continuing to be aggrieved, unless they are freed completely. Well, conflict perhaps, but my only prayer is that as we free the system progressively, then you should remember that conflict will never be in the interest of our country, and everybody should remember that. What we want is a revolutionary process rather than fighting.  

Hon. Ogwal, almost understandably, talked on the issue of Article 269 and the banning of political parties in 1969 by the UPC. Now, this was conclusively answered by the production of the statutory instrument by hon. Manzi  Tumubweinee. I do not have to say much on that.

Hon. Ogwal also raised the issue that, as of now, the Movement system entrenches some structures at village level in LC 1. The chairperson of LC1 is also a member of the Movement.  Now, speaking as a party person, I would probably say that we should always find a way of getting round some problems. If I were you, when you go to a village do not seek to recruit the chairperson of the LC 1. It will not be helpful at all.

Hon. Mukula said that once the Bill is enacted, Article 269 will lapse and the Bill will be the rule of the day. But he wants the Bill to give benchmarks to political progress. My only answer is that we will want to be patient, but progressively patient. What is going to happen will depend on the political operators. How will we relate to each other politically? How do organisations behave politically? How will you relate to the electorate? Once things go on smoothly, you will see that, quite easily, these restrictions will move out. The parties are free to go to the people and say, ‘this is what we want’. I must say we should not boycott talking to people.  If you boycott talking to people then you are really digging your own grave.  

Hon. Alleluya said that the Movement starts in a nursery but it should graduate. I say yes, of course graduation is a process. What I can call for is a quick graduation, so that we do not take too long to graduate.  

Lastly, hon. Okello-Okello asked why he could not start a political party with members of his own family or members of his own religion. Well, I must say that all the parties I know in existence now in Uganda started in this way, not necessarily sectarian in a way, but with few people. The problem now is Article 71(a). That Article says that a political party shall have a national character. If hon. Okello-Okello wants to have a political party, a family cannot, by any state of imagination, have a national character. It may of course operate as an association, for that we will not stop you, but if you want to operate it as a political party, it has to have a national character. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question to the motion that the Bill be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, as you heard, hon. Okello-Okello raised a pertinent point that amendments by Government should be circulated before we consider them. I think this is a reasonable proposition, and actually the Minister advised me that he is circulating these amendments. In view of that, I suspend the proceedings until 2.30 p.m.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 12.55 p.m.)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998


Clause 1

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert the words “and political parties” after the word “Organisation”.  

The reason is that Article 72(1) provides for the right to form political parties and other political organisations. So, in as much as the Bill mainly deals with political parties, this should be referred to in the Bill.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to

Clause 2

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to delete the following words in that clause: “on such date as the Minister may by statutory instrument, made with the approval of Parliament appoint; but the Minister may appoint different dates for different provisions of this Act”. And I beg to insert the following, “on becoming an Act of Parliament”.  

The reason for this is that without the proposed amendment, the clause amounts to giving the power to the Minister to vet what Parliament has enacted into law.  

Article 91(8) of the Constitution reads as follows: “A bill passed by Parliament and assented to by the President or which has otherwise become law under this article shall be an Act of Parliament and shall be published in the Gazette.”  

So, once it is an Act of Parliament, published to the whole world, it is improper to give discretion to a Minister to bring it into force by statutory instrument.  It should become law on a specific date. This also will reduce the confusion likely to arise from searching for statutory instruments to determine which part of the law is in force. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to

Clause 3

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 3, I propose that the meaning of the following terms in the Bill be deleted and replaced with the following: 
    i) “Executive officers of a political organisation or party” means the elected officers of that political organisation or party by whatever name called.
    ii)  “Founding members of a political organisation or party” means signatories to the original document registering that political organisation or party.
    iii) “Minister” means Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 
    iv) “Non Ugandan, Non Government Organisation” means a non-governmental organisation which is registered in Uganda but whose headquarters are located outside Uganda.  
    v) “Public meeting” means a meeting to which the public is generally invited and is held in a public place for purposes of clause 22 of the Bill.  

Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to

Clause 4, agreed to

Clause 5

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to substitute the word “Commission” with “Registrar General”. 

This is because the functions of the Electoral Commission are spelt out in Article 60 of the Constitution. The role of the Electoral Commission is to manage elections and not to regulate political parties.  

Secondly, there is already an established authority, which deals with registration of legal entities, and there is no reason to make exception here.  

Thirdly, this Parliament passed the Electoral Commission Act in February 1997 and did not deem it necessary to go beyond what is prescribed in the Constitution. It would have been more appropriate if this suggestion were considered under the appropriate law, that is the Electoral Commission Act, 1997. 

Lastly, the independence and impartiality of the Electoral Commission, provided for in Article 62 of the Constitution, shall be undermined if the Commission is to be involved in the disputes which will arise in registering and refusing to register political parties or organisations.  
Sir, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to

Clause 6

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to substitute “21” with “71” in that clause.  

Article 21 of the Constitution deals with the freedom from discrimination, and discrimination in Article 21(3) means to give different treatment to different persons attributable to their descriptions by sex, race, colour, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability. In this case, the question of giving different treatment does not arise, but rather formation of political organisations based on prohibited considerations. This is provided for in Article 71(b) of the Constitution, which reads as follows: “(b) membership of a political party shall not be based on sex, ethnicity, religion, or other sectional division”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to

Clause 7

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman,  I propose to delete the entire clause 7(1) and replace it with the following: “(1) every political party or organisation in Uganda shall be registered in accordance with this Act and shall pay such fee as is payable under the Registration of Documents Act.”

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 7(3), I propose to delete the words “but shall apply for registration within six months after commencement of this Act” and replace them with “shall file necessary documents within six months and such filing shall constitute registration.”  

The reason for this is that Article 270 of the Constitution already recognises certain political parties as existing. The purpose of registration is to bring into being entities that have not been in existence. And it is not necessary for political parties or organisations, which have been in existence, to seek registration. It would negate the intention in Article 270. 
I beg to move.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I might agree, but I would like the hon. chairperson to explain to me what Article 72(2) would mean, because it says that a party, whatever party it is, whether it is in existence or not, may not operate unless it is registered.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, Article 72(2) correctly reads as follows:“An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in this Constitution and it is registered.”  

What we propose later on will come to that. We provided for such a party, which was in existence and recognised by the Constitution, to file documents with the registrar of documents, and by the mere fact that it is filing, it be brought under the operation of this law.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: How then will you ensure, at least under Article 71(a), that that party is of a national character, because that is constitutionally required?

MR. OGALO: Since it is constitutionally required for a national character to be sought by getting signatures from one third of the districts, I believe that the political party in existence would have to fulfil that requirement. There is no way it would go around that, because it is constitutional.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But Article 270 reads as follows:“Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (2) of article 72 of this Constitution, but subject to article 269 of this Constitution, the political parties or organisations in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to exist and operate in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution until Parliament makes laws relating to registration of political parties and organisations.”  

Well, doesn’t this mean that they were not registered but they were assumed to exist until such a time the law for registration is in place, therefore, they will register under that one? That is why we have Parliament making laws relating to registration of political parties. The importance is here, “until the law for registration is in place”.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Chairman, my understanding of that Article is that nobody can come and say DP, CP or UPC cannot register because they are presumed to exist. They would have to follow the machinery for registration. You could say that we do not want a nazi party to register, because it does not fulfil certain objectives in the future, but the parties that were saved by the Constitution have a right to register, but they would have to follow the process of registration. They continue to exist until Parliament formalises their registration.  They register in accordance with the rules set up by Parliament. In which case, I think the proposed amendment is not correct. The registration remains necessary, but you cannot stop those parties that were saved from registering, while you can stop others.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I think I will go by your point, in that, they shall continue to exist and operate in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution until Parliament makes laws relating to registration of political parties and organisations. From this, it would appear that at the time Parliament makes these laws relating to registration, those political parties have got to come in and begin at that position. So, I cannot proceed with the amendment as it is. In which case, I will withdraw the requirement for them to merely file.  It does not arise now. We go back to the provision in the Bill, if that is okay, or the amendment as proposed by the Minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I now take it that the clause stands as it was, without any amendment.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that we replace that clause 7 (3) with the following: “A political organisation or party in existence under Article 270 of the Constitution, in this Act referred to as the existing political organisation, shall register under the section in accordance with clause 2 of Article 72 of the Constitution.”  

That does not say very much. It simply says it shall have to register. Another clause should then specify the manner of registering. So, we are proposing that the six months and things like that be deleted, and all that be replaced by this one, which is more compact.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But do you have to mention this, because Article 72(2) is a provision of general application. Do you have to mention it in respect of any particular political party? It is understood that any organisation or political party registering must comply with that one, then why do you have to mention existing parties? All parties are affected by this particular provision, so it is not necessary, I think. I will now put the question that clause 7 as amended stand part of the Bill, because there was an earlier amendment.

Clause 7 as amended agreed to.

Clause 8

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have noted from the amendment circulated by the Minister responsible for this Bill that clause 7(6) was deleted. Is it part of that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In view of the reference to the various provisions of the Constitution, both the chairperson and the Minister have dropped their proposed amendments so that we only have one amendment, which we carried before others came in. I put the question that clause 8 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9

MR.  OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, in clause 9 (1)(a), I propose to delete all the words after the word “by” and replace them with the words “authorised officers of the political organisation or party”. 

This is because the constitutions of different political parties or organisations may have different descriptions for their offices. I beg to move.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Some parties find it more suitable to work on a conventional constitution rather than putting down everything in writing. If they find a member not obeying them, they can sit down and remove him without going to court. So, I thought the question of writing down a constitution should not be so compulsory, but the party can be allowed to register, as we register the names of businesses. I take this from the British Government, it has no written Constitution, but it is working.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, to reply to hon. Nsubuga Nsambu’s objection, in order to avoid internal wrangles within parties, I think it would be better to be explicit on regulations governing that party, so that people joining them know exactly what they are going in for. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Satisfied?

MR. NSAMBU: I think that is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I beg your indulgence. I had circulated a small amendment under clause 7, which I think the Chairman also wants to read. It says, “the Registrar General shall be responsible for registering the political organisation or party under this Act”. The Chairman I think also wants this, so this would be 7(7).  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but before we come to sub-clause (7), are there other amendments between that?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we have one in (b), where we want to delete “one third” and replace it with “two thirds”.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I think two thirds is burdensome on parties. We want to leave one third only.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, there is an amendment proposed by the Committee, but the Minister is saying he wants one third. Chairperson, can you please assist us by reading the entire clause, including the proposed amendment.

MR. OGALO: “9 (1) An application to register a political organisation shall be made to the Commission and shall be accompanied by – 
(b) a list of the full names and addresses of at least one founding member of the political organisation from at least one third of the districts of Uganda being a member ordinarily resident or registered as a voter in the district”. That is the original clause I have read, now the amendment is to change one-third to two thirds.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the import of the amendment is understood. The original Bill suggests one third of the districts but the Committee wants two thirds. Let me put the question to the proposal by the Committee.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 9 (1)(e) reads as follows: “(1) An application to register a political organisation shall be made to the registrar and shall be accompanied by- 
    (e) such other particulars as the registrar may reasonably require” 

We propose to substitute this with the following: “the application referred to shall be in form 1 in the Second Schedule”.  The reason for this is for certainty.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to renumber and amend 9(3) to be 9(2) and to read as follows:  “The Registrar General shall cause independent inquiries to be made so as to ascertain the truth or correctness of particulars submitted with the application.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you want to change the order of these clauses?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, to renumber 9(3) to become 9(2). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And does 9(2) become 9(3)?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, that will come on the next page. We just renumber 9(2) to be 9(3). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, there is that proposal that you change what is 9(2) to 9(3) and 9(3) to 9(2).  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that 9(2) now reads as follows: “The Registrar General shall cause independent inquiries to be made so as to ascertain the truth or correctness of particulars submitted with the application.” 
I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that we have 9(3) read as follows: 
“The Registrar General shall not later than twenty one days after receipt of the application, issue the political party or organisation with a provisional certificate of registration and shall cause a notice of the application to be published in the Gazette as soon as practicable.”  I beg to move.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, when the chairman refers to registrar does he mean the Registrar General?  What do you mean by Registrar General? We have a Registrar General in the Ministry of Justice for registering all these sort of documents, is that the one you mean? If that is the case, please make it specific to mean the Registrar General.

MR. OGALO:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, that is the one we mean for purposes of registration.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that immediately after (3), we insert a new sub-clause and renumber accordingly. The new sub clause should read as follows:
“(4) The Registrar General shall not register any political party; whose 
    (a) name, symbols, slogans, or colours resemble a party that has already been registered.  
    (b) aims, objectives, constitution, regulations and rules contravene any law.” 
Accordingly, we should delete clause 9 (5) to (8).

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to

Clause 10

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I move that in clause 10(1), we insert the word “not” between “shall” and “issue” in the second line. So, subject to section 9 of this Act, the Registrar General shall not issue a final report. 

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, my proposal departs further away from the Bill than his. So, we begin with mine, because I propose to delete the whole clause. The reason for this is that the Registrar General shall have satisfied himself that the rules or regulations submitted to him conform to the laws of Uganda. He would have satisfied himself that there is at least one founding member from one third of the districts of Uganda. Before registration, he would also have satisfied himself that the motto, symbol, colour do not give the appearance that its activities are confined to one part of the country, and that no purpose of the political party or organisation has contravened the law.  The whole process would have been verified before the actual registration, so that by the time the Registrar General is allowing registration, he has satisfied himself that all the contentions of the precedents have been met. That is why we seek to delete this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, there is a proposal for deletion, and there is a proposal to just amend the existing clause.  Let us start with deletion. I put the question to the proposed amendment by the Committee, namely to delete the clause.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to substitute the words “existing political organisation” in clause 11(a) with “any political parties/organisations preserved under the provisions of the Constitution.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to

Clause 12

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 12 be deleted because it is a repetition. The political party or organisation has made an application to register and the Registrar is not satisfied. He requires more information and thereafter rejects the application once again. It is only logical that at this stage, that once the application has been rejected by him for a second time, the political organisation or party should seek remedy elsewhere, possibly in court.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 13

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 13, immediately after the word “declaration”, we insert the words “in Form 2 in the Second Schedule”. I also propose that we delete (a) and (b) in clause 13. 

This is because a schedule is more detailed and calls for specific information. It minimises the chances of avoiding mentioning some details, which could easily be avoided by such general provisions as in clause 13 in the Bill. 

Furthermore, since there will be a necessity for doing this annually, it becomes easier for purposes of record keeping. It should further be noted that a body corporate is expected to keep accounts as required by law. And there is already an established precedent that such information is given by way of annual returns. Therefore, the procedure where a format is provided simplifies the work and makes it easier for the parties concerned to know what is exactly required. 
I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Chairman, is it possible for these forms and schedules to be circulated, because we are deleting in expectation of forms, which we shall approve, and we do not have any prior notice of them. We do not know what shape they will have. Is it possible for the Committee to circulate them? Now we have created two forms and two schedules, and we are deleting clauses that are specific, in favour of forms whose content we do not know. So, it is very difficult to say, yes, we shall delete this clause, because it will be in a schedule, which is more specific, and yet we do not have that schedule.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if you look on page 23, you will find that the amendments by the Committee and schedules are provided for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He says that the schedules are part of the report, which he read to us.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 13, which concerns declaration of assets and liabilities, sub-clause (4) be deleted and be replaced with the following:  “the declaration shall also contain such other particulars as may be described by regulations made under section 32 of this Act.”  

Section 32 provides for regulations, which should be made by the Minister with the approval of Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I propose that clause 13(5) be amended to read as follows: 
“the declaration shall be supported by a statutory declaration made by the leader, the national treasurer and the national or general secretary of the political organisation or political party.”

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we also have an amendment on the same clause. We have a proposal to delete some words from clause 13 (5). We propose to delete the words after the word “supported” up to the very end of the sentence, and replace them with the words “authorised persons”.  

So, we seem to have two amendments, one from myself and one from the Minister. The reason we advanced our amendment was that each political party/organisation determines how to designate its leaders. It does this in its constitution, so we do not have to do it in the law here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying the political parties should decide the authorised person to make the verification, but the owner of the Bill says, let this be statutory. He names the people to make the verifications rather than leaving it as an internal decision of the party. I think these are the principles of the Minister and of the chairperson. You are saying, let it be an internal matter, and he is saying, let it be statutory.   I do not know whether the Members really notice the difference.  So, now I will put the question..  

MR. KUTESA: Before you put the question, Sir, I would like to get clarification from the chairman. Would anybody who is not a member of the executive of the party be asked to make a declaration under his proposed amendment? If you say that the party shall choose anybody, it does not have to be a member of the executive, and I have difficulty with that. Really, someone who is not fully conversant with these contribution receipts, for example, is not a member of the executive. How can you just say anybody? You could pick anybody from the streets, and if you do, I do not think it would be right. Maybe we would not designate which member of the executive, but at least we could say a member of the executive of the party, but not just anybody.   

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also have difficulty with the amendment proposed by the chairperson, particularly when we know that these political organisations or parties will be constituted as bodies corporate. It would only be fair, in this case, for the officers who must take responsibility, and who should be accountable, to be named statutorily. So, I support the amendment proposed by the Minister.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Since Members now know the difference between the two proposed amendments, let me put the question.

MR. WACHA:  Sir, I am a member of the Committee, but with permission of my chairman, can I improve on hon. Sam Kutesa’s suggestion. Instead of ‘authorised persons’, we say ‘authorised members of the executive’.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, with that we will know that it must be a member of the executive committee. Now the difference is the number, because the Committee is proposing one person, but apparently the Bill is suggesting that there should be more than one. So, that is the difference. Should we now vote on the proposed amendment by the Committee as improved by the hon. Ben Wacha, a member of the Committee? I now put the question to the proposal by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to re-write sub-clause (7) to read as follows: “Where a political party or organisation refuses to comply with this section within 21 days after notice from the Registrar General to do so, the Registrar General may de-register the political party or organisation.” 

We also propose to delete 7 (b). 

The reasons are because this is a constitutional matter and it calls for serious action. False declaration is provided for in the Penal Code Act.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please explain again, it may not be clear to Members.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Clause 13 (7) reads as follows: “Without prejudice to any other penalty prescribed by this Act or any other enactment, where a political organisation- 
    a) refuses or neglects to comply with this section; or 
    b) submits a declaration which is false in any material particular, 
that political organisation commits an offence.”  

That is what is in the Bill. Now, the Committee’s proposal is: “Where a political party or organisation refuses to comply with this section within 21 days after notice from the Registrar General to do so, the Registrar General may de-register the political party or organisation.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman, before you put the question to Clause 13 as amended, I would like to draw attention to 13 (5) as amended by hon. Ben Wacha. When the issue of numbers was raised, it had not been addressed. So, if we say the members of the national executive, how many members of the national executive should be stated in the clause?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Earlier, I explained that after the improvement by hon. Ben Wacha, the difference was the question of number. Should they be more than one, which is the Minister’s proposal, or should it be one? So, Members agreed that even one, if he is authorised and he is a member of the executive, is enough. So, now I put the question to clause 13 as amended.

Clause 13, as amended, agreed t)

Clause 14

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 14 (3) be deleted and replaced with the following: “If a political party or organisation refuses or neglects to comply with this section after due notice, the Registrar General shall serve the organisation with a notice to show cause why he should not commence proceedings for an order winding up the organisation 21 days after such notice or where the party or organisation fails to show cause, the Registrar General may commence proceedings to wind up the organisation.”  
I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, when the Cabinet considered this particular proposed amendment, they actually leaned on the side of leniency. We thought these amendments were rather draconian. We thought that we better leave what is provided for here in the Act, without really saying the party be wound up or all that. We did not want to really come to this kind of situation vis-à-vis the parties, and so we should not accept the amendment but leave what is there.  What is in the Bill reads as follows: 
“(3) Without prejudice to any other penalty provided in this Act or any other enactment, where- 
    (a) a political organisation refuses or neglects to comply with this section; or 
    (b) a political organisation makes a statement for the purpose of this section which is false in a material particular; 
that political organisation commits an offence.”  

In other words, committing an offence can be punished, but we thought winding it up really goes too far. That is our attitude.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 15 be deleted.  It is a long clause, I will read sub-clause (1). It reads as follows: “(1) This section shall only apply during a period when the multi-party political system is in force.” 
It goes on to give others. 

We propose to delete this clause because in the other sub-clauses, two to seven, there are matters dealing with the referendum. So, we think that where this section refers to a referendum, such matters are not appropriate in this Political Organisations Bill. In certain other instances, the clause alludes to presidential, parliamentary and general local government elections. It is certainly clear that laws do exist for presidential, parliamentary and local government elections. Those laws also provide how much fees should be paid by the intending candidates, and in the case of presidential elections, it provides for the assistance that will be given to the candidates. It is only in those laws that such matters can be addressed. 

Since this clause deals primarily with referenda or elections, those matters would be appropriately addressed in other laws. That is why I move that this be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 16(1), we delete the following words at the end of sub-clause because they are superfluous, “and its actions and purposes shall not contravene or be inconsistent with any law.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete clause 16(3) and replace it with the following, “The election of the national executive officers of every political party or organisation shall be conducted at such regular intervals save that the first elections shall be supervised by a representative of the Registrar General.”  

The reason here is that, where party members are summoned for a first meeting, which includes electing office bearers, there is a need for an impartial person to handle such elections and enhance the reason for providing for a representative of the Registrar General.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I find it quite interfering with the privacy of the political organisation. I do not think it is really necessary.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, could the hon. Member possibly indicate who would be in charge of that first meeting to conduct elections?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: If you consider how companies start, anybody can preside. They can decide on who will be the chairman. But why do you bring somebody from outside?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I will put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to

Clause 17

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 17(2), I propose to delete paragraph (a) and (b) and re-phrase the sub-clause to read as follows: “Every change or alteration referred to in sub-section (1) shall come into effect when the Registrar General approves the application to change or alter the rules, symbols, regulations, constitution, colour, name as the case may be.”  

The reason is that the Registrar General has been given power to make sure that the constitution and the rules comply with the law, therefore, he should have the power to ascertain whether the change or alterations is within the law.  

Furthermore, the Registrar General shall have, at his disposal, all names, colours, identifying symbols of political parties/organisations and is therefore best suited to determine whether the proposed change or alterations do not prejudice a political party already registered.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I would like to propose an amendment to clause 17(1) to add the expression “of” between “section 9” and “this”. It would read, “where a political organisation registered under section 9 of this Act intends to change or alter…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to

Clause 18

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 18, I propose to insert the words “which shall be accessible to any member of the political party or organisation” between the words “record” and “of”.  The reason here is to ensure that there is transparency in the political parties.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to get some clarification from the chairperson of the Committee.  With reference to what has been happening at many political party headquarters, for example the Water Gate scandal in the USA, it has been assumed that it is risky to keep all the party records at the headquarters. Noting that this is so, wouldn’t it be proper not to be so strict in insisting that records be kept at the headquarters of political parties?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in the first place, I would like to read clause 18(1) so that the import of the amendment is understood. It reads as follows:“Every political organisation shall maintain at its head or national office, an accurate and permanent record of the following…” They are listed.  

We propose to introduce the words “which shall be accessible to any member of the political party or organisation”, so that the records are accessible to members of the political party.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert a new sub-clause (6) to read as follows, “If any member of a political party or organisation is denied access to any of the records or accounts of the political party/organisation, such a member may petition the Registrar General and the Registrar General upon hearing from both parties may issue such orders as he deems fit.” 
I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to

Clause 19

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to re-phrase clause 19 to read as follows: “No person shall be appointed nor accept any political office in a political party/organisation in Uganda if he or she is; 
    a. not a citizen of Uganda 
    b. not resident in Uganda 
    c. above 75 years of age.”  

The reason for this is that managing political affairs of a political organisation requires dedication. It also requires discussions and consultation among office holders. It is therefore necessary that all political office holders are within the country. 75 years is also constitutionally recognised as the upper limit for holding an important office. The same ought to apply to political parties or organisations.  

MR. KARUHANGA: First of all, there is a little difficulty in the construction of that sentence. It could actually also mean a person, who is resident in Uganda, but not a citizen, can qualify. He actually meant a citizen, who is resident in Uganda, not a non-citizen who is resident in Uganda. So, that amendment in itself brings confusion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you improve on it?

MR. KARUHANGA: The question of age, to me, is also unconstitutional, because all citizens of Uganda have access to political offices and political organisations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about the President of Uganda? You put a restriction on the President of Uganda.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, of course for the President of Uganda the limitation is constitutional, but for other offices, there is no limitation. So, that is what I think.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that the amendment by the chairman of the Committee negates a very important principle of association, which we have expressed in the Constitution.  

Secondly, whereas the office of the President of this country is restricted beyond 75 years, the president or a chairman, whoever the office bearers of a political party would be, would not necessarily be the President of the country. These are two different things. A party may have a party president and sponsor another person, who is below 70 years, as a candidate to stand for office of the presidency of the country. So, I think we must be clearheaded and broadminded about this subject, because we are mixing two issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think Members have now appreciated the merits and demerits of the proposed amendments, I will now put the question.

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, the way you put the question may be very confusing, because the Members are only questioning (c), but not (a) and (b). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us start with the first proposal. What is it?

MR. OGALO WANDERA: A citizen of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO WANDERA: The second proposal is “not resident in Uganda”.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO WANDERA: Now we have the 75 years.

MR. KARUHANGA: I do not know whether we voted on the non-resident, did we?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.  

MR. KARUHANGA: On the question of 75, I really appeal to colleagues to reject it. It is as if we are legislating for Obote and we do not want Obote to continue to be the head of UPC. This is not fair!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, we have finished the debate. Now we are going to vote. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to

Clause 20

MR. OGALO WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete clause 20 (1) and (2). The reason for this is that this clause goes beyond what is provided for in Article 71(e) of the Constitution. That Article requires political parties to account for their funds and the sources. This clause would mean writing something more in the Article.  If the makers of the Constitution had intended a ceiling, they would have said so.  

Secondly, the ceiling of 20 million shillings per year is not realistic. It can hardly buy one car.  

Lastly, if an organisation has people, who have the same political aspiration or beliefs and are willing to promote such beliefs and aspirations, there is no need for them not to be allowed to grow just because of money.  After all, they will be embedded in the party or organisation’s constitution. Compliance with the law is enough. I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I would like clarification on where Article 71 of the Constitution is being contravened?

MR. OGALO WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, the clause reads as follows: “(1) The following shall not directly or indirectly make a contribution, donation or loan whether in cash or kind in excess of the value of one thousand currency points within any period of twelve months to funds held or to be held by or for the benefit of a political organisation -  
(a) a non-Ugandan citizen; 
(b) a foreign Government or diplomatic mission 
(c) a non-Ugandan non-Governmental organisation registered in Uganda under the Non-Governmental Organisations Registration Statute, 1989” 

And Article 71(e) of the Constitution reads as follows: “71. A political party in the multi-party political system shall conform to the following principles- 
    (e) political parties shall be required by law to account for the sources and use of their funds and assets.”  

That is where we draw it from, Mr. Minister. We did give our reason as reading more into the Constitution, because the Constitution simply requires you to account for the sources and the funds. But now what you are writing here is to refuse a certain source. You are saying that a foreign Government, or diplomatic mission, or a non-Ugandan citizen cannot be a source. That is reading more into what is provided in the Constitution, because in the Constitution you are only required to account for the source. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, is it not the same Constitution that guarantees security of this state? I think the hon. Member is just looking at one little thing. We are saying they may have all the money, but for heaven's sake, do not have the monies or funds which are going to be anti-state. Are we going to restrict ourselves simply to this little 71(e) on accountability of funds?  We do not mind where the funds come from but the nature of their funds!  I think that is wrong.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, under Article 72 (3) of the Constitution, Parliament is empowered to regulate the financing and functioning of the political organisations. So, under this power to regulate financing, I think Parliament is empowered to determine what sources of finance can be allowed and to what extent the financing can be allowed. So, we are acting within our constitutional powers under this Article.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Chairman, I have a different concern.  I do not know whether the chairman is also outlawing loans, apart from donations and contributions. If I take a loan from a foreign bank, to put up a building for my party, I do not see why I should not be allowed to do that, because I will be able to pay back this loan? That is different from a contribution or a donation that is supposed to finance my campaigns. Many times you may not find the same favourable terms of borrowing in a country like this one. Why can’t I borrow?   

I am concerned more about the loans. What is a foreign bank, for example? As far as I am concerned, Standard Bank is probably a foreign bank here, Barclays Bank is a foreign bank, and DFCU may be a foreign bank, so where would I borrow?

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, I think the problem we have here is to do with mortgaging in the country - (Interjections)- Yes, because one assumes that anybody who starts a party is actually vying for power or for governance. This means that, if you get monies, which are beyond a certain limit or even if you borrow, where is the guarantee that when you have borrowed so much money and you are in Government you cannot fraudulently use Government coffers to pay back that loan for your party.  

In actual fact, we are trying to give effect to Article 1 of the Constitution of this country, which says that sovereignty lies with the people. And in fact, a bank loan is even worse, because not only are you going to pay back the loan, but you will also pay it with interest, which means you are doubly mortgaging your sovereignty as a future representative of the Government of your country. So, that is really the problem behind this.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, the other problem or the other drift to this is that there are too many money-lending institutions around the world, which not only lend money but they launder money. There are many very big curtails, including those that deal in drugs in places like Colombia, which channel money to money lending institutions, and these can hold a country at ransom.  Now, banks like Barclays Bank, Standard Bank, which are registered within the country, do not fall in this category. These ones fall outside that category, because they are registered in the country, even if they are foreign.  

What we are talking about here basically are those institutions, which have got ties with foreign interests, and they can turn around a Government when you are in power or if you win the elections. This is the concern of this concept. What happens to a party, which is being financed by a foreign interest, which has got a different aim for financing that organisation? If it is done beyond a certain point, they could hold you at ransom, and this has happened in some countries. This is the main concern.  

I want you to remember that this should not happen to you, and if it happens to you when you are not in Government, it can be extremely difficult. If it happens to you when you are in Government, probably you might enjoy that trapping for a few months, but after some time, you could get yourself in a lot of trouble in terms of awarding contracts and people getting involved in all sorts of trade and business. This is the main concern. I thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I think this question of parties getting loans from foreign banks or institutions need not cause us great fear. First of all, what is a loan? You know that it is completely different from a donation or just an ordinary contribution. Before you go to any bank or institution and apply for a loan, that institution will look at you very carefully. It is something you are going to repay. It looks at the proposal and whether, out of that proposal, you are likely to have a return to pay back. 

So, I think the fear of Her Excellency the Vice President, which appeared very patriotic, I must say, should also be looked at in the sense that no credible foreign bank is going to loan a political organisation any money without critically looking at the possibility of repayment. These banks are going to look at this proposal and give you money, and if they give the money, it is up to you to use it properly. If you want to build headquarters, like UPC has done, and you want to get a ten storied building, that in itself could be part of the security.  

With the problem that we have with resources, a political party needs to have some form of business. A political party may wish to run a printing press or a newspaper, but where are you going to get all this money? Of course, I know that some people have already got it. They are lucky. They have laid their foundation on the national budget, so the next time switching over to another political party comes, they will be are okay. For example, if the Movement switched over to a political party, they would be lucky, but for those who are going to start afresh, they will need all sorts of assistance.   So, let us really not shift the political parties unnecessarily. They need these loans, and foreign banks are very careful when it comes to giving these loans.  They will look at the project before they give the loan.

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look at these organisations as organisations, which are aspiring for power, and not mere business entities. When we talk about banks like Standard Bank, yes, it is a foreign bank, but it is denied certain operations within the Companies Act of Uganda. When they want to come here, they have to get a Memorandum of Association, which derives powers from our own Act. Therefore, they cannot give us what we do not want, because they have to go to the Registrar of Companies, unlike these political organisations, which would wish to politically overpower other organisations in power. Usually when you are trying to displace the other one, you use very many strategies, and those, which want to get into power very quickly, would want to get money from anywhere. They can even mortgage this country if political vulnerability exists in the country.  

Once you give a political organisation the freedom to get this money, they will even get this money from drug traffickers because they would want by all means to take over power. And these are the organisations we would like to give the lieu way to go and look for unscrupulous loans from abroad! They are not worried about these small ones, which get money from foreign banks, which operate within and are controlled by Acts of Parliament. Those ones are not there. They can go to Brazil, to Columbia or even now to the Democratic Republic of Congo, which is an enemy state.  Some aspirant actually went there. He went there, I think to collect money. And that is enemy money, because we are at war with that country. Supposing you are to get a loan from there, what would that loan be for? It would be for fighting this country. That is what they mean by these loans. 

Therefore, I appeal to you, hon. Members, not to look at the local loans and regard them as serious loans. The loans are for overthrowing Government. Thank you.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Chairman I would like to propose an amendment. I think this should be at the end of this clause. It says, “for purposes of loans under this clause, the foreign banks registered in Uganda shall not be treated as non-citizen”. I am trying to find a middle course by saying that we can have loans, but at least we authorise banks, which are registered in this country.  Yes, I am scared by what the Vice President said, and rightfully so, but I must find a way – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think we need to stand over this particular one so that you think about it? Maybe we could proceed with other amendments and we shall come to it later. It could be debated, but I suggest that we stand it over and proceed with others that will not generate a lot of problems. I have not said we are not going to debate it, but maybe we should proceed with others.  

MR. KARUHANGA: I think it would be nice to know what the issues are. I think there is a misunderstanding, and if we leave it like that, without knowing where the differences are and what the issues are, we will still come back with no solution. So, we should define where the differences are, and then we could think about it.  

The original text of the Bill says that you can get money from foreigners but that money must not be in excess of a certain amount. This means you can even get loans from foreigners, but that money must not be more than what is specified. I am very attracted to that idea.  The Committee is saying you can borrow money from a foreigner, and it keeps quiet. It does not say up to some time, and that leaves our country absolutely mortagageable.  

You saw what happened with a man called Bandru in Congo. He said he was putting so much money so they can fight the war, after the war they will deal with him. And do not forget you are talking about political factions. One faction takes over power, has taken a loan from a certain loaner, not necessarily a bank, and the contracts come, and in order for it to survive, it will have to rely on its financier.  

We cannot allow our country to be mortgaged.  The Vice President is correct. We must limit wherever these loans are coming from. We do not mind the loan coming, but there must be a limitation on it. Therefore, I favour the original text in the Bill. These other amendments open our country to mortgaging. The Americans, the British, the French, the Germans, whom we all follow, have strict constitutional rules, not just Bills, on the limitation of money from foreigners. The other day one Chinese man doing business in America in California gave money to President Clinton’s party at the President’s election.  This almost brought the Clinton Government down, because they accepted money from the Koreans. Who would influence the Bill? 

In Nigeria we have a situation of chaos. We have lost a lot of valuable Africans just because foreign money is influencing politics in countries. So, we have to protect our country. We are moving into a new World.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on the motion.

MR. OGALO WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, as a matter of procedure, you had ruled that this matter be stood over. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was just proposing, but it was opposed. I thought we would keep it pending for some time and we proceed, but it seems they want to vote.

MR. OGALO WANDERA: It was not the Members, Mr. Chairman, it was hon. Karuhanga who argued against your proposal, but I agree with you. If it is causing us so much disagreement, we stand it over, we shall come to it later. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, that is agreed. We stand it over.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I am effecting an amendment to clause 20.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have agreed. You will effect the amendment tomorrow.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: It is different.  It is not connected with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall give you an opportunity to move your amendment tomorrow after we have finished this. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I am travelling to France. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with clause 21 now. I will now put the question to clause 21.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22
 
MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 22 (1), I propose to delete the word “seventy two” and replace it with “forty eight”. Seventy-two hours are too long for mere notification and no other action is called for, save to provide security.  I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose this amendment.  First of all, we have stated that this political organisation of whatever nature must have a national outlook. If it must have a national outlook, when you summon a meeting, somebody in Kisoro, Moyo, or Kotido at least needs a bit of time. So, can you justify as to why you are reducing this time to forty-eight hours?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is for notification to the local police where the meeting is going to take place. It has nothing to do with summoning people from various parts of the country. So, he is talking about local information to the local police in Kotido, if the meeting is going to be there.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: For example, if I am going to have a meeting in Kotido and I also want some of my members to be there early, I provide information. So, the notice of 72 hours is good for security and all other arrangements.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, there was a motion to amend, which is being opposed.  Now, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to delete clause 22(3) and replace it with the following: “The organisers of the meeting shall give a police officer in charge of the area the time, venue and proposed duration of the meeting”.  

This amendment has been brought so as not to give the discretion to the Police to refuse an organisation or a political Party such a meeting, since it is just for purposes of notification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you heard the proposed amendment? Some Members say it is not clear.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Clause 22(3) reads as follows: “The organisers of the meeting shall give a police officer in charge of the area such information relating to the meeting as he or she may reasonably require”.  

The essence of this is that the police officer may require from you certain information, and if he is not satisfied with the information you are giving, he has the discretion to refuse. We are removing the discretion from the police officer, because according to 22(1), you are merely giving notification to the police. So, the proposed clause 22(3) should read as follows:
“The organisers of the meeting shall give a police officer in charge of the area the time, venue and proposed duration of the meeting”. That is all.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, what are these public meetings? Are these rallies? Our concern is that the constitutional provision is saying that we should not legislate above what may cause the Movement system, which was adopted, not to be workable. But now here we are saying public meetings, what are these public meetings?

MR. KAVUMA: I thank hon. Kayonde for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Kayonde and Members of Parliament that in accordance with section 3, a public meeting means a meeting attended by more than 20 persons in a public place for the purposes of promoting the interests of a political organisation. I thank you, Sir.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I would like clarification from the chairperson of the Committee on this notice of 48 hours. When Dr. Lukwiya, the Medical Superintendent of Gulu, died a political organisation may have wanted to call a meeting so as to pass a message of condolence and talk about him to the people. Now, such a meeting must be held immediately so that people can pass their message of condolence and endorse it in the public meeting. It may be another tragedy in the country, and a political party must hold a meeting immediately. It could be something like an earthquake in Fort Portal or another disaster and a political party would like to hold a public meeting to talk about that tragedy. Now, if you do not hold it immediately and you give notice to the police, 48 hours is too late. So, I really think that 48 hours is on the higher side. There is no need for 48 hours.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we have already dealt with that provision, so there is no question of going back, maybe at recommittal stage.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, I can see that clause 22 is conflicting with what is provided in the Constitution for when one system is in place. I think we are going beyond the limit that the Constitution allows, and I want to move that clause 22 be deleted. I beg to move.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I am just seeking guidance here, because we have already expressed ourselves on 22(1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes we have, we are now dealing with 22(3).  Maybe when I put the question on 22 as amended is when we shall vote. If you say, no, it means it will be deleted. So wait for that.

MR. KUTESA: I have a problem with clause 22(3), which almost runs through the whole clause. We are talking about notifying the police officer in charge of the area, but what is he expected to do when you notify him? Can he say no? Can he say that there may be a breach of the peace? Can he say yes? You notify him and then what? I think we are not providing for that at all. Here we are saying that you must give him notice within 48 hours.  Suppose you give him notice and indeed there is insecurity in an area or there is some possibility of a breach of the peace, what is he supposed to do?  According to this clause, the policeman just receives notice and that is it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kutesa, a police officer does not only operate under this law, there are other laws under which he operates. Supposing you give him notification and there is a quarantine because of one reason or another, definitely he will tell you because of this reason you cannot hold a meeting. So, many laws will have to come into play. But in here a political party is required to notify. If the police officer has got a good reason for the rally not to be held, then he has to state it.

MR. KUTESA: I thought that the better proposal would be if you notify the police officer in charge of an area and he has no objection within 24 hours, you go ahead. But if you leave it open-ended, then he has basically nothing. I do not know what other laws say, but I would have thought that it would be better to say that what is required of you is to give him notice, and if he has had no objection within 48 hours, then you go ahead.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then propose an amendment so that we see what to do with it. 

MR. KUTESA: Let me draft it, Mr. Chairman.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, we are of the view that since we are going to re-committee section 8 dealing with rallies, we could delete 22 and handle it under there and put in the necessary amendments.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, my casual look at Section 8 is that it restricts public meetings before final certificates and before registration. Now, this one seems to be dealing with meetings of these political organisations after they have been registered. I do not think the two have any relevance, but let me say this, there seems to be a move towards deleting this for purposes of curbing political party meetings. That would be very unfortunate, because you are passing a law regulating the functions of political parties and yet not allowing them even to do the most obvious part of their function, to meet with their people. I do not think we should be seen to be obsessive with protecting ourselves. It would be unfortunate, and I warn you, if you do this, then you will have gone back to the position, which we have been striving so much to be seen to have moved away from.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Clause 22 (2) reads as follows:"No two or more political organisations shall hold a meeting in the same place and time" 

It follows that the police officer should be able to advise in case there is one meeting disallowed or something like that. But the clarification I am seeking here is, can the advise be in writing so that when I am given permission I have it, or in case I am denied, I use it as a means to seek redress.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what hon. Kutesa has said. We need to improve on the clause so that it states what the police officer is supposed to do on notification. But I am waiting for that at an appropriate time.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, the point to note on this is that this is one of those fundamental issues. We must not be seen to be using the police to restrict the freedoms of parties to speak, to associate and to hold rallies where they want to hold rallies. We are dealing with a Political Organisation's Bill, so we are assuming that time is coming when there will be political parties. To be seen to want to restrict them unnecessarily is not healthy for us. 

At the same time, being Parliament, we have a duty to stop somebody from holding a rally in a place where there is an Ebola outbreak. When an aspiring politician goes and holds a rally in such a place, saying that he wants to demonstrate against Ebola, the police have a duty to stop such a politician. Therefore, we are caught up in situation where we need absolute freedom for parties to operate, but - (Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Karuhanga to mislead this House that political parties may hold its rallies, under the provision of this law, when there are problems like Ebola and other disasters?  These are governed by other laws, and those laws will be enforced, like the Public Health Act. You will be stopped because of the provisions of other laws. The penal code provisions are there, so you do not have to use these provisions. So, is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the problem has been caused by what hon. Kutesa said. He said that the way the provisions end, one does not know what the police officer is supposed to do. The police officer is faced with a situation of Ebola and you have just notified him, does he keep quiet because you have just notified him because the law says you notify him? There is nothing we have put here as to what the police officer should do. I think this provision requires improvement. If there is a quarantine, will the police officer say stay because you have notified me or that I am sorry there is this and the other. If the security situation does not warrant holding political rallies, he should be able to advise you and tell you that this is going to endanger you so do not hold the rally here. But I think the way it ended does not provide for this. If hon. Kutesa has an improvement to make, he should bring it so that we understand clearly how this should end.

MR. WACHA: Even then, Sir, are there no provisions in the Police Act to deal with such situations? Do we have to keep on repeating what appears in one law in all the other laws that we are going to make?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Agreed, and I told him that as far as I know, police officers do not only operate under this law.  They operate under other laws also. But the problem may be, if he stops you because of a quarantine, which is not specified here, you will say, how can you stop me because my duty is only to notify you, I have notified you, so why do you stop me? So, I think we need to say something, provided the police officer, for some reasons, may do this and the other. Otherwise, it is not provided and it may cause problems or insinuations.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, could I make an appeal to you and to Members of Parliament. What is really being resolved is public rallies. And clause 8, which I intend to re-commit, also deals with public rallies. I think we need some time to think over this. As we stood over clause 20 concerning money, I request that we stand this over also.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you move a motion for the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report there to.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Political Organisation's Bill, 1998 from clauses 1 to 21, and passed them with several amendments.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Sir, I shall need assistance from you. If I want to re-committee a clause, how do I do it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will come at the end.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you for the great work you have done. We have gone a long way in dealing with this Bill. If it had not been for some touchy provisions, maybe we would have gone further. But go and think about them, then tomorrow we will be able to find solutions to some of the queries raised. 

With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7th December, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)

