                                                    Tuesday, 5 December 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)
 

MOTION

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, and hon. Members I stand to move a Motion to cause this august House to fulfill it’s historical duty in approving Members elected to the Interim Electoral Commission.  Sir, with your permission before I move I request that you allow me Sir, to request you to ask hon. Nkurukenda Florence to abstain from participating in these proceedings and hon. Azizi Kasujja. Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Interim Electoral Commission Statute which we passed in this House some time ago, we have to have an Interim Electoral Commission for purposes of refreshing our memories, Sir, permit me to read the provisions of that section.  It reads, “There shall be a Commission to be known as the Interim Electoral Commission which shall consist of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and not less than three and not more than five other Members appointed by the President on the advise of Cabinet and with the approval of the legislature.”  Under that Statute the legislature is defined to mean a body authorised to make law for the whole of Uganda and clearly during this transitional period that Statute is referring to this august House the National Resistance Council as the legislature to approve appointments made by His Excellency on the advise of Cabinet to fill positions on the Interim Electoral Commission.

My Motion is also on conformity with Articles 2.6.3 and 2.6.4 of the Constitution in effect to those provision, Sir, allowed the NRM Administration or Government to continue in office until the 7th of July, next year and it allowed all the organs of the Movement to continue doing their duties has they had been doing before the promulgation of the Constitution.  I am pleased Sir, to represent to you and this hon. House for their approval the names of the following persons who have after thorough scrutiny been considered to be fit and proper persons to serve the Interim Electoral Commission.  I must explain, Sir, that Cabinet considered these persons and advised the appointing authority who is His Excellency the President as required by law. 


The names Sir are:

1. Mr Akabwai Steven Besweri   	- Chairperson.

2. Mrs Nkurukenda Florence      	 	- Deputy Chairperson.

3. Mr Owori Charles              		- Member

4. Mrs Saida Namirembe Bumba 	- Member

5. Mr Philip Edulo  			- Member

6. Mrs Margaret Sekajja            		- Member

7. Mr Azizi Kasujja             		- Member


With your permission I will give a bit of information about the Members being presented to the House and I am encouraged to note the support the House if already giving to the Motion. (Applause)  As hon. Members are aware, Mr Akabwai has been the Commissioner for Constituent Assembly, Mr Akabwai is a graduate professional teacher of Linguistics and Economics and has authored many school textbooks both in English and vernacular.  He has served as an Educational Administrator and a Senior Inspector of Schools and has over 25 years of working experience; Mr Akabwai is a Member of the Charter Drafting Committee of the African Association of Election Administrators.

Mr Akabwai did a commendable job in organising and managing the CA elections and overseeing the CA throughout its deliberation on the draft Constitution that culminated into our Constitution.  During those two exercises, Mr Akabwai acquired vast wealth of additional administrative experience and election organisation skills and the Commission when set up with no doubt have a lot to benefit from the services of Mr Steven Besweri Akabwai as it’s Chairperson. (Applause)

Mrs Nkurukenda F. Deputy Chairperson was born in 1945, she is a graduate of the University of East Africa with a Bachelor of Education, she is a former Deputy Minister in the Ministry of Local Government and she is an active leader having at one time or another carried several positions of responsibility in public life and civic organisations.  Mrs Nkurukenda satisfies all the requirements to be entrusted with responsibilities on the Electoral Commission as it’s Deputy Chairperson. (Applause)

 Mr Owori William Charles Member, Mr Owori was the CA delegate for Aswa county Gulu district.  He is a graduate of Makerere University and the University of West Indies where he obtained a master of Laws Degree.  Mr Owori worked in the Ministry of Justice and he was the executive director Uganda Legal Resources Centre Kampala up to the time he was elected to represent the people of Aswa in the Constituent Assembly.  Mr Owori did a good job in the Constituent Assembly, he participated effectively and most importantly he was a very useful Member of the Legal and Drafting Committee we have no doubt in our minds, Sir, that Mr Owori is fit and proper person to hold the office of a Commissioner. (Applause)

Mr Philip Edulo is 42 years old and he holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Economics he served in several executive posts in Public Service before he went into private business.  He was a chairman of RC 5 Moyo District.  Mr Edulo we have no doubt he is fit and proper person to serve in the position of a Commissioner. (Applause)

Mrs Saida Namirembe Bbumba is a graduate of Makerere University and holds a Bachelor of Commerce Degree.  Hajati Namirembe Bbumba has vast working experience in financial institutions including the Uganda Development Bank where she is at the moment the top executive of the finance department.  She has held numerous positions of responsibility in various fields of public life she is the chairperson of the organisation of Muslim University Women in Uganda, she has served on many boards and in all the posits she has served, she has exhibited a firm commitment to work for the good of our nation.  Mr Chairman, once again I have no doubt in my mind that Mrs Namirembe Bbumba is a fit and a proper person to serve on the Commission as a Commissioner. (Applause)

Mrs Margret Sekajja, Member, is a Principal Lecturer at the Law Development Centre. She is a graduate of Makerere University and the University of Zambia Lusaka.  She was involved in the Constitution making process as a researcher for the Constituent Assembly Secretariat involved in writing legal opinions and research for the C.A and giving legal advice to the delegates.  She also advised and served the technical committee in her capacity as a researcher and the legal and Drafting Committee.  She is also a trained Constitutional Lawyer.  Mrs Sekajja has worked as a teacher of law, a Magistrate and a Consultant in the Legal profession.  She is a serious writer on legal subjects and has participated in many local and International conferences, she is a committed and hard working woman; she is a suitable person to be a Member of the Interim Electoral Commission. (Applause)

Mr Azizi Kasujja served as an active Member on the Constitution Commission as a Commissioner.  He holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree with long working experience as a Banker, he was a delegate in the Constituent Assembly and he is a Member of the NRC, he is a dedicated and serious worker. (Applause) Mr Chairman, once again we have no hesitation in recommending that, hon. Kasujja serves as a Member of this Commission.

Hon. Chairman and Members, I want to repeat that Cabinet and the appoint authority has thoroughly scrutinize the above names and they are satisfied that they posses the required qualifications under the law and the qualities called for by the offices of Commissioners.  I am also glad to report that our equivalent of the appointment’s committee of this House in the transitional period has also considered and approved the appointments.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, permit me now to refer to some of the provisions of our constitution, under the national objects and directive principles of state policies part three, there are among others the following provisions; one that all organs of the state and the people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity peace and stability.  

Two; that every effort should be made to integrate all the people of Uganda while at the same time recognizing the existence of our ethnic religious ideological, political and cultural diversity.

Three; that everything shall be done to promote a culture of co-operation, understand, appreciation, tolerance and respect for each others customs, traditions and believes.  

Four; that the State shall provide a peaceful secure and stable political environment, which is necessary for development.  Furthermore, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, in part six of the objectives of State policy, the Constitution provides that the State shall ensure gender balancing and fair representation.  (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members it is in the spirit of our national objectives that, the team presented to you, this afternoon has been assembled, it is in the same spirit that we seek approval of that team which withered through the scrutiny of Cabinet, the Appointing Authority and the Appointment’s  Committee.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members that is the team for which we seek your approval.  It is a team of men and women of integrity, proven experience and ability in public affairs, it is a team that is well balanced within the teams of our constitution, it is a team that the country and indeed our Friend’s else where in the world have been anxiously waiting for, this team should have received hon. Members approval yesterday.  It is the team that will play a crucial role in ensuring that the forth coming election will be organised in such away that it would be considered by all to have been free and fair.  

I wish to report that Government puts it’s full support behind this team and it is my humble submission and request, Sir, that this House plays it’s historical and rightful role in this matter by giving it’s unqualified approve to a team that has been so well assembled.  I beg to move Sir. (Applause)

MISS KADAGA (Women Representative Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I second the Motion and in so doing I would like to draw the attention of this House to the provisions of the Constitution as promulgated on the 8th, October 1995.  We are governed and bound by the objectives and the operative part of the Constitution.  I would, therefore, like to draw the attention of this House to objective number two which states, “That all the people of Uganda shall access to the leadership position at all levels subject to the Constitution”.  It is our submission that the composition as presented here fully conforms with this -(Applause)-   I also draw the attention of the House to objective number 15; which states, “The State shall recognise the significant role that women play in society”. 

 It is also our submission, Mr Chairman, that having three out of seven Members of the Commission fully comprises with the provision of the Constitution. (Applause)

According to articles 60 and 61 of the Constitution, the Commissioners are required to be persons of high morale character and integrity with considerable experience in the conduct of public affairs.  It is our submission that the Members do posses all these qualifications and I would like to commend the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs for his commitment to the compliance with the Constitution.  

As the Minister has already stated, this House has a big responsibility to the nation we must be seen to facilitate the transition from this interim period to an elected Government.  While the consultation have been carried out and I would urge Members to approve the composition of this commission as quickly as possible so that we can leave this country from political uncertainty.  

We are already behind schedule the country is in suspense they want to know when the elections are going to be held let us, therefore, be statesmen and fulfill our public duty. I would like to assure the House that in this interim period the Appointment’s Committee of this House charge the responsibility of vetting proposals by the President has already done so and we believe that this is a step in the right direction we hope to improve upon this in the next parliament.  

I will touch briefly upon the Members of the Commission.  Mr Akabwai is a person very familiar to all of us, his performance has not been put in question, our Colleague Mrs Nkurukenda is well known to us especially the women as a hard working person, very committed to this country, Mrs Margaret Sekajja is a very Senior lecturer at the Law Development Centre many of you are familiar with her both here and from her working in the Constituent Assembly.

Mr Philip Edulo rose to the high rank of the Chairman of the first five of the district of Moyo.  This was in the first three years of the end of NRM Administration, for a man who was below 40 to have become an RC 5 Chairman, -(Applause)- I think that is a point in his favour.  

Mr Charles Owori is my professional colleague, we have worked with him in his capacity as a State Attorney in the Ministry of Justice he was employed as a State Attorney in the department of the first Parliamentary Council where he expelled and consequently was sent abroad for further studies when he obtained a Masters Degree in legislative drafting.

Mr Azizi Kasujja, we are familiar with his performance on the Constitution Commission in the Constituent Assembly as well as this House, I am more than satisfied that he is a proper person to be on this Committee.

Mr Chairman, with those few words I would urge Members to assist the country to move towards the next phase of our democratic transition.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to make some few remarks about the presentation by the Minister.  First of all I would like to thank him for presenting this Paper.  This is a very responsible House and we make very responsible decisions, but before you do that you need time, you need to consult, and you need to check to know what you are going to do. (Applause) I think more honesty we should have been given these names a few days back so that we can consult I do not think that we all know who these people are and that is not to through any doubt above their integrity, it is simply to give us an opportunity to be able to look at each one of them consult each other so that when we make a decision we are sure that we have made a decision worth the name of this House, and, therefore, I would like to propose that we be given time a day or two to consult each other on these names. (Applause) 

Looking at this list there are a few important facts which are not indicated for some of them, I definitely did not expect Government to present a Paper of seven names without a name of a youth unless some of these people whose age are not shown are youth, but by the definition of a youth there is no youth.

I also like to bring out one important fact, although we are working in a Movement system I think it is very clear that in this country political parties do exist and I think no fairness and for the sake of good governance Government should have consulted political parties and as far as I know, you have not consulted.  The Appointing Authority for these names has indicated that he is a Presidential candidate in the forth coming elections and there also others some of us who are interest in the same exercise. (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, I think the President has selected people who are bound at best to wish him success in the coming election -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor that among the names presented there is one Charles Owori whom I worked with in the Constituent Assembly and he never made it a secret that he is a support and believer in the policies and philosophy of UPC and he is a very able lawyer at the same time we benefited a great deal from him. So, it is absolutely not correct to say that this team is designed to support one political candidate as opposed to any other.  I wanted to give that information, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, whether Mr Owori is a Member of the Uganda People’s Congress or not, I think it would have been better if these names were, say, for example; if Mr Owori’s name was proposed by his own political party. (Interjection)  What I am trying to point out is that, in the interest of good governance political parties which are now in existence in this country should have been consulted.  (Interjection)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I think I should give this information to the hon. Member, because what we are discussing is purely on the law we made in this House, the Interim Electoral Commission and the provisions of contacting political parties and others does not appear.  So, at the time we were making that law he should have brought that amendment in so that we would have catered for the situation now, as it stands now we are proceeding the law we made here the Interim Electoral Commission Statute.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I have not quoted any laws, I have said in all honesty and in the interest of good governance and for the sake of wanting to make people feel comfortable and sure that justice is being done it would be fair that political parties be consulted if they have not been consulted that is an error and we may leave to regret it. Mr Chairman, 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, hon. Tiberondwa please proceed.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, having made these remarks, therefore, I would like to appeal to the hon. Minister and to appeal to you that the hon. Members of this House be given an opportunity to consult more about these people so that we can discuss it with more information and with -(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that during the time when we were in the C.A parties were consulted and definitely UPC did not send the candidate into that assembly so I do not think it is right for hon. Tiberondwa now to demand that parties should be consulted on this aspect. (Applause)

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr chairman, if we are going to behave as if this one is a Constituent Assembly I think we shall not go very far (Laughter) The Constituent Assembly produced it’s constitution and we are using it, I would also like, before I sit down to point out one thing and important thing which the hon. Minister has made at the beginning of his submission that this Parliament will continue to do what it has been doing as provided for in the new constitution.  I would like, therefore, to ask the Minister when he is winding up to compare this remark by the remark he made earlier in this House when he said that this NRC has no power to amend the constitution.  With these remarks, I once again ask that we be given a day or two to look at these names thank you.

MR RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the motion. The public has been disappointed they have been asking, you Parliament, you NRC what are you doing, why do you not do the thing that matter at the moment and people are waiting for elections.  

So, as a matter of fact, we should have done this much earlier so that people know the trend of things how we are going to have the elections, when, and through all these procedures.  Although there is a timetable, but time is not for us, time moves faster than people’s actions, so it is high time that this body is confirmed so that it can start work for preparing elections.  When we confirm this body I would request Government to do it’s best to make sure that this new team of the Electoral Commission be facilitated with enough infrastructures, enough logistics to do the job they are supposed to do, because it would not help us at when we confirm the body and they stay another month with no job because there is no car, there is no type writer, there are no papers. So, I hope the Minister is very much aware that the body after being confirmed must be given all the logistics possible so that they can do the job that is expected of them.  

After this passing of this body, the next thing is the Electoral Law, because the people those who want to stand, those who want to vote they want to know what will be the procedure of the new elections or what are the constituencies, who is supposed to vote, what are the procedure, what are the arrangement, all these should be elaborated in the Electoral Law that should be next to the passing of this Motion.  The new body has got a lot to do, as we talk now the registers for those to vote are not yet complete I want to report, that upcountry we have got three groups of people who are not yet on the registers.  First, some who never registered during CA and some have remained there they are not motivated they are not encouraged; they are not educated about the importance of being registered.

Number two, we have people who want to shift their electoral transfers some people who voted in Kampala they want to go up country and that process is not yet completed.

Number three we have the youth who are becoming 18 this month and perhaps next month all these things have be put into consideration. I am afraid to say that the information about a registering exercise was not properly published and people have taken it for granted that whether he is registered or not, I do not mind people will vote, but I think this is unfortunate I think everybody above 18 years has got not only a right, but a responsibility to vote the Government that will govern him for the next five years.  Therefore, the Electoral Commission has got a lot of work to do to make sure that the registers are in place and everybody who is supposed to vote is on that register so that tomorrow we do not get excuses that people were not informed.  So there is a lot of civic education to be done either by the Minister of Constitutional Affairs or the new Electoral Commission so that by the time we go for elections everybody is in the right place.  

Regarding the people that have been brought to us, definitely Mr Steven Akabwai I think he is fit to be a Chairman through the work he has done, through his impartiality and state man ship definitely that name needs to be supported because he is quite brave and transparent person who can lead us in the next exercise of proper elections of our new Government.  Mrs Nkurukenda has been with us in this House, she has been a Deputy Minister in Local Government I think her record is quite good.  Now when they talk of multipartyists definitely as hon. Kanyeihamba has said, Hon. Charles Owori is a multipartyist, but a man who is well balance, a gentleman sober -(Applause)- and, therefore, I think he will stand in very well for any other party that will like to put a representation.

Mr Philip Edulo, I knew him when I used to work in Moyo when I was in the Ministry of Rehabilitation, we did a great job to have about 600 returnees people from Sudan, Zaire, and he was then Chairman RC 5 he is a man who can be dedicated to his job and I have no doubt that given this responsibility he will do a very good job.

Hon. Azizi Kasujja has been with us here and in C.A and with the experience he has had in public office he should be able to help us on this Commission.

The other Members I do not know them very well, but I think we have got other Members who can talk about them.  Mr Chairman, with those few words I support the Motion.

MR GWAIVU (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion, but I want strongly to conquer with hon. Tiberondwa on the issue of giving us time to consult -(Applause)- because the Motion assumes that since these seven have gone through the Cabinet, therefore, they are equally known to everyone of us I think that is wrong.  So, I think we should not hurry and make everybody think this is characteristic of the way we do things here we should at least discuss the motion and defer decision at least after - adopt it so that it also allows us time to consult those we feel can give us constructive advise so that when we meet here to make the decision we make a very valid decision.  I do not think it is wise even to remind anybody here that these seven people are going to perform a very noble duty, very, very noble in this transitional period we are and that we need to be all agreed on what decision we are making, so this issue of consultation or Members of NRC consulting those we see can give useful advise should not be ignored.  

Mr Chairman, I am appealing to the Members of NRC to consider that issue very seriously.  Thank you very much indeed.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion.  The Motion is so important and the time is so limited according to people’s demand and according to time limit I thought they should have started work already so as to complete the job which is very heavy and it is infront of them.  But there is one thing I would like this House not to make a quick decision, I do agree the seven who will determine the future of the next Government through fair election must be people of high integrity.  There is one thing which is not sufficiently provided we do agree, we passed a Bill here so the appointment of the seven including of course the Chairman and the Vice Chairman will be done by the President that is one trust with the advise of the Cabinet, but with the approval of the House.  

Now, if I can ask anybody a Member of the House here, can you honestly get up right now and tell me you are so convinced with all these seven you can even endorse without any question, do you know them?  The answer is definitely very few of us; it must be very few -(Interruption)

 MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all we are looking for men and women of integrity, secondly Manzi or anybody does not have to know all the seven, but around the House we shall be able all of us to know all of them because they certainly come from areas constituencies where we all come from and I can base that we would actually know all of them.  Mr chairman, I do not see any problem.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much for the information. You have actually concluded what I wanted to say, I want to know all of them before I endorse each of them to be the correct person I must have sufficient time to inquire from you who knows these people so that I am given time to ask what about number one, four and number five, whom I might have never come across.  That is why I am saying, the names are now brought it is now to give me enough time to find out whether the seven whose names appear here are really people of integrity so that I can endorse it.  I am not saying we oppose, I am saying we support, but it is not very simple if it is just simple seven names are brought we assume the Cabinet has done a good job, we assume the President has nominated we must endorse then that is a rubber stamping because, we have nothing but except seven names brought us, I am saying let us have enough time to satisfy ourselves that the seven are proper.  (Interruption)

MISS KABASHARIRA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that he is either confusing us or contradicting himself.  He first said that these people should have been working already, so he is saying that they are late to be in office now we are saying that since they have been brought and they are regionally balanced at least if I do not know Steven Akabwai someone else knows him so that we do the work and pass them and prove them and start the work so that we should not lie behind the schedule.  I thank you.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, when we were electing the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly and somebody who comes from the East is the land of wise people they were five men who were brought forward and it took a bit of time for us.  so, what is the reason for really hurrying without consultation in any case may I inform the hon. Member that political parties have been advocating  and in that the whole exercise should be balanced and would it be fair for them to be consulted before we get names voted on.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much for the information. But I still stick to my point that they should have started that does not mean that they must start wrongly it does not mean that we now force them to start wrongly because we are desperate.  So, I think at least the Motion has come to this House, the House should be given proper time to scrutinize and be satisfied with each of these Members so that we can endorse I am not asking for many days, I am asking the House to give me sufficient time to ask some of these Members from the various groups of people who know them that is what I am saying, so that I make a judgement for all seven of them and I am satisfied with that judgement 
-(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  First I want to react to this issue of referring these names to another day.  I have looked through these names and the names are not strange to the Members of this House, if you see number one, hon. Steven Akabwai is known to many Member here, Mrs Florence Kurukenda, Mr Azizi Kasujja, Mrs Margaret Sekajja, the only two names that people may want to know about which are included in this list are only two names and some of them have been working in the constituent Assembly.  So, to try to refer this matter to another date again will just create a lot of speculation for nothing.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MISS. KADAGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House, that according to Article 2.63 of the Constitution all the organs of the NRM which were in place before the promulgation are still in place.  There is an Appointment’s Committee of this House which has in consultation with the Cabinet and others approved these names.  So, Mr Chairman, it is not true that Members have not been consulted, the organ of this House has done the consultation. So, really I would ask Members, please, the country is in suspense let us get this over a week.  Thank you.

MR CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, I think my doubts are becoming very clear and we are not becoming very sincere.  I am wondering why some of us to be hurrying up the appointment of only these seven people to be now when we can all be happy when we put it tomorrow to give me a few hours to consult the other people so that I - representatively very happy.


AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member that the question he asked is very important and I think I have the answer.  The answer is that so far of all the seven people the only person we have been told among the seven who support multiparty is one, therefore, that is the reason they want to hurry so that -(Laughter) - multiparty do not have support in the Commission.  

AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much for that information.  Mr Chairman, I want to show you my interest, but when we look in the way elections are going to be held we seem to be in the deadlock.  The explanation is clear the elections are on personalities I think this is true in Constitution, am I right?

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

AN. HON. MEMBER: All Ugandans are qualified to come to this House, all Ugandans are qualified to stand as candidates to the presidency this is the law as it is today.  I am being confused by this House some are saying we must have the other parties, I know parties exist, but I do not know, Mr Chairman, the Minister of Constitutional  Affair will inform me whether we are going to have cans or boxes bearing other parties like this DP,UPC in the front line, are nominations going to be so and so NRM, so and so UPC, so and so DP.  If the answer is no that is not my worry, my worry is whether the Ugandans are claiming to be UPC or DP or whatever it is they are Ugandans who are entitled to their right individually should be guided during this election that any of them should not be suppressed through the system of elections that is a fair assistance I am seeking from the appointment of the seven.  Now if the seven are the people with a high calibre and responsible Ugandans I would like them to take office as soon as possible after giving me really two days so that I can pass on when I am satisfied everyone who stands here says he knows the five, but the other two - (Interruption)- you have not got time to ask the two, I am giving you the time to ask the two, you clear your doubts like I will ask my five, so that we are very convinced once we stand it up we are happy.  Now, I want to say something, what I want to say additional is that, right now  -(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification because I a bit puzzled, is the hon. Member on the Floor by saying that he wants to know the people does he want the physical features or really is he referring to these individuals by their CVs which we have here, I thought these CVs are adequate for an hon. Member to make a decision about these people.  Thank you.  

AN. HON. MEMBER: I want to confirm the CVs, I am going to do my investigations and if the man has worked for ten years or 20 years and during these years he has been a thief which is not written here then I will not satisfy that one that is why I want to do research whether these people have a clean record give me time to do research.

AN. HON. MEMBER: If really we have got to go for elections without us having any doubt we should entertain the views of this House and the Members of this House because we have heard that some of these have even pending cases against them, but we want to prove whether it is actually true that such a person or such a person who have been nominated does not have that attitude.  We do not want to have a situation where we have got to regret, so it is actually necessary that we be given time to find our -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, you are now debating; you will get your chance.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member now holding the floor to make a general accusation against all the seven without being specific and says, I point out that Akabwai or Azizi has got a case against him and, therefore, should be investigated.  Is it in order simply to make a general accusation?

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not in order and he has already left.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I hope I can resume  -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, I am with a view that we may be, starting on a wrong footing by creating suspicion because if there is a strong feeling by any Member that more than today one can substantively move a Motion and be voted on and if seconded it will be debated on.  Secondly, it is assumed as if this is closing now and now, we still have the rest of the day to debate this, if the wisdom of the Chairman sees that there other Members to contribute he can continue and, therefore, I beg that instead of saying that I need two days let one contribute substantively raising facts and then if by the end of the day we feel that he need more time you move a Motion.  (Applause)

MR ASIKU : Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Let me continue and finish.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR ASIKU: I had asked for more days, I am advised that if the Chairman thinks fit, he would not conclude it today, maybe after a day or two it will be concluded.  I think that is a good advice and I am appealing to Mr Chairman to consider it so that we can do our research. (Laughter) I am saying, I have doubts because the history of Uganda has indicated a lot of doubts in elections.  The elections of 1980, the then Government appointed a chairman; with this House saying that the Chairman of the election will have powers to announce the results of the election.  When the results were coming out, everybody was hearing them.  In the middle of the day, the leader of the exemptible power said anybody who would release results will go to jail; and the chairman took to his heels and up to now I think he has not returned.  I do agree.  

I think it is not proper for me to stand here and debate the names of these candidates one by one and discuss their evils in here to disqualify them.  That is improper and I think it is not correct.  Because they are not here to defend themselves.  By saying give me time, I will do my research, I will be satisfied evenly, I will show it by a vote; it will be quite.  But I do not want to create any opposition either I have the foundation or I do not have the foundation openly criticizing one individual.  Another option, if we had sufficient time was that, I would seek for Adhoc Committee of the House so that the Adhoc do the research and summarize the recommendation for us as Members of Parliament to support the appointment.  This would have been of honest guest.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Wind up please.

MR ASIKU:  Finally, I am saying that there is social exercise which we actually gave a priority to.  The updating information we gave to this House to continue is completely incomplete.  I am therefore, appealing to them to insist on updating the register.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

MR ASIKU: In my constituency, the majority of the voters are not updated.  Worse still, this Commission which was in action has lost all documents of my constituency.  All documents of my division are lost, they cannot be tressed; and that is one of the things which was even giving me doubt as to be -(inaudible)- which I cannot completely endorse by being planned.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR BACHOU (Pader County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I believe that, all hon. Members of this House are aware that there is one underlying factor which must have caused this election of these seven to be on the Electoral commission  -(interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

DR BACHOU:  Shall I go back to that one?

THE CHAIRMAN: Use that one, it is the same.

DR BACHOU:  I believe now people can hear me.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I had already said that, all these Members who have been appointed on this Interim Electoral Commission are individuals who were appointed on the basis of just one principle factor and that is the merit.  These people came here purely on merit.  Nobody looked at some of these other factors that I do not quite subscribe to you.  Whether it is regional balance.  Suppose we had four regions in the country and it so happened that, all the stools were put by Colonialists in only one region and by the time of independence, all that you had were people who were educated from one region.  And independence was handed over to them; the rest of the region cannot complain.  They can only complain if after several years of independence, the Colonial Status Quo was maintained.  

So, for me I believe it was on merit.  Merit per se has been the underlying factor that constituted the reason for appointing these people on this Commission.  And I would like hon. Members to realise that these are names, which were not like cats being pulled out of the hut.  There must have been a lot of consultation; and as I know from the manner in which government operates and I know that my hon. Colleague the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, must have come out with a long list.  And the names that have been submitted, a number of them must have been submitted by Members of this august House.  Well, it does not have to be everybody submitting a name. But surely consultations were made, which consultations included seeking the views and options about hon. Members of this House.  To that, I can testify I am sure that is what happened.  

Mr Chairman, the style of running a Parliament is that, the ‘Ayes’ as a response to your question, would always have it.  So long as the ‘Ayes’ sounded bigger than the ‘Noes’.  And, therefore, the list that has come here, even though Cabinet has already approved it, does not mean that, every Member of Cabinet knows everybody who is here in full detail.  And when we ask ourselves about knowledge of people, what do we exactly mean?  Some Members have asked for two days in order to consult and hopefully therefore, in order to know these individual Members; does a knowledge have a time dimension?  If you have already known somebody who is 42 years old, and you are probably 50 years old, how are going to make do, with that piece of knowledge in just two days?  Is it feasible for us to assume that somebody who does not know another person is going to know this man inside out over two days in order to endorse his name as a Member of this Commission (Applause)?  

So long as you know that the names, which are here, are on the basis of merit; and the merit is underscored by the individual -(Interruption)­- that we have been given here.  I do not see why this should be a major issue at all.  Knowledge in this context can be collective.  What we are talking about is individual knowledge and that is not going to be attained in the next two days or the rest of the year or the next two years.  Because what you have already known about a man who is 42, you are not going to know that, in the next 48 hours or something.  So in the context and in the name of collective responsibility so, there can be collective knowledge.  What I know and I submit to the House in the name of trust, in the name of national duty, I believe that cannot be questioned unnecessarily.  And what we should avoid is questioning these names unnecessarily.  Because they are here purely on the basis of merit and the time dimension I am talking about is not going to help us at all.  Therefore, I am tempted to question the motive behind this intention of trying to get this Motion postponed for a couple of days or even just one day, in order to get to know these people.  Now, what is going to happen is somebody comes out with an allegation that someone has a pending case.  You see, if you already know that somebody has a pending case, why do you have to wait for two days to mention it? (Laughter)  Why do you not say it right away?  Because it is quite possible that, when Cabinet was looking at this list that originally was there, nobody was aware that someone had a pending case or a pending criminal case.  Now, if you know you will be doing a service to this House if you mention that -(Interruption)

MR OKURUT:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, with due respect to what has been started by the Minister for State, I would like to state that, if there is a case which is already subjudiced, we are even waiting for the file number of one of these Members.  We want to get the fact so that, we tell the Chairman and the whole House that, we should not hurry.  Let us establish the fact so that, we do not have to have a person who is alleged and accused of embezzlement.  So, I think it is necessary for the good of this House.  We have been accused of being rubber stamps.  Whenever the Cabinet brings whatever it brings, we just rubber stamp.  But this is a very crucial election.  In the sense that we have gone through constitutionalism and we praise this Government for getting things done constitutionally.  But certainly, we are part of the constitutional process.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Give information and stop there please.

MR OKURUT:  I am saying that, if we are given time, we will even give you, Mr Chairman, the file.  The file of one of these who has been accused of embezzlement.

MR CHAIRMAN:  You are now debating.  Proceed please, do not waste time.

DR BACHOU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I appreciate the information given by my elder colleague.  But I think the difference between what I am doing here and what my Senior Colleague has done is that, whereas on the one end I am simply trying to reason, he is trying to make an allegation about an allegation; and that is where we run into problems.  If you already have an allegation, you do not have to allege that an allegation exists.  Why do you not just mention the allegation.  Because if you keep referring to allegation, then by itself it becomes an allegation whether substantive or perhaps; it maybe just a sub allegation.  I think what is important is for us to reason and get through with the next file that we think are crucial as well as of national importance.  

So, as far as I am concerned, I am questioning the motive behind the inclination of some people to postpone the endorsement of these names.  Because I do not know of any case pending against any of these people by now.  And I cannot even claim that, I know all the people here.  But I trust the sufficient research has been done about all these people whose names have been submitted here enough to endorse them as members of the Electoral Commission.  

I just have one more point to add to my contribution Mr Chairman, and that is the role that these individuals are going to play as Members of the Electoral Commission.  We know very well that, they have a singular duty to perform; and that is to ensure that the elections which are going to be carried out early next year, will be fair and will be just to every party that is involved.  If we are questioning their credibility on the ground of their being unsuitable to perform this role, then to me would be a different issue.  But if you are going to question our knowledge about them, I think that is not a substantial matter to consider.  Since I know on the basis of their CVs, that they are people who are sufficiently literate to read and write whatever they see on the card, to be able to count, to use something which is knowledge above common sense, to be able to pass fair judgement and to be able to apply if you are given value judgement to quantitative cases.  I have very, very strong reason to trust that this election of these seven individuals has been carried out wisely and prudently and therefore, I fully support the Motion.  And I hope and back other Members to do likewise.  Thank you very much.

MR MUKAMA (Kigulu County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion to have the proposed names be put on the Interim Electoral Commission.  My Colleagues have said that, they need time to know most of these people.  When I looked through the list, I find that three of them, they already know.  Because three of them are Members of the NRC, so they know them.  Yes, you look through.  Then another one, that is Steven Abakwai, they already know him, they know what he did.  So, those make four.  That is a quorum already in the Electoral Commission (Laughter).  So, I do not see why we should spend much time.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to tell this House that, three Members of these names proposed are Members of this House when they are only two?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is entitled to his views.  Proceed please.

MR MUKAMA: Mr Chairman, at least I know that about 102 of the Members of this august House know most of these.  One of them was a CA Member, so they know the performance of the person.  So, we need this Interim Commission in place now.  It should have been yesterday.  Because we have to make sure that, our register is in place.  They have to put everything in a Motion including civic education.  If we keep on postponing, then we are going to be behind the time and the population will say, the people who are supposed to put the Commission in place are still playing around.  So, I do recommend and support that, we pass the names that are given to us here and now.  So, I support the Motion (Applause)

MR D. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I think the proposal which is being made for this House or that this House does not pass this Motion or resolution now, is a reasonable one.  Only yesterday, even I myself as Chairman of the Rules and Orders Committee, who is involved in programming; the information that we heard was that, we are going to discuss the VAT Bill.  And this morning as I usually do, I called at the Clerk to the National Assembly, only to find that a Motion was on the Order paper.  Members came without sufficient background as to what should be tabled and when we came here, the papers were just being passed for the names as the Minister was tabling the Motion.  A number of Members here, have requested and I do join them; that we do not conclude this Motion today, we need to look at the names more carefully amongst ourselves and beyond. And even if we spent a day or two, I do not think that is what is going to disorganise the politics of this country.  

The Minister would have done well if by Thursday when we were here last week, he had circulated the names and some details, as he has been able to afford to the Members.  We are working for great, greater and greatest transparency.  And anything that we do at this critical time in our history, it is important that we are seen to be transparent.  One or two days cannot disorganise the politics of this country.  And for instance, when I read at the details given against some of the names, I find that one of the names if I remember well, was also shorted listed for being a campaigning person for one of the Presidential candidates; if it is what I read in the papers.  

I also do remember that, there is a name that came up which should be here, but which has now been plunked out.  Well, I am not complaining against this, since we have been told that, a certain committee has also besides the work done by the Cabinet, has also looked at these names and invented them that, if that Committee and I am sure it is not a Sectoral committee, the Standing ones we have, I suspect that, it should be a Committee of NEC, which NEC is no longer reporting here.  I do not know whether they are still in session or not.  If that is the Committee, for that is causing.  But the point I am labouring to make is that, anything that we do should be done so that we are seen as people who are working in a transparent manner.  Having said that, I would therefore, strongly support that today, we can go on debating, but we do not conclude our debate.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Motion is an important one and I rise to support it.  But I do not think the issue is whether you support Motion or you oppose it.  The Motion is important.  Constitutionally, it is a fulfillment of an obligation and politically it is important to this country.  But, I think what we are looking at is not simply the appointment of Members of the Electoral Commission.  But I think we are looking at the appointment of an Electoral Commission which will undertake one of the most important functions given to it by this Constitution, namely; to ensure the holding of a free and fair election.  This is the key word.  Article 61(a) says’ The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions to ensure that regular free and fair elections are held’.  The holding of a free and fair election starts with the appointment of this Commission.  And the confidence of the country in the holding of a free and fair election will be judged after we have marched out of this House on the people we are going to appoint.  It is expected that the Commission will not only ensure a free and fair election, but in the process of doing so, it will be independent and impartial.  That these functions can only be done by human beings who according to our wise judgement in this House measure to this challenges.  This House is being called to form a unique task which the next Parliament is going to perform very regularly.  That is to say, the approval of various political appointments.  I believe that this possibly is a very important foundation we are laying for the next Parliament.  That how will the next Parliament approve all those important political appointments, which will be there?  And we are starting today, with the appointment of the Electoral Commission.  We are setting a President; and the President we set here is important.  One of the Presidents we are setting here in the manner of exercising this function is, do you as an executive bring the names of the people to be approved by Parliament in this manner possibly taking us by surprise and asking us to approve those names with hurriedly and without further consultations?  Mr Chairman, this is a very important issue.  

The second one is, we as representatives of the people in this House, given this important task to approve not for ourselves but on behalf of the people of Uganda, do we need time when these names are given to us to carry some consultations?  Not only that.  But do we also need an input from outside this House?  In other words, should it have been necessary, for example, for the executive to have published these names a day or two before.  So that my constituency knows that in the meeting of Parliament today, my representative is going to approve Members of the Electoral Commission and what do they have to say about? Do they have to advise me?  I believe that it will be a great error in the history of this House if only for sentimental reasons the Executive had to deny the cries, the pleas of Members of this House, to be given some extra time to look at these names critically.  I am privileged by virtue of age and exposure to know all these people except one.  And I would then easily exercise my voting right today.  But the question I am asking is, is that proper?  Is that right?  Why is the Executive hurrying us to vote today?  Are people not going to read a lot into the motive of the executive and therefore, are we not going to undermine the credibility of this Electoral Commission?  That this thing was smuggled in by the Executive, rushed through and this august House was pushed into approving it.  

Mr Chairman, I think I have laboured this point sufficiently  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you. Mr Chairman, I will like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, I have got from this Paper which was circulated and in the Motion that we are not only approving these appointments for ourselves and for this country.  This Paper says on the last page, it is a team that the country and indeed our friends elsewhere in the world have been anxiously waiting for.  So, it seems the government is being pressed from outside and that is the reason why we are being hurried (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I have no doubt that, the purpose for which certain appointments are supposed to be approved by this House is very justifiable.  I am aware the Executive has carried out its research and debating; the President and Cabinet, now, it is our responsibility.  Looking at the appointment of these people and the appointment that normally takes place in this Country, I think one has to satisfy himself whether the appointment cuts across a wide spectrum of our diversity, tribe, sex, religion and political beliefs.  I have no doubt that the executive has tried to satisfy these requirements which are part of our political life.  But, I think that in the appointment of the three ladies, I would have been pleased that, the three are broader based tribally to take care of the tribal compositions of the tribes of women in this country.  

I am saying this really in good faith because some of these Members of the Commission will be doing functions in certain areas where they should be appointed culturally and otherwise.  And I do urge the Executive that if they are not in a hurry to have these names approved today, they should replace one of those great ladies with one of the women whom we can easily supply with the name coming from the Northern and North Eastern part of the country to look at this broad based tribal which for men it has taken care of very well.  

Also to ensure that the Electoral Commission is independent and impartial, I think we also have to ensure that, Members of the Commission are not openly partisan.  I have heard people saying, this one we know is a UPC Member, this one is a Member of DP, this one is a Movement Activist.  To me, this is the disadvantage.  In fact if I had my way, I would ensure that, the likes of Akabwai should have been the people constituting this Commission.  Politicians should be out, non-politicians should be out of this Commission, people who are politically known to be activists in their parties and in their political organisations should not constitute this Commission.  We have brilliant Ugandans, we have a lot of Ugandans and why should we give a person one job over the other one, when we know that others are there who can do it.  

The Commission is going to do not only administrative function, but it is also going to do judicial decisions.  It is going to take judicial decisions and if it was not for limitation of time, I could for example quote you in Article 61 ‘ and determine election complaints arising before and during polling.’  You are going to have people who are having those complaints coming to lawyers to put their clear petitions and so on; and I am sure that, the wise Members of the Electoral Commission are going to exercise their judicious judgment on this matter.  In doing so, when somebody is appearing before a person taking a decision in court, he would not see justice being done, if he knows that the person who is going to take that decision belongs to a faith which would be opposed to his.  

So, for us to come and say this person belongs to this party in that Commission, this person belongs to that organisation is already to me a disadvantage.  And this is really the reason why I believe that, a bit of consultations among us for a few days will do this House, Mr Chairman, a good work for the future.

In conclusion, let me say this.  That the next election is a special election.  It is an extraordinary election, and it is a unique election.  I am saying this because, with the controversies that we have gone through in this country, people are trying to see that the next election is free and fair.  It is a test for this nation.  But it is not only a test, but it is also at a political cross road for this country.  The next Parliament is to some extent going to be an extension of the Constituent Assembly with so many laws which that Constituent Assembly did not make but asked the first Parliament to do; Citizenship, land and so on.   

So, to measure up to the task of the next Parliament, the people whom we are going to appoint, must satisfy us; and everybody in this country. People we represent must be sure that the seven great Ugandans who are going to make history for this country are able to do so.  Not because they are activists in a particular political organisation, tribe or religion, but because they stand above petty divisions, petty tribes, petty religions, petty political organisations.  They are able when you appear before them to say yes! despite my colour, I am able to say this petition must be decided in this manner.  

Mr Chairman, I beg you that we consult further in good faith and in the interest of the executive.  Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA (Representative for the Disabled):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I also wish to rise and support the Motion moved by the Minister.  I am a little bit worried because I thought that the Motion was going to sail through.  But as the debate continues, it appears that the list which we have been supplied with has been coloured. Because already an honourable Member has said, some of the people on that list have cases pending against them.  Coloured because somebody else has mentioned -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to give this information to hon. Members regarding any criminal charges hanging over any of the seven people that we have presented to these hon. Members.  I want to assure every hon. Member that, we have researched through all channels on each and every individual on this list.  Now, obviously the point is not to discuss the individual.  But since the question has been raised in a blanket form, I want to assure hon. Members that none of the seven people has any criminal charge hanging over him or her in any court of law in this country.  I work in a Ministry which controls the prosecutions in this country, I have consulted on this particular issue on all of these Members and there is nothing like a criminal charge hanging over the neck of any of the seven people.  I wanted to give that information Sir.

MR MWANDHA: Well, I hope hon. Members will take the assurance given by the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You were given a chance to tell us what you know about these seven people, you kept quiet about it.  Proceed please.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, you see my other worry about this debate is one.  Because I know that many of my Colleagues have asked for a day or two, so that they find out a bit more about these people; and then they can come back and give the approval which is provided for in the constitution.  Mr Chairman, my worry about this approach is the fact that, once this is permitted -(Interruption)

MR OKURUT: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I have the highest respect for you and this House; and I have been in this since 62.  So, I do not want to have a situation where a House is derailed by wrong information.  We have information to the effect that, one of the persons that has been asked or proposed has a Police case.  Why does the Minister not accept to get the information, because we have got even the file number of the information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  I gave you a chance to bring that information, and you refused yourself.

MR OKURUT:  No, no! Mr Chairman, I was getting the information and we have got it now.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, give it now.  Give that information to the House.

MR OKURUT:  Mr Chairman, it is not fair to accuse a Member in this House when he cannot defend himself.  I think the best possible procedure is to give the information to the Minister and to you the Chairman (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed please.  You will get in touch with the Minister later on.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, if it turns out that the information hon. Okurut has given you, Mr Chairman, is correct then it will cut doubt on the research undertaken by the Minister.  So, this is my worry.  I do not see why we should not have done what other Parliaments do?  In this House, we adopted a system of committees.  This House will have to have a Committee on Public Appointments.  Because they are many.  The Constitution has provided for a lot of appointments that will have to be cleared by this House -(interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend that with regard to submitting the name here, the name being disqualified, the Minister bringing another one, he should not worry about it.  When President Clinton, made a submission of a name of a judge to be approved, it was rejected, it did not prevent President Clinton from making another one.  So, when another one made, it was brought to the House and also approved.  If this one eventually after approval is found not to be fit, that one will be disqualified.  So, do not worry about the Minister, you worry out your information.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor, is in regard to use of Committees of this House.  This House one of the earliest functions it performed was to elect a Committee of its own called NEC.  And when NEC was established, it also sat down and elected among themselves a sub committee to advise the executive on a appointment.  Now, I would like this House to know if they did not know yet that, I happen to be one of the Members of this Committee.  And I want this House also to know that this Committee was very widely consulted on behalf of this House.  Now if hon. Mwandha thinks that not withstanding the fact that this committee was legally constituted, this House should still take those powers from this committee and use it themselves.  Then Mr Chairman, I do not know whether we are following the rules of the game or not?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The information hon. Mondo Kagonyera gave just now, was the information he gave me in the corridors before we came here.  And he gave this information to me in the presence of other hon. Members; and other hon. Members said, hon. Kagonyera you know that NEC no longer reports to this House.  Do you want to say that, NEC was actually acting on behalf of the House?  After all, this Appointments Committee which the hon. Member is talking about, I do not think that, Members know who sit on this Committee.  And if we do not know who sits on this Committee, are we responsible for whatever it does (Laughter)?  

The Committees of this House reports to this House and this Committee which hon. Mondo is referring to, I have never seen one report submitted to this House for your information.  So, really I do not want to be derailed from my point.  So my real fear is, that we are now discussing a matter which is so important and yet if we have to discuss it thoroughly, we are likely to discuss individuals who would not be in a position to defend themselves in this House.  If you had a committee system; the Committee would call the people concerned, interview them and if there is any accusation that maybe labeled against them, they will be in a position to defend themselves.  But if you brought names like these names that have been brought to us today, I can assure you, Mr Chairman, it will be very difficult for this House to really, critically write each one of the people on the list.  I happen to know very personally four of the Members and I will definitely vote for them.  I also have appointments of two others.  But I am sure that there are Members in the House here, who may not know as many people as we know.  Not only that.  Knowing people is not enough to know what they have done.  Because we are choosing them on the basis of merit.  

Therefore, if it is permissible, I would like to propose to this House that, we set up a Committee actually to vote these people and submit a report to this House, so that the House can adopt the report and actually go ahead and allow these people to operate as an Electoral Commission.  This Committee will have an advantage. The Most important advantage of this committee is that, those people who have been accused as having Police cases, will be in a position to defend themselves before the Committee.  Because it may be that, they are being maliced.  And it is not fair.  Right now it will be improper for this House to take this list as it is.  Because there have been question marks raised against Members of this Committee that has been proposed to us.  Therefore, the only solution would be, to get a Committee of this House which would face these Members and actually recommend to this House that, certain people have been approved by the House, to be Members of the Electoral Commission. If anyone of them is not recommended by the Committee, then this House will not adopt him as a Member of the Electoral Commission. Mr Chairman, I would like to propose.

MR KAYONDE (Historical Member): Mr Chairman, I wish to support the proposal to approve these names for the Electoral Commission.  I have looked through this list and I am convinced in my mind that unless people are going to manufacture people or Ugandans.  This list contains I must confess that, a man like Steven Akakwai; if anybody would attempt to get a Chairman under the circumstances better than Akabwai; I definitely would doubt.  Because he has excelled in whatever he has performed.  And really this question of postponing; I think really this House should be a bit serious.  There has been demand by this House, by the population that there is an attempt to delay the elections and therefore, the earlier we approve this list, the better.  Because according to the CVs given and, as the hon. Minister of State said, if you are a Member of NRC and you do not know these people, the only thing you can rely on is other people to give you information.  Now, this information can be obtained from the Members here; and you rightly asked one Member if he had any complaint about these people and he has provided.  And therefore, I do not accept that we should delay this debate; we have sufficient information. 

Secondly, the task a head of us is  enormous.  The duty that is assigned to the Electoral commission, the Electoral Commission is supposed to draw an electoral time table; these people are supposed to update the registers; they are supposed to put in place all requirements for the elections.  Now, if we set up this Committee, how long will this Committee take?  We are not so sure that the amount of work required to investigate on each individual candidate which has not been collected by the Minister and the Committee of this House has given the information by hon. Kagonyera; I think this House will not have done its noble duty by debating and passing.  And in any case, if one of these has a case in court, the Statute which set up this Interim Electoral Commission stipulates that, you cannot be a Member if you have not met the requirements.  And if it is found even after approval, that this man or woman has a criminal record, this can put against her and she can be withdrawn from the Commission.  So, this one is not final, in fact if we approve these names and they are out and there is proof that one of them either has got a criminal record or has a case in court, then the Statute will compel the Appointing Authority to take up appropriate measures.

HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Members holding the Floor and the whole House that, I get a little bit perturbed as to why, after all we have been availed this paper with individual Members with all their CVs that we have to go on and on diluting what has already been done. I remember sometime back, 12 names were circulated here for Leadership Code Commission to be established.  We ticked these names, up to now we have not got the results.  It seems as if it is the same thing, which is bogging us down again here.
MR KAYONDE:  Mr Chairman, I will not respond because that was a different exercise and I think this -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR KAYONDE: Mr Chairman, it is a constitutional requirement that the President will appoint on the approval of parliament.  And to me this is fundamental because to the President as the head of the Executive, has submitted the list constitutionally.  Now, what is not provided for either in the Statute or in the Constitution is the time framework in which this should be done.  There is no provision.  So, in fact I think those who want to postpone the only thing they can resort to is an amendment as advised by the Minister.  Because really, there is no legal impediment, not to approve these names now.  But I am satisfied that the names presented are members of this society -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I do not think the constitution will have everything.  But on the principle of good governance, we are saying that, this list could have been out on Thursday, to allow us time to consult, come here one Tuesday and then debate it.  That is good governance not constitutional (Laughter)

MR KAYONDE: If the hon. Member knew, good governance depends on the law and the rules of the game.  We have our Rules of Procedure, it is not the first time we have debated a Motion and approved.  I am saying the names really provided here; the majority of names are really known to this House.  I do not want to go one by one.  If one does not know Akabwai in this land, if these Members do not know Nkurukenda; and they will give a person who will be beneficial to the law and I am sure the Minister during the committee had no objection to this; and let us not go back to what they had in the corridors when they were discussing.  That is why we brought the whole bill back to the House for consideration.  So with all due respect to the Members of the committee, I am suggesting that we use institutions.  If the person is not acceptable, the Minister can ask the law society to give a more acceptable person.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this council we are instituting is a professional council.  Now when you come to this lawyer, not every lawyer in this country is a member of the law society and being a member is optional.  (Interruptions) 

I know what I am talking about; not every lawyer is a member of this society.  I would rather have that the lawyers sit amongst themselves -(interruptions)- and nominate one lawyer rather than deter those who do not belong to the law society but would benefit this council.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, as you can recall - order, sit down.  Excuse me hon. Members.  If hon. Members are under the influence of something, I am going to call upon the Sergeant-at-arms  (Laughter)  Because this is not very normal conduct of the council.  I am repeating that if some hon. Members are under the influence of something this afternoon, I am going to use the Sergeant-at-arms to help because we must really behave according to the norm of the House.  You remember hon. Members, this is a simple matter.  Last time when the committee presented their report, in fact we would have deliberated on this bill a long time ago but because of few amendments that came in, we had to use the rule and procedure to come to the committee stage.  In fact when we came here, not every sub-section was affected by the amendment.  But we agreed; but now coming here, we are spending more time on even the clauses which were not affected by the amendment than even those which were affected.  

So, I am calling upon your indulgence.  If there is a new amendment proposed, I would expect the Members of the committee to react and if they cannot, then I will call upon the Minister responsible which has been the case here; and if there is a consent between the Minister or between the Members and the proposer of the amendment, then I will put the question from time to time when that amendment is seconded rather than wasting our time.  Please hon. Members, I am indulging you, let us follow the procedure.  Hon. Omara Atubo has proposed here a very simple amendment that in line with what we did this afternoon, you know we agreed that the Minister in so appointing these members makes consultation and that one was passed.  In a similar manner, he has made another proposal that when making appointment for a distinguished practicing lawyer, he appoints the lawyer in consultation with the Law Development Centre.  This one is the debate which is straightforward and it is between the Members of the Committee and the Minister and maybe some hon. Members who would like to contribute.  Please, let us follow the procedure and then minimise on time.  I know you are very busy. I now call upon hon. Ongora Atwai to react to that proposal.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, earlier on there was a proposal that a retired judge be the chairman of the council but Members especially journalists who are trying to establish themselves as a body said that this is their professional and supreme council but it is legal knowledge that they are after.  Because law society has no intrinsic interest in the association and for this, they said, let the hon. Minister appoint first of all this lawyer who goes to the council as a member and if he proves his worth, the council may elect in the chairman.  So I think it is just in order that we leave it as it is that the hon. Minister will appoint a lawyer.  (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 13(2)(g) be amended as proposed by hon. Daniel Omara Atubo.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

Clause 13(5)

MR MWANDHA:  I had an amendment Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman Sir, the amendment I want to propose is to provide –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where is the amendment?

MR MWANDHA:  But this has become consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But it has been almost a new style of work that even without your amendment being circulated you just come and - and most of those amendments hon. Members which have not been circulated are really taking our time from the experience we have here in the last few days.

MR MWANDHA:  But I thought we had agreed that after this (g) I will move the (h).

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of procedure Mr Chairman.  I would like to draw your attention to Rule 30 (h) of our interim rules.  Which says, the following motions may be moved without notice; any motion made when the council is in committee.  Mr Chairman, in view of this rule call upon you to -(Interruption)- Can I finish, and then you can pass your ruling?

THE CHAIRMAN:  And also you could read that in conjunction with 31(4).  You read together with 31(4) of the same rule of procedure.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, 31(4) says, no amendment shall be permitted if in the opinion of the Chairman it substantially alters the principle of the question proposed.  Mr Chairman, first of all, Rule 31(4) speaks of an amendment which in the view of the chairman - no amendment shall be permitted if in the opinion of the Chairman it substantially alters the principle of the question proposed.  First of all, no question has been proposed.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But the motion can be a question.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  And secondly Mr Chairman, the motion of hon. Mwandha does not alter any principle involved in the regulation. Mr Chairman, the purpose of motions being moved at committee without notice is simply to assist us to make a good law.  So many things can just come impromptu and maybe in the interest that it be entertained, discussed and the question be put and I believe that the principle here which hon. Mwandha was raising was that if you look through all the representation, the journalists are nowhere and I think it is a very important point.  So, I believe that you do entertain the motion of hon. Mwandha, we debate it and see how far we can accept or how far we can dispose of it.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You see hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, you raised a question that the journalists have been nowhere here but you have helped them with one amendment already where we said even the Minister will make appointed one from the registered association of journalists.  We have just put it here in the provision.  But concerning hon. Mwandha’s amendment,he said he had a major one and normally I know what major comes from him. But hon. Omara Atubo, we would like to go through this bill and if anything finish it as fast as possible.  We have spent eight years on the bill alone and here in the House, we have spent more than a week and I would seek your indulgence that really we have been very accommodative to allow the bill to come to this stage and really if you could recall, we have accommodated so many new amendments here.  But we must have a limit to new amendments. We cannot just go unlimited like that and I think the Chair should also guide the direction of the House.  So please, you bear with me.

I now put the question that Clause 13 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14:

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman Sir, I am proposing an amendment to 14(1)(b).  Mr Chairman, my amendment is to delete 1(b) all together.  The reason being Mr Chairman that it is not practicable to arbitrate between the public and the media.  The public is such a big thing and the State is such a big thing that it is not possible that you can actually effect an arbitration process between those two.  I think the committee either failed to find the right work or they probably did not mean arbitration because arbitration as understood cannot be in the form it is given under this particular sub-clause and the best thing to do is simply to get rid of it because it serves no purpose.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment. The words public and State as used are clear and they are not ambiguous, quite understandable in legal terms. So, I see no alteration there Mr Chairman.  I beg to oppose.

HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, in supplementing what the chairman of the committee has just given in opposing the proposed amendment, I would like to draw the attention of the proposer to the fact that if you removed the Act of Arbitration for this council, then the whole section stands cancelled; because the argument that the House really advances is that this council should facilitate the mediation, the arbitration or whatever word one is going to use between the parties interested in the freedom of the press, the public.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 14(b) be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: On Editors and Publishers, Mr Chairman, not the whole council is going to exercise - (c) reads “to exercise disciplinary control over journalists, editors and publishers”. Mr Chairman, not the whole Council is going to exercise.  It is a disciplinary committee of the council.  So it should read that, to exercise disciplinary control over journalists, editors and publishers through its disciplinary committee.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose this amendment because council is supreme, it is going to have a disciplinary committee.  Whatever it carries, it does so on behalf of the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 15(e) be amended as proposed by hon. Daniel Omara Atubo.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 14(1)(e):

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, as has earlier on been circulated, I beg now to formally propose that sub-section (1)(e) be amended to read: “to censor films, video tapes” - and he missing word here was “plays and other related apparatus for public consumption.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 14(e) be amended as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14(2):

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to propose again that under clause 14(2) that we insert the expression for public consumption immediately after the word acted occurring in the third line thereof so that it accommodates whatever can be under public consumption.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 14(2) be amended as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 14, as amended put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, in sub-clause one, you talk of the provisions of the fourth schedule and in two you talk of the first schedule.  I do not know whether reference in sub-clause two is first schedule or fourth schedule.  After that clarification, I will come with a substantive amendment.  Otherwise the first schedule is referred to in clause 46.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman this is an error.  It should actually read fourth schedule.  

MR OMARA ATUBO:  If it was first schedule, I would have moved the amendment but if it is fourth schedule, is okay.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 15 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 16 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 17 put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that the entire part five of this bill be deleted but the objects which are appearing in clause 19 be rearranged and incorporated into the functions of the media council.  Mr Chairman, this bill is intended to recognise professionalism in mass media ….

(Incomplete)
