Wednesday, 6 December 2006

(Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you. As you realise, it is now almost 3.00 p.m. when we were supposed to have started at 2.30 p.m. The House was adjourned to 2.00 p.m. but normally we start at 2.30 p.m. I have been monitoring what is happening here in the House; I wanted to start on time but when I looked at the monitor, I realised that the Chamber was empty. I want to appeal to you, honourable members, to be conscious of time so that we can manage to clear as much as we can before we go for Christmas recess. There were complaints that the recess was long yet we had a lot of business but the anxiety to conduct that business has not been exhibited. Let us please be on time and clear as much as we can. 

There was also a claim that there was a lot of business but I have not seen business being generated by individual Members or committees. Please, utilise this opportunity to generate business so that we go for Christmas recess when we have some business to show that we completed. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ABDUCTIONS AND DISAPPEARANCES OF PEOPLE AND OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES

3.06
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to move a motion. But before I do that, I would like to make a slight amendment to the motion arising out of a misprint of the original text. The amendment will read: “A motion for a resolution of Parliament to set up a select committee of Parliament to investigate abductions and disappearances of people, loss of jobs, murder by state operatives and other human rights abuses.” 

THE SPEAKER: This is not reflected on the copies given to Members.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I noticed that this was missing after the circulation of the motion.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are asking Members to correct this and note the formulation of the motion as you have read it? Okay, please do the needful.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Members, I rise to propose a motion for a resolution of Parliament to set up a select committee of Parliament to investigate abductions and disappearances of people, loss of jobs, murder by state operatives and other human rights abuses. This motion is moved under Rules 43 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay. 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, the motion reads: “WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda is enjoined by the Constitution to ensure the protection of the Constitution and promote democratic and good governance in Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is accountable to the people of Uganda with the duty to oversee the operations of the Executive and to expose, combat and eradicate abuse and misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices; 

NOTING that there is reliable information to the effect that a number of Ugandans have been abducted, murdered, detained in ungazetted areas for periods beyond that stipulated in the Constitution, suffered torture, extortion as well as loss of employment; 

COGNIZANT of the President’s call, during the State of the Nation Address on 8 June 2006, for all people in positions of leadership to support his plea to mobilise the population to cherish the value of constitutionalism and the rule of law and his pledge to promote, support and entrench the culture of constitutionalism in Uganda; 

AWARE that Rule 162 of the Rules of Procedure empowers Parliament to appoint select committees for the consideration of matters that the House may refer to it;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
1.	That a select committee be appointed, under Rule 162 of the Rules of Procedure, to investigate and make recommendations on the aspects of: -
	i.	Abductions;
	ii.	disappearances and discoveries of  bodies;
	iii.	detention of persons in ungazetted places;
	iv.	extortion of money by security operatives;
	v.	unresolved murders;
	vi.	Loss of employment on the basis of security concerns;
	vii.	harassment and intimidation.

2.	That the select committee examines why the Uganda Human Rights Commission, established under Article 51 of the Constitution, has not been effective in exercising its mandate under Article 52 of the Constitution with emphasis on the duty to educate and encourage the public to defend the Constitution at all times against all forms of abuse and violation and the duty to formulate, implement and oversee programmes intended to inculcate in the citizens of Uganda awareness of their civic responsibilities and an appreciation of their rights and obligations as free people.

3.	That the select committee reports back to Parliament its findings and recommendations within one month from the date of appointment.

4.	That the chairperson of the select committee be a Member of the Opposition in the same spirit as chairpersons of oversight committees are.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, the matter of human rights abuse is extremely urgent and important. Hundreds of people in Uganda are in prisons, many have been tortured, lost their jobs, and lost their loved ones. Children have been deprived of parental care and guidance; many have dropped out of school and have become delinquents on the streets of this country, and families have broken down. 

And many of the cases that I have put before this House are suspected and indeed proven to be because of allegations of political differences. I am aware that the Uganda Human Rights report of 2005 has not yet been tabled before this House. And some Members will probably argue -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I notice that maybe you have not attended some of the sessions of this House because the records definitely show that the Human Rights report has already been tabled.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but I meant that this House has not yet debated it. And Members will probably argue that we should wait for the report to be debated before considering this motion. But I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that some of the issues that have been raised in this House have spanned over a period of over ten years in spite of the annual reports by the Human Rights Commission. I, therefore, think that this motion will not be affected in one way or another. 

Mr Speaker, during his State of the Nation Address, on 8 June 2006, the President of Uganda called on all people in positions of leadership to support his plea to mobilise the population to cherish the values of constitutionalism and the rule of law. He called on all leaders to support his pledge and promote the culture of constitutionalism in Uganda. But I regret to inform this House that in spite of assurances on the Floor of this House that citizens of this –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance. I see that this report supporting the motion is extremely detailed, and knowing that the Human Rights report is before the Committee of Parliament on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, would it not be wiser if this report was dealt with by the relevant committee so that it is put in the context of the Human Rights report together with the committee’s reports then the House would have a more enriched report? I need your guidance, Sir.  

THE SPEAKER: Justify your motion; it will be seconded then there will be a debate. But from what I see, your motion’s intention is that the select committee be set up and it will be that select committee, which will get all these details. And may be you will be able to go and give evidence there. So, you justify your motion briefly, and then your seconder speaks, and your motion will be open for debate. But you can use some notes because from what I see, there are some figures –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, for your wise guidance, Mr Speaker. That is what I intended to do. But I included this so that the honourable members may know that they are matters of very serious concern. 

Paul Kalemba was abducted and we could not find him for a week until I sought the intervention of the Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who found him in a record time of a couple of hours. Paul’s family is grateful for that! But the question is on situations where people cannot reach the MP who would in turn reach the minister to intervene, what will such people do?

Paul Kalemba was supposedly abducted and put in some safe house on suspicion of involvement in acts of terrorism. But since the minister’s intervention and the subsequent discovery of Paul, the suspicions were dropped. He was never questioned or charged. So, one wonders what happened to the suspicions! 

Robert Ndyomugenyi has disappeared since May 2006. Everybody knows the story of young Kasekende. It was only when he was trying to escape when he landed in the garden of the Danish Ambassador that his family found out where he was. 

There are vehicles, many of them numberless, that go around Kampala particularly in my constituency. They abduct people; they extort money from them and abandon them in places very far away from where they were. I have listed here some of the numbers, but clearly they could be forgeries. I have received information from one police officer that one of the vehicles actually belongs to CPS.

Mr Speaker, these days there are cases of children under 15 years of age that are lured by people who pretend to ask for directions. They are abducted and they are discovered very far away from home. A case in point is 15-year-old Santos Wabwire, who was abducted from Busia town. One week later, he woke up to find himself in a place he did not know. And when he escaped and asked people outside where he was, they told him that he was in Mutukula!

Andrew Ndawula, 23, has disappeared since 4 August 2005. The parents have no clue as to what happened to him. 

Francis Kawuki disappeared from his home where he was picked in Bunamwaya on allegations of being a supporter of FDC. He has since not been seen.

Mr Speaker, there have been murders by state operatives. A case in point was the shooting at Mengo Lubiri, where Haruna Byamukama narrowly survived death but is languishing in Mulago Hospital. His three colleagues were buried in Kayunga, Masaka and Mbale. When I went to discuss the management of his medical attention because he was rotting in Mulago, several doctors that were handling his case told me, “We can’t discuss this man with you because this is not a usual patient; this is a political patient.” Honourable members, has any one ever heard of a political patient? So, I wasn’t able to help Haruna in that way.

Lt Shaban Magara, the murderer, was “arrested” and 11 months later the police are still “investigating.” Shaban Magara murdered three people in broad daylight. Hundreds of witnesses are willing to testify. The newspapers took pictures of Magara with the murder weapon in his hand, standing over the bodies of his victims but up to now, police are “investigating.” But while they are investigating, they have never even visited the graves of the three people to ascertain the action of death and burial.

Mr Speaker, in October this year, Abdu Kasule, the Chairperson of Kawempe South, was taken from home, beaten, killed and his body was taken in the boot of a car and abandoned far away from home. 

Some time in June, four unidentified bodies wrapped in polythene bags were discovered floating on the River Mayanja swamp by fire brigade who had been hired by Mukwano Industries to look for the body of one of their employees who had drowned in the river.

Mr Speaker, there are cases of job losses and discrimination on account of political persuasion. UPDF Pte Allan Barigye and 20 others were picked from Mbarara barracks after he swore an affidavit in support of Dr Kiiza Besigye’s petition against the EC, after the presidential elections. They were tortured and kept in several ungazetted places but later were taken to Mbuya barracks. The 22 others were released, but when they went home to check on their bank accounts, they had not received their salaries for all the time that they were in prison.

Francis Mallinga and others who used to work with CCA Entebbe were discontinued unceremoniously, after the 2001 elections. But recently, Francis is a sad case. He got a job with In-flight Services in Entebbe after a very competitive process. You are required to get a security pass in order to be able to work with In-flight Services. But Francis Mallinga   was not given a security pass on grounds that he is a security risk. He has never been charged or questioned but he was just under a confidential report to his employers branded as a security risk, and was therefore not able to get a job.

There are many cases as you will see listed here, for which there are many people that can give evidence and they span as I said over a very long period. 

Mr Speaker, President Museveni himself has on several occasions explained that lack of development and the delivery of services to some parts of Uganda are accruing from their voting patterns, the latest of which was attributing Cholera out break in Kawempe Division this month to the election of FDC politicians. The casual and almost joking manner in which the President said this depicted a person so removed from the reality of the pain to the family of death caused by Cholera.

Mr Speaker, recent press reports revealed that my colleagues, the NRM MPs and the NRM Cabinet, blocked my attempts to secure micro-financing for the people of Rubaga North Constituency on grounds that I was an FDC MP who must not claim any facilitation for my constituency until NRM MPs have had their fill. (Laughter) We are laughing but this is a very serious matter because we went to a referendum and voted multi-partism as the mode of operation in this country. 

If the population had been told that the condition for multi-partism is that the parties that do not form government will not participate or benefit from any government programmes at all, it would have helped during decision making. So, I do not consider it a laughing matter at all because it could start on a small thing like that, it will go on to the courts of law where justice is selectively given to the people of Uganda on account of their voting patterns.

Mr Speaker, the people of Uganda urgently need direction on this matter on whether belonging to the opposition relegates one to being to the status of a second class citizen who must wait for the children of the family to eat and have their fill first. 

Mr Speaker, there are many cases of torture, harassment and intimidation. The Human Rights reports of over eight years have listed these cases. I don’t need to go over them.

We have a very big problem in my constituency and Kampala in general called, “Idle and disorderly.” It is very common in Kampala District for unidentified plain-clothed people to just come and beat up youths and arrest them on grounds of, “Idle and disorderly.” Currently, there are 550 cases of “idle and disorderly” in prison, most of whom were picked within the vicinity of their homes, some actually coming from the toilets.

In many cases, they are required to pay cash bail of between Ugshs 100, 000 and 200,000. There are very few people in Uganda who can just come up with Ugshs 100,000 or 200,000 to buy bail especially the kind that are arrested for being “idle and disorderly”, given that nine million Ugandans will actually be idle and disorderly because they are very poor, they have no jobs and cannot even raise Ugshs 1,500 to live on. 

Many other cases of human rights abuses must be given attention. The 22 people, co-accused with Dr Besigye for engaging in acts of terrorism were granted bail by the High Court. They continue to be held in prison in spite of the High Court ruling granting them bail and the Constitutional Court ruling saying that one cannot appear before two courts. 

Dr Kiiza Besigye’s treason case itself is a classic example of the state -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me; I think you are very conversant that matters that are in court should not attract a series of debate in the House. If it is a case of Dr Besigye it is a case of Dr Besigye, please let us not comment on it. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Cases of rape, castration, extra judicial killing in Karamoja have been reported to this House; cases of selling children at Shs 3,000 in Teso were reported by Members of Parliament from Teso. The last time I visited the IDP camps, every little girl of over 12 years was carrying her own child and there are cases of incarceration of children in the same quarters with adults.  

As you rightly advised, Mr Speaker, I don’t need to belabour these points and as you have said, many of them are well known by the people of Uganda. I would, therefore, like to suggest that a committee if it is appointed should investigate under what laws the prison authorities are holding the 22 people co-accused with Dr Besigye and what plans the Ministry of Internal Affairs have to correct this injustice and violation of the Constitution by its own department. 

As I said, it is a good thing that Paul Kalemba is out of prison, but he is constantly looking over his shoulders. He doesn’t know whether he is safe and whether he will not be picked up again. And if he is picked up again, whether he will be able to reach the minister to be able to save him. The plight of Paul Kalemba is that of many Ugandans who are insecure and intimidated.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, in his State of the Nation Address, the President said, on page 9, that the Movement Government will continue to adhere to constitutional order and the rule of law. If they ever did! He also continued to say: “We must recommit ourselves to building democracy for both the present and the future generations and be prepared to meet the moderate sacrifices for this noble cause. 

The challenge to all of us in different positions of leadership is to mobilise the population and make them conscious of the need to cherish and adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law at all times. Although government may take lead in this endeavour to sensitise our people about the need to adhere to the rule of law and constitutionalism at the various levels of our society, it is incumbent on each leader to make a personal contribution to educate the people about democracy and the rule of law.”

I contend that while the President has verbally and literally asked us to support him in this cause, he expects this House to provide support through concrete actions, not merely supporting by clapping our hands when he talks. Moreover, this House is accountable to the people of Uganda under Section XXVI (iii) of the Constitution which states: “All lawful measures shall be taken to expose, combat and eradicate corruption and abuse or misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices.”

The Uganda Human Rights Commission report of several years says that one of the biggest challenges of enforcing prohibition of torture in Uganda is that the perpetrators of torture are not personally penalised for their actions.   

I beg this House not to politicise this motion because we are talking about real people, real problems and real flesh and blood. As I said, today it is someone else, but tomorrow it could be you or your loved one.

I, therefore, move, Mr Speaker, that:

1. 	Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate allegations of serious human rights abuse.

2. 	The chairperson of the select committee be a Member of the Opposition, in the same spirit as chairpersons of oversight committees are.

3. 	The select committee reports back to Parliament its findings and recommendations within three months from this date.

4. 	As a matter of great urgency, while the committee does its work, the Ministers of Internal Affairs and Defence provide answers in respect of missing persons, suspects held on violation of a court order granting them bail and withholding of suspects’ salaries, as enumerated above because, honourable members, justice delayed is justice denied.

5. 	The committee investigates why the UHRC is ineffective in playing their role as the leading antagonist of human rights abuse.
  
6. 	The law be revisited so that individuals are held accountable for their individual involvement in human rights abuse and torture be as a crime in the laws of Uganda. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR WASIKE: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedure? (Laughter)

MR WASIKE: Mr Speaker, according to Rule 108 (1) (b), I am of the view that this motion involves spending of some money because I believe this committee cannot work without an in put. In light of that rule, is it procedurally right for this motion, which involves a charge on the Consolidated Fund to be moved by a Member other than as provided for here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: If we agree with the motion and we set up a select committee, it will operate within the parliamentary budget.

3.38
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): I rise to second the motion on the Floor. Mr Speaker, this is a well-intentioned motion, which I believe all of us should support whole-heartedly. It is a motion that is seeking to ensure that there is good governance, constitutionalism and rule of law in this country. It touches the crucial -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, to be courteous to our visitors this afternoon. We have people from Kibuye Primary School, Kyaka County, Kyenjojo District. You are welcome!

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I was saying this motion touches the whole essence of constitutionalism that is fundamental rights in this country. When we talk about constitutionalism, we always give emphasis to fundamental rights, especially the right against torture, cruelty, and inhumanity and degrading treatment. This right under Article 44 is sacrosanct and indeed there shall be no derogation of enjoyment of freedoms and rights. Unfortunately, we have not had legislation to operationalise Article 44, but that is a different matter altogether. 

As the motion stands today, calls for serious investigation by this honourable House if we are to guarantee constitutionalism in this country. I will emphasise a few areas for purposes of guaranteeing and indeed protecting the sanctity of the Constitution. It was noted by the mover, and I Indeed support it, that the whole essence of this Parliament is to protect the Constitution and democratic governance. That is under Article 79 of our Constitution. It is our primary obligation as the august House to protect the Constitution and constitutional governance in this country. We cannot do that when we do not address matters of this nature.

Despite the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission as observed by the mover, there is still continued gross violation of fundamental human rights. Indeed in those various reports, we have had time to review them. The commission has noted that despite a number of actions being taken, there is still impunity and perpetration of violation by a number of state agencies and in most cases they go away scot-free and no action is taken. This is a matter that calls for the attention of this House.

One, I notice that under Article 49(1)(b) of this Constitution, the Minister of Internal Affairs is supposed to give a report to this House every month of actions taken in compliance with the findings of the Human Rights Commission. 

Secondly, under Clause (2) of that same Article -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you read it verbatim, please?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, Mr Speaker. Article 49(1) says: “In every month in which there is a sitting of Parliament, the minister responsible shall make a report to Parliament in respect of –

(b) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human rights Commission.”     

Then I go to Clause (2), which is equally relevant.

“The Minister responsible shall publish every month in the Gazette and in the media –

(a) the number and names and addresses of the persons restricted or detained;

(b) the number of cases reviewed by the Uganda Human Rights Commission; and

(c) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.” 

THE SPEAKER: Is that in the Constitution of Uganda?

MR LUKWAGO: This is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as at 15 February 2006, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I just want to give information that the clauses he is referring to refer to human rights and freedoms during a state of emergence. But we do not have a state of emergence in Uganda right now.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you for that information but I deliberately left out Clause (1)(a) that is specifically about a state of emergence. There cannot be a sitting of Parliament in a state of emergence. Mr Speaker, there is a semi-colon after (a) and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are suggesting that in case of a state of emergence Parliament cannot sit?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, when there is a state of emergence here, there are situations that warrant other actions to be taken and Parliament might not be of help. But I have moved away from that particular point. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have not seen any report to that effect. We have not known the number of people who have been detained in un-gazetted places, even those who are detained in gazetted places. The list is not available. The bill of rights in our Constitution is very clear; no single Ugandan should be detained in an un-gazetted place. Here we are, it is a reality in Uganda, and we still have scores of Ugandans detained in un-gazetted places. We need to know under what law these people are being detained? 

Secondly, we need to know where these un-gazetted places are, how many are they and for what purpose?

Article 218 (2) of the Constitution states: “No intelligence service shall be established by the government except by or under an Act of Parliament.” But in this country, we have several intelligence organisations, which are not known under any Act of Parliament. I am in private practice, you struggle to get a person who has been arrested by PIN they will tell you, “No, he is not with PIN, that person could have been arrested by VCCU.” On trying VCCU they say, “We do not know him, probably he is with GISO.” You go to GISO and they tell you they do not know that person. So, we need to know how many security organisations are here and under what law are they established. It is this committee that will assist us to establish all this and whether in executing their duties, these security organisations comply with the law. 

I remember I was appearing in one case involving the death of Patrick Mamenero who died at the hands of CMI. And what happened? Hon. Noble Mayombo came and testified and indeed conceded before the commission - the case has already been decided anyway it is not subjudice. He came and submitted and said, “Yes, it is true we detained him for over a month.” Then I gave him the Constitution to read. You are not supposed to detain somebody beyond 48 hours without producing him before court for plea. He said, “Mr Lukwago, are you living outside Uganda? You do not know what is going on in this country? Is it practically possible to arrest a suspect of treason and to produce him before court within 48 hours?” This is the situation they will tell you. 

I am citing only one example but there are scores of Ugandans who are detained in un-gazetted places, even in places which are gazetted, who have not been produced and they have been arrested by these organisations. 

Mr Speaker, I am winding up. Article 221, which is more less a paper tiger states: “It shall be the duty of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and any other armed force established in Uganda, the Uganda Police Force and any other police force, the Uganda Prisons Service, all intelligence services and the National Security Council to observe and respect human rights and freedoms in the performance of their functions.” 
 
But more often than not, members of UPDF flout this provision with impunity. You go to a number of places in detention camps – I would not even wish to mention a Member of Parliament here who survived death by a whisker. He was remanded in Gulu prison, and what happened? A number of UPDF officers including a current Member of Parliament stormed the prison, they grabbed those people and shot one of them dead and then they took the rest to Kigumba.

This is just a tip of the iceberg, Mr Speaker, as to what is going on in this country. And you see, with VCCU, Oh my God! It is terrible. For them, they even go down like in my constituency here, they move around in numberless vehicles, grab people purportedly – even in enforcing a civil debt. Not even looking for guns but because they have been hired by somebody to go and enforce payment of a civil debt. This is how low we have gone. 

It is these kinds of select committees, which will help us to unearth all this. Of course, there are other issues that have been raised like torture of political opponents. Just recently, you witnessed what happened at the Constitutional Square. It was after the promulgation of this Constitution that that place was named Constitutional Square. It was originally called “City Square,” then it was named Constitutional Square as a symbol of constitutionalism in this country. It was on 8 October 1995 when we launched the Constitutional Square.

Now what is happening? It is now a battlefield! It has been proclaimed a “no go area” for any political opponent. It was declared that you step there at your own risk by a “small” chairman of a division. You can imagine, Mr Speaker, we have people who are registered –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When do you become a “big” chairman?

MR LUKWAGO: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I do respect the chairman and the chair, but the orders that were issued infringe on peoples’ rights. He did not have those powers and these are the issues we are talking about. Tear-gassing of people, who have rightly assembled at the Constitutional Square to launch a lawful civic political activity, is a gross violation of fundamental human rights that we are supposed to observe.

As a country, we are supposed to sign the Optional Protocol to the convention against torture. The UN convention made it way back in 2002, and up-to-date we have not yet signed it. We need to investigate as to why we have not ratified this protocol with all its well-intentioned provisions. 

So, I beg to move that there are scores of Ugandans who have been arrested for being “Idle and disorderly” and so many other cases. So, for those reasons, I support this motion and I humbly appeal to honourable members, especially those on the other side, please, support this motion because it is for all of us. It is for the good of everybody, and it is for us to have constitutionalism and the rule of law in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in terms of Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure, a motion to constitute a select committee to investigate disappearances and other forms of violations of human rights has been tabled by hon. Kamya, Member for Lubaga North and has been seconded by hon. Lukwago, Member for Kampala Central. Now the motion is open for debate. But the debate should not exceed one hour from now. You may contribute, if you so wish.

3.55
MR SAM NJUBA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, for the opportunity. I stand up to support the motion. As I was listening, I was wondering how many Members of this House lived 30 or 25 years ago. I was trying to count, but there are quite a few who do not remember those periods. Among the reasons why the National Resistance Movement ever came in existence, was that the government at that time had lost respect for human rights. 

I want to remind young Members of this House that during that period, people like Father Kiggundu were killed, Chief Justice Ben Kiwanuka and Lawyer Hark disappeared, Mr Kigonya who was Commissioner of Prisons disappeared, Kawalya Kaggwa, Dr Bagenda and Dr Kamulegeya were killed, and the list goes on. I do not want to repeat what the mover has said. As a result of this disrespect of human rights, some of us took up arms. We joined those who had the ability to do it and we brought peace in this country.

Mr Speaker, I did not want to raise this one. But when we came back, there was a good lawyer called Edward Ssekandi and a judge called Oder. Judge Oder chaired the commission while the lead counsel of that commission was a lawyer called Edward Ssekandi. He compiled a report and as we speak now, that big report, which cost a lot of money is lying somewhere in the Ministry of Justice. Nothing has been done about the culprits in that report. Many of these are still around. The other day, one was released from Luzira after serving 20 years. He was not even asked what happened to the people we picked up from the bus park. We begin to ask -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I believe that my honourable colleague was once a Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, as well as Internal Affairs. Could he tell us what he did with that report during his term of office? 

MR NJUBA: Mr Speaker, I have never been Minister of Internal Affairs and I have never been Minister of Justice. I was only Minister of Constitutional Affairs and I did my job. Be that as it may, I am beginning to think that we are not serious in this country. Government is not serious. Government must protect its citizens. The list of people given by hon. Beti Kamya and the one I gave you deserves to be investigated. We must find out what caused their death. But to simply sit and wait, we have no business to govern this country if we cannot protect the citizens.

Mr Speaker, I am saying we are not serious. Dr Andrew Kayiira was a minister in this government. He was a liberator in this country. He was killed in cold blood yet he is not even remembered among the heroes of this country. I am challenging this government, which instructed Scotland Yard to investigate this murder, why doesn’t it release the report? It is now over 15 years later. If they did that, we would see its seriousness in protecting its citizens. Let me pray that this House lives to fulfil its duty by supporting this motion, and find out the causes and the reasons and the way forward. Otherwise, we will have worse situations in future. Thank you.

4.00
MR JOHN LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In 1979, after the overthrow of Idi Amin, the National Consultative Council repealed very many decrees he had made. One of these was Disappearing Persons Decree. This law was repealed on the understanding that disappearing would never again come back to Uganda. However, it is now clear that it has come back in a worse manner. This is because there are now two groups abducting people. There is abduction by government functionaries. [NRM Members: “Kony”]. I hear my colleagues say that Kony is the creator of the system we have in charge of the country today. Kony was not there. If you think it is Kony, what did you do about him? Why did you create him? We did not have Kony before; Kony is your baby. So, the first category is government functionaries abducting people.  

When we were touring Acholi sub region, I came across a very sad case of a man who was abducted by government soldiers and tortured to the extent that his manhood has been destroyed. His wife has run away but we are assisting him to come and get some redress.  However, no redress will ever restore his manhood and this is a very unfortunate situation! There are damages by Human Rights Commission, by courts, which are just ignored by this government and they have accumulated to very big amounts. Are we under the rule of law? Do we have a Constitution? Do we respect it? I think something should be done.

Secondly, there is this other group that abducts mainly children reportedly for witchcraft. This is very serious! These people have realised that around the capital city, people are aware of what is going on. They have now moved upcountry. During our recent tour, the LC III Chairperson of Parabong sub-county in Kalong came and reported three cases of abductions of children. Two of the children were rescued: one from a bus heading for Kampala and the other one from a cyclist. The guy reportedly abandoned the bicycle and ran away. The third child has not been seen up to now. 

Mr Speaker, the question is why does abduction keep coming back to this country? This is what the motion is all about. We want a select committee to find out why abduction keeps coming back to this country. I think this is for the benefit of everybody. It is not in favour of any group of people. Every child is a candidate for abduction. Therefore, do not think that if you subscribe to a different political party with the mover of the motion, you are safe. No abduction has any boundaries today. It is my child today, but tomorrow it could be yours. So really - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek some clarification from hon. Okello-Okello.  According to the current motion, they are saying abductions have been done by government. For him, he is mixing up the abduction of our innocent children, which could be something different. This motion is clearly pointing a finger at government.  Are you trying to amend hon. Kamya’s motion so that we look at the abduction of children differently? With the abduction of children, we do not have real suspects like this motion is alleging.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I listened to the mover very carefully. She said that children between the age of one and 15 are certainly not being abducted by government functionaries. So, even if she had not included it in the motion, there would be nothing wrong with making it more comprehensive. The idea is that we want abductions to stop! It is a big shame that this thing has been going on for years and nobody seem to care. I beg the honourable members to support the motion.  Thank you.

4.09
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and in that respect thank the mover. I support the motion because I feel it is really timely.  Probably as it is said, justice delayed is justice denied.

I give my submission very passionately because I would like all of us to be focused, without any political attachments. When we talk about human rights violation, today is somebody but tomorrow will be me. As the leaders of this nation, the world is looking at us. The facts should be put to book and this is the opportunity that all of us join hands to let all that has been suspected to be happening underneath be brought to book. It should also be a method, which will make our governments accountable. It is our responsibility to protect the rights of our people.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to give an account of what is happening right now in my constituency, Kitgum. Such cases have also been reported and it is very sad that the people who have been afflicted by these acts have not seen justice being done.  There are many examples which I can cite but I have a few which I would like to share with the honourable colleagues to appreciate that this is an issue which we must join hands to stop.

In Kitgum, on 16 August 2006, the LC Chairman, Mr Sam Odida, was picked from his house by armed people who killed him. The case was reported. I made some follow up but we were told that this gentleman was killed because he was running away from the patrol. But when you look at the photograph, this gentleman was shot at a very close range while on his knees and up-to-date nothing has happened to bring these to justice. The family is still aggrieved. These are sad situations which are happening. 

Some of our people in Mucwini sometime back were suspected by the UPDF to be rebels. They were bathing by a river and they were shot. When I went to the RDC, he told me he cannot harshly handle the UPDF who live in tough conditions because it demoralises them. They gave aggrieved families a bag of posho and beans. This is what is happening. 

There was also somebody suspected to have run away from prison. When he ran, he came across people who were drinking - and with Cholera drinking “kwete” has been prohibited. So, when they saw the Police coming, they all dived, including those ones who were just seated. One of them was beaten and killed by a police officer. To-date nothing has been done!  The statement claims that the man was not killed. I have the photograph with me showing how sad the incident was. 

There are many other cases. And this is why we are appealing that such things should be earthed by the said committee so that we clean up the system. When we talk about killing, it is still on. Even right now, my colleagues from the district sent me a message that yesterday someone was killed by the UPDF forces and the burial is today. This goes on and on, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  That is why I support the motion. I appeal to all honourable members to join me in supporting this motion. Today it may be somewhere else but tomorrow it will be in your home.  

When we talk about harassment at places of work because of supporting opposition parties, I want to state that I, Beatrice Anywar, was a victim of such harassment and intimidation. I used to work with National Water and by then I was in Reform Agenda. I contested in 2001 after which I went back. This was allowed in our company as long as you asked for leave. When I went back, the story was different. I was harassed. I was told to ask for voluntary retirement. The case even reached the President’s office. When we met him at State House as the executive of Reform Agenda, he directed his minister to look into this. It was raised as a case of harassment of the opposition. Whoever does not agree with the party in power, is supposed to be eliminated from his livelihood got at the work place. 

Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was also handling that. When I went to his office several times, I was asked, “What do you really want? How old are your children? Talk well and things will be alright.” (Laughter) Therefore, if I a Member of Parliament can now recount such an experience, what about the ordinary people? I am giving all these details so that we support this motion. It will help our people who are unable to speak for themselves. Very many things are happening and this is the truth. I can cite many examples –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But time.

MS ANYWAR: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. In my district, the harassment comes directly from the office of the RDC. Recently, when the Prime Minister was in my district I put it to him. Our people who are not NRM supporters are harassed. Here with me are documents from people that would have wanted the RDC to help them. He refused because they are not Movement supporters. 

Let us really take this to be our responsibility as national leaders, who talk on behalf of our people. The facts are there or if there are doubting Thomases, please support this motion so that we put records right. I believe we are not party to it and we should therefore not block it in anyway. Support the motion so that those who are not right are put to shame and subjected to courts of law. This is my passionate appeal, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This will help our people who cannot talk for their own sake especially those from troubled areas. I thank you.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Beti Kamya who has moved this motion. It is true that I have had an opportunity to discuss matters with her, concerning security.  However, I must say this motion suggests some bad faith. This is because if my sister had really wanted to move the House on the question of human rights, she would have talked with one of the colleagues on the government side and mobilised general support. Perhaps she would have got somebody to second the motion. That way, it would have been viewed with more sympathy. This is the first suspicion.

The second suspicion became obvious during the debate. Hon. Erias Lukwago made many political overtones and other tones that were so clear. In fact, I would like to salute hon. Baryomunsi for his vigilance and constitutional alertness. He knocked out hon. Lukwago rightly by quoting the relevant part and exposing the fact his colleague was leaving out. I thank you, colleague, for that vigilance.  

The third point I want to mention is, hon. Kamya should have recognised the improvement in the issue of human rights in Uganda over the years. (Applause) You very well know that in the 1970s and 1980s, Uganda was almost the global headquarters of massive violation of human rights.  You know very well that in the 1980s and 1970s, we lost about one million people, killed by the state or state agents. So, the fact that hon. Kamya –(Interruption)  

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. While I appreciate that the situation has really improved, I do not know what you really studied. From the figures presented in this report, in 1997, the number of complaints was 414. In 1998, the number was 981; 1999 it was 1265 and so on and so forth. Hon. Rugunda, I do not know if this is an improvement or otherwise.  

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, hon. Kikungwe. This is eloquent testimony that people of Uganda are now free to complain and they have properly utilised the enabling environment for them to fight for their fundamental human rights. In fact, what I expect is that this number will increase next year as more vigilance and education become nation wide. 

Mr Speaker, the other point why my sister and I really defer is the fact that there was no reference to the numerous rebellions that have been taking place in Uganda since 1986. The Government of Uganda was accused of mass violation of human rights and no mention was made of the Lords Resistance Army and Joseph Kony and other leaders. The Government was accused of abductions; can you imagine? Really, I think there were some good points but they were undermined by this one sided presentation of the case. 

It is true that hon. Kamya and I discussed the case of this young man, Kalemba who was interrogated by security forces and found to be innocent and released. It is necessary that the security agencies are vigilant. If they were not vigilant, this country would have been overrun by backward rebellions that have been taking place in our country -(Applause)- In fact, we should use this motion to salute the daughters and sons of Uganda who have been in UPDF and other security organs -(Applause)- for heroically defending the people of Uganda, the sovereignty, the property and the security of the people. 

Mr Speaker, what has Government done about this matter of human rights? In fact, you could characterise the struggle waged by the National Resistance Movement as having been a struggle for human rights. I am glad that in practice, a lot has been achieved. 

Shortly after taking over power in 1986, a Human Rights Commission headed by Justice Odel (RIP) was put in place for several years. The commission sat in International Conference Centre with very eminent people. And indeed as hon. Njuba said, they produced a good report on this matter. Because Government attaches so much importance to the question of human rights, it supported the constitutionalisation of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, which is now well established and doing excellent work. 

Hon. Kamya, also quoted the case of Mamenero. As hon. Lukwago himself said, this is a case that was dealt with and disposed off a long time ago. If I were you, this would have been one of the cases to delete from this list. I thought the cases that you would put in this document would be cases that have not been properly handled by –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Patrick Mamenero died at the hands of CMI. The matter was filed in the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the decision of the commission was that the family of Mamenero be awarded Ugshs 30 million. Todate that money has not been paid and the bereaved family is still languishing in abject poverty. These are all issues of human rights. We cannot say this is over since it has not been dealt with conclusively. The fruits of litigation have not been realised. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the information by hon. Lukwago is good piece of information but the fact is that in as far as the legal systems are concerned a decision was taken. If money has not been paid, we should combine efforts to ensure that that money and other monies remaining unpaid are handled. However, you know the problems of the resource envelop that the country has. All the same, I am confident that the money will be paid. It is just a question of time. 

Mr Speaker, a few other points were raised and I will just make short comments about them. There was the issue of torture at the constitutional square. When one looks at the media in Uganda, there has been a grotesque misrepresentation of what exactly happened. It is true that the FDC wanted to have a membership recruitment drive. They went and got permission from Kampala City Council. However, the business community in Kampala wrote and complained to Government that in the past, whenever there have been similar political activities, they have been harassed, their property destroyed or stolen and that they did not feel safe to have that meeting in the centre of the business district in Kampala. Government considered their point of view and as far as Government is concerned, protection of people and their property is sacred. 

So, we agreed with the business community and advised FDC to get any of the several other places in Kampala so that they could carry out their recruitment drive without any problems. In fact, Government even offered Kololo Airstrip to FDC. I spoke to Mr Wafula Ogutu, the publicity chief of FDC and General Muntu, the Organising Secretary of FDC over this very subject matter. Unfortunately, FDC did not accept the offer by Government and they decided to go and confront the police.

Ms Alice Alaso (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I really had no intentions of getting up until the honourable minister went overboard in insinuating, blatantly telling a lie to this House that we were offered Kololo Air strip. He knows very well that by the time we reached the discussion on Kololo and he told us to write to Madam, is it Amelia Kyambadde, some name like that, it was almost evening and we could not trace the lady. How can the honourable minister come to tell us that he gave us an offer to go to Kololo? I think this should really be rectified.  

Secondly, on a matter of clarification, if I complain and say, “I am threatened –” (Mrs Wabudeya rose _) Let me just put this first to the Minister, maybe my big sister hon. Wabudeya would like to help me. I guess her problem is with the title because I said, “Some name like that.”  Maybe she wants to tell me the title. She will tell me later. 

But what I want to say is that besides that, is the hon. Minister in order to tell this House that if I tell him and the police who are the custodians of my security that I feel threatened, the best they can do to me, instead of coming to secure me is to tear gas me; is he in order? Because he says that the Kampala city traders, who unfortunately, we know were forced to write the letter saying that they were scared - why did he not ask the police to ensure that the traders were safe? Why did he instead tell the police to tear gas FDC who are just putting up tables to sell their cards? Is that in order?

THE SPEAKER: Please stop this question of asking me to judge on issues to do with whether it is proper or not - I cannot really rule on that -(Laughter)

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was actually not standing up to correct the title, but for your information, Amelia Kyambadde is a PPS to His Excellency the President. But I wanted to say that indeed the Minister of Internal Affairs did contact me and we agreed that FDC should come for permission to use Kololo airstrip. I waited for them, but I did not see them. So, I could not give them the permission that we had agreed upon and I am still waiting to give them permission to use Kololo airstrip.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much hon. Beatrice Wabudeya for that “bwino;” that is the fact of the matter. Mr Speaker, we better make this position clear. This Government is interested in every Ugandan being able to organise himself or herself freely so long as it is done in accordance with the law. FDC should enjoy this freedom too, but they should stop that confrontational approach -(Applause)- definitely this is not a Government you can intimidate -(Applause) 

Mr Speaker, the other issues, which my sister did raise – hon. Betty Kamya, concerning some- (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure, Rule No.8 - sitting arrangement in the House: 
1)	Every Member shall, as far as possible, have a seat reserved for him or her by the Speaker.
2)	The seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and Members of the Party in Government.  
3)	The seats to the left hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition and Members of the Opposition Party or parties in the House. 

Mr Speaker, I am raising this because the people seated here are making a lot of noise and engaging us in a discussion, and our Rules of Procedure do not even allow them to sit here. Is it procedurally right for the Members, who are violating the Rules of this House, to continue making noise for the Front Benchers on your left side.

THE SPEAKER:  I do not know - are they making noise because of their closeness in distance or because of their big voices?

MR KIBANZANGA: It is a close distance and the manner in which they are reacting to the debate, engaging this bench –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think if you are talking about my right and left side, I see an open space here, you are on my right and they are on my left -(Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to advise hon. Betty Kamya that this august House has very robust committees; it has got the Legal and Parliamentary Committee and it has got the defence and Internal Affairs Committee. I believe that this information you have, if and when passed to them, they will be able to do justice to that information and produce the required way forward and solutions.

Secondly, the Uganda Human Rights Commission, which has been doing a very commendable job, and by the way, it has held several meetings with leaders of security agencies to work together to resolve issues of human rights nature. I believe it will be extremely useful in tackling some of the issues, investigating them and dealing with these cases.

Thirdly, the Uganda Police Force has the capacity to follow up some of those cases. I believe they will also be very useful and in some cases, if they do not have the capacity, then instead of opening new areas of operation, it is better to re-enforce the capacity of those institutions. 

I, therefore, oppose the motion. I further oppose the proposed intention to have a select committee because there are adequate avenues and machinery to deal with all these bodies - there are enough bodies available to deal with each of the cases that my sister has raised. I call on all members of the House to reject this motion. I thank you -(Applause)

4.42
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you Mr Speaker and the mover of the motion. I am a human rights activist, so I really sympathise with what the mover has brought up about human rights abuse, torture and kidnapping of children. 

However, let me draw the attention of the House to the Constitution of Uganda, Chapter IV Article 51. In that article, the Constitution sets up the Uganda Human Rights Commission, under the leadership of a High Court Judge, with members of high integrity from all over Uganda.  

Article 51 (1) states that the duty to deal with all human rights abuses in Uganda is vested in the Uganda Human Rights Commission and therefore if we refuse –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker and fellow members, if we set up a committee of Parliament, we will be denying the Uganda Human Rights Commission its duties; we would be undermining it and we would be duplicating its work. I noticed that my sister even quoted their figures and cases, so there was nothing that they had not done. Therefore, I join hon. Rugunda in saying that Members of Parliament should not support this motion. Thank you.

4.45
MR FRED RUHINDI (NRM, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I rise up following representation of this motion, but which I had had an opportunity to discuss formally with my colleague the mover, hon. Betty Kamya. 

I remember my views were generally the same as those put by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Essentially I was saying that the appropriate report from the Uganda Human Rights Commission has been presented before this Parliament. It has been referred to the Appropriate Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Accordingly, any one with concerns of this nature would ordinarily go to the appropriate committee, raise these concerns, and they would be investigated. 

Please bare with us really, Mr Speaker, because I believe that most of us found this information today, just this afternoon. We are just running around to find the appropriate answers to respond to such grave statements in the midst of the public that is watching to see how ably and adequately we handle such issues. 

So it would certainly be befitting if the appropriate committee handled this matter and the report comes here. Certainly if hon. Betty Kamya is not satisfied with the progress of the appropriate committee, then she would be in a position to propose the formation of a Select Committee. But that notwithstanding, I wish to clarify a few issues:  

The first issue was raised by hon. Elias Lukwago. He asked why we have not yet ratified the additional protocol on the prevention of torture.  I want to assure you, actually a few days ago, my senior colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was in Bangui. One of the matters they were actually discussing related to the signing and ratification of that particular convention. It is not yet signed, but of course the progress is being made. 

 As you hear the language, it is an “additional -.”  There is the protocol against torture. That one we ratified.  Honourable members, this is an additional protocol, the problem is that some times we do not really internalise most of these international conventions; we do not synthesise them. Sometimes, we actually ratify without understanding them yet there is no harm in taking all necessary steps to have them understood before we become members. That is what we are actually doing.

The second issue is on the matter you ruled on as subjudice. Let me clarify one or two things about the 22 suspects charged with Dr Besigye.  This is for purposes of clarification.  –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned, you made a ruling earlier on the issue of Dr Kiiza Besigye and 22 others whose matter is before court. Is the honourable member in order to insist on debating, discussing and commenting on a matter that you already ruled on? 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I was not given time to understand what he wanted to comment on. So, I think let him do so, I will be able to rule on it.  Because mentioning that there are 22 people is not subjudice. I should give you a write-up on what is subjudice. What you can say on a matter and what you cannot. But mentioning that there is a case in court of about 22 people is not subjudice.  So let me hear what he wants to say, and then I will rule. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to inform the House that the Constitutional Court ruled that the General Court Marshal and the High Court have got concurrent jurisdictions over these matters. So having obtained bail from the High Court, then the suspects were brought before the General Court Marshal. If they wanted, they would also have applied for bail because the courts have got concurrent jurisdictions, but they have not yet done that and the Constitutional Court also ruled that it is unconstitutional - it is not provided for that the General Court Martial cannot try terrorism acts and those charges relating to terrorism were accordingly dropped by the General Court Martial. So, that is the information that I thought I should bring to this Floor.

THE SPEAKER: So, actually, what has been done is to give us information of the ruling of the court and that is not subjudice.  

MR RUHINDI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Following that, hon. Lukwago also raised a matter about the reporting of the Minister of Internal Affairs to this House, matters of human rights in accordance with Article 49. 

Much as I first attempted to agree with hon. Lukwago, by looking at Article 49 1(a) and 1(b) to be read disjunctively, but I thought that hon. Lukwago would also look at the heading of this part, it is in the Constitution, if you could open it please. I think he has it because on top of Article 46, it says: “Human rights and freedoms during a state of emergency.” 

So, all those provisions relate to a state of emergency and therefore, Mr Speaker, I was not quite clear and I wish that the honourable Member of Parliament for Chua would tell us a bit more about this decree because it was my first time to hear of it; the “Disappearing Person’s Decree”. I wish he would give us more information about this decree because –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Let me assist the honourable member to give you that information. The decree is, “Estate of Missing Person’s Decree.” It was about management of estates of people who were deemed to have disappeared under the hands of the State.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, you can see, because this information should have been given to hon. Okello Okello; this is not information to me. In any case, when you relate the two, disappearing of persons and the State - Mr Speaker, I think with those few clarifications, I urge this House to reject this motion and uphold the principle of our working organs within this Parliament. And when we are not satisfied with them, we can move otherwise.  Thank you so much.

4.56
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I have heard from the movers and the others. So, according to our Rules of Procedure, as you cited, I would like to move a motion that a question be put.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that I put the question – what I should remind you of is that we have clocked an hour and the debate should not exceed an hour. But in fairness - because there are a number of people here who wanted to speak. So I will give two people on my left side and then I will put the question.

4.53
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having been so considerate that more voices should be heard as far as this motion is concerned.

Secondly, I stand here to support this motion, which has been tabled before us in good spirit. Not long ago, Israel went into war with Lebanon and we all know what happened, and they went into war over nothing but abduction of one soldier of a rank of a corporal of the Israel Army. 

While the Minister for Internal Affairs was here registering successes in improvement in human rights, any sane and noble Government will even be much more proud if no cases of human rights and abuses were registered at all. As long as the number and the statistics as reflected in the motion indicate a steady increase, there is still much more to be done and a sane and a serious Government should get concerned and strive to zero the cases of abuse of human rights.  

Mr Speaker, my friend Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, is on record today saying that this motion has had a lot of political over-tones. I am happy that on the front bench of the Government, we have a re-known professor of political science, who has just taken leave of the chambers. Politics have got three major ingredients: resource mobilisation, resource distribution and most important of all, conflict resolutions. 

When we bring out these issues of human rights abuse in this country, we bring them in a good spirit that we feel these conflicts, which have been created as a result of violation of human rights must be fairly, humanly and expeditiously addressed in order to avert further pain in the hands of those who exercise the abuse. We do appreciate that there is now an increased reporting of cases. The increased reporting of cases is in no way an indication that the cases of human rights are now coming down. Actually, what it shows is that people are becoming increasingly aware of their rights and they are demanding for action from Government.  

So, the demand for action from Government is, therefore, a sign that much more still wants in as far as improvements are concerned on part of Government. Vigilance and adherence to the law is not what we oppose, certainly we would be more than willing even to cooperate with law enforcement organs in reporting bad elements in society to ensure that sanity prevails in this country. What we are bringing forward is not about the vigilance on law enforcement organs, but we are saying that in exercising their vigilance, there is lack of adherence to observers of human rights. 

Surely, if a VCCU official comes up and is engaged in civil matters of collection or recovery of funds, that is not a criminal matter and I do not think that is the essence and reason for which that security organisation was concerned. When we are talking about vigilance on their part we would expect that each security organisation be allowed to operate within its mandate and within the codes of conduct as prescribed to them. 

The point is not for example if a police officer arrests a person, instead of leading that person to legitimate and registered places of detention, he or she takes that person to a safe house which safe house may be an individual’s house. We have been informed in courts of law that even members of House created safe houses in their own houses during campaigns. I think those are the issues that we are talking about. I am not pointing fingers but if you think that that statement has touched you then the onus is on you to feel concerned that we have got our ears and eyes on the ground. 

That is what we are concerned about. What I am saying is not subjudice because the court has already pronounced itself on it. All we are saying is that these are genuine issues that we Ugandans want to talk about.

Mr Speaker, let us talk about our attendance in this Parliament. On a very sad note, I would like to report that one of our colleagues, a Member of Parliament, who is supposed to be here with us on a day to day basis has for a number of months been intimidated by security operatives. Where is the honourable Member of Parliament for Pian County? Is he with us? For how long has he been absent? These are the issues. 

There is only one Member of Parliament for Pian County and there is only one county called Pian. If that honourable Member of Parliament is not with us here, it is not because he does not want to be with us. He has suffered intimidation under the hands of security operatives and what has happened to him could have happened to us -(Interjection)- when I stand up here I am well informed about the facts that I am talking about. You can involve me in the corridors of Parliament but not here at this time. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Speaker, although the name of the Member of Parliament has not been mentioned, I know that this Member of Parliament is in New York pursuing his PHD -(Laughter)- I was with him recently. So, is it in order for the member to insinuate that security operatives intimidated him? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that you have now got the information that the member is pursuing academic matters -(Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I respect the ruling and without any prejudice to that, the truth of the matter is that this honourable member was incarcerated in a safe house and he has attested to that. Yes, I stand by that and I know the facts on my fingertip that is why I am able to bring it up here. If I were not sure I would not have brought it –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am going to check with my records to see whether this honourable member wrote to me over this issue and I will inform you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as this debate comes to an end I would like to appeal to every one of us to reflect very seriously and engage our individual conscience. Let it not be a matter of being directed. Not long ago, not until a member of the front bench of this House suffered in prison and later on became a Minister of Internal Affairs was he able to appreciate how bad it is to be under detention. 

You may say whatever is being reported today has come from FDC but at the end of the day only after it touches your own team will you come up and agree that yes, illegal or inhuman treatment or degradation of nature is bad to everybody. Of course cases like that of when hon. Omara Atubo was jailed while he was Deputy Minister for Defence; Northern Uganda is a known case to everybody and I do not want to go into that. 

I appeal to each one of us to make a personal decision on an informed basis when it comes to voting on this motion. This motion I believe is for all of us. It is moved with good intentions so that each one of us as a leader can be able to take responsibility for institutions that are our direct political guidance. I appeal to every one of us to support this motion. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

5.08
MR MATIA NSUBUGA (Bukoto County South, Masaka): Mr Speaker, as we debate this motion I ask honourable members of this House to debate it with sober minds. The very reason why the Movement Government is in power is because there were human rights abuses in this country. I am very sure that the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs who has been on the floor here, hon. Rugunda and hon. Matia Kasaija are very cognizant of the fact that in those struggle days when we were trying to liberate this country, the most important issue was human rights abuses. 

Dear members of this House, when you debate this motion do not think that you are exceptions to human rights abuses. Previous members of this august House like the late hon. Sebugwawo were abducted; the late Africano Sembatya was also a member of this House and he was killed; the late Bakamuturaki was also a member of this House. So, when you are debating this motion, it is true that there are improvements in the human rights but when we talk about improvements it does not mean there are no human rights abuses. 

When you say you have Ugshs 10 or you are looking for Ugshs 10 and you have say Ugshs 5, it does not mean that you need Ugshs 10 more so that you get Ugshs 10. So, when we say that we are debating this motion we want to improve on human abuses. The honourable Member of Parliament who moved this motion mentioned very vivid examples of people who have been abducted. Nobody has stood up to say that you have told a lie that these people did not disappear. When she mentioned people incarcerated in unknown gazetted houses_ hon. Rugunda, in those days I did not want to talk to people because you know very well that when we were in Nairobi The Democratic Paper and The Citizen used to give lists of people who had disappeared and that that was a tool for us to make advances in the struggle to liberate this country.

Mr Speaker, it is very disheartening when we are talking about human rights. In 1985 my party, the Democratic Party, was holding a political rally in Mbarara and Kabale before the overthrow of the Obote Government and they were tear gassed and beaten by soldiers in 1985. This is the same thing that has happened today at the Constitutional Square. Is it different from what happened in 1985? Dear members of Parliament and my dear colleagues, let us be exemplary. Nobody would like to go back from where we came. 

Hon. Rugunda, would you like to go back to exile because of human rights abuses? Therefore when we talk about these issues -(Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving the Floor. I want to inform him that I do not want to go back to those despicable days that you are talking about, and that is why the Movement Government is committed to continuously improving the human rights record in our country.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much. That is why I am saying honourable members that let us not just reject this motion. Yesterday those of you who were listening to the CBS and KFM radios or reading newspapers heard about the KANU Government that was in power for 40 years. Where were they when people were being beaten in Kamukunji?  Yesterday when they tried to go to Kamukunji after 40 years, they were tear-gassed. Let us not just argue for purposes of defeating a motion 

The honourable minister in her motion mentioned security agencies like JAT, VCCU and PIN. I was expecting the minister to tell us whether an Act of Parliament set those organisations so that when we are looking for somebody in JAT we know it is an organised security agency.  So, Mr speaker my honest –(Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much for giving way. VCCU and some of the organisations we have referred to are merely administrative structures and organisations that are legally constituted like the Uganda Police Force. Actually VCCU is just a branch or section within the Uganda Police Force that specialises in very hard-core criminal cases and that is all.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information. Mr Speaker, I would have expected the honourable minister to bring an amendment to the original Act so that we can include those JATs and PINs and so that we know it is an amended act.  But when you do not bring that kind of Act we still think that the Act of Parliament in charge of setting up these organisations is still in force. Thank you very much for the information but it needs an amendment. 

Before I wind up, as a man who belongs to a party that has suffered most human rights abuses since the independence of this country and as a man who has been in the struggle to liberate this country, I appeal to members of this House not to reject this motion wholesale but to think twice and make amendments where you think necessary other than rejecting it.  Thank you very much. 

5.15
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to wind up this motion.  First of all, I wish to thank all the members here who have supported the motion on the Floor. On the other hand, I find it unfortunate that the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs has turned it into the achievements of the Movement debate. This motion was very straightforward as it only listed people who have suffered irrespective of which hand they have suffered from. 

I have listed people who have been tortured, those who have been abducted, those who have disappeared and those who have been tormented in very many ways. I have also listed people who have lost jobs and called for an investigation into the matter.  That is simply the essence of the motion. 

Mr Speaker, why would the minister labour so hard to enumerate the achievements of the Movement when all I am asking for is an investigation into matters that are not contestable but that are proven and where even the Human Rights Commission has given awards, where even CMI has accepted responsibility and where even the minister himself has intervened to ease the pain? That is all that I was talking about. 

We admit that there were probably worse human rights cases before the advent of the Movement Government. This motion seeks to improve this record. It does not differ from what the minister is saying but only seeks to improve the performance of this Government.

I was hoping that this motion would not be politicised for the following reasons. In fact I was hoping that it was going to be supported if only for these reasons.  First, that the President called everybody to support him in building the culture of constitutionalism. How better to do that than to investigate even the few cases of human rights abuses? I was hoping that everybody would see it as a win- win deal for Government, which if it supported the motion would greatly improve its image as a Government that really wants to come to the bottom of matters of human rights abuses. I was therefore hoping that it would be taken as a direct and positive response to the President’s plea.

Hon. Rugunda recommended that this motion be passed on to the relevant committees of Parliament and to other agencies of Government such as Uganda Police Force and the Human Rights Commission. However, the Human Rights Commission has mentioned many times that security agencies including police are the biggest perpetrators of human rights abuses.  They are the ones we want to investigate. 

The Human Rights Commission on the other hand has problems so we want those problems to be investigated. Why has its role been relegated to that of writing reports and awarding compensation when they should be working to stop cases of human rights’ abuses?

It is reported that the Human Rights Commission in the last ten years has received between 27 to 60 percent of their budget requirements. I would like it to be investigated as to whether Government does not have faith in the work of the Human Rights Commission. It is terribly underhanded and perhaps that is one of the reasons why they are not performing as they should.

With due respect to the appropriate committees of Parliament, this motion proposes a select committee because it is envisaged that the appropriate committees of Parliament will be very busy handling day to day activities whereas the Select Committee would be able to handle this huge and gigantic assignment within a given period. I do not see that this motion is harmful to Government and I am surprised that hon. Rugunda found it to be ill intentioned and actually said so.  

As a matter of fact I discussed this motion with some colleagues on the right hand side of the Speaker and asked them to support the motion and they actually said that they would. I am very surprised that they are quiet -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member you should not lose hope. Do not say, “I hoped” because that means that you are giving up. Since you are winding up, hope that they are going to support it.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable Speaker. This is a serious pointer in addition to what hon. Kassiano Wadri was saying. This state of intimidation goes beyond the few things that we are talking about. Honourable members of Parliament, let us not live in denial, I beg you. People are being abducted and tortured and there is terrible overcrowding in prisons.  Out of the 19,700 prisoners, only 7,900 of them have been convicted while 60 percent are on remand. For that matter, sometimes they have only one meal a day and that is a case of gross human rights’ abuse. Let us for once join hands as both sides of this House. I beg you to condemn perpetrators of human rights’ abuse and support this motion.  

Honourable Speaker, I wish to conclude this debate by asking members of this House to support the motion to set up a Select Committee of Parliament to investigate these matters of gross human rights abuse in this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the gist of this motion is that there are a number of human rights violations in Uganda including disappearances, abductions and so forth. Because of that the request is for a Select Committee of Parliament to be set up to investigate these incidents. That is the substance of the motion. Now I want to put the question.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you raised a question about the abstainer. I saw one honourable member who was not sure on what side to vote and yet it is not procedurally right- I can see him trying to get up to say something.

MR ACHIA: Well as for me the question is not clear because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you abstain because you do not appreciate. I will take you as abstaining. 

MR ACHIA: No, I have not abstained, I have not got the question yet –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have ruled. If you do not understand the motion you should not vote; that is abstaining. Honourable members, the position is as follows: 35 members voted ‘Aye’, 65 voted ‘No’ and 2 abstained. The Noes have it -(Applause)  

(Question negatived.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2001.

THE SPEAKER: I am advised that the mover is out of the country on duty so we shall skip it until he comes back.  This brings us to the end of today’s business, honourable members. I understand the report on the Equal Opportunities Bill is ready so if you have the copies please go and read the report so that tomorrow we can start on this Bill which is overdue. Otherwise, I thank you for turning up in big numbers. But as I said at the beginning, please let us keep time so that we can start business on time. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday 7 December 2006 at 2.00 p.m.).







 


