Wednesday 9th December, 1998

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PRIVATISATION PROCESS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember yesterday, we received the report of the Select Committee on the Privatization Process. There were complaints yesterday that some Members did not have copies of this Report, and others complained that they did not have annexes to the Report. So, we could not proceed with the debate. I hope today each of you has got a copy and you are in position to contribute to the debate. If there are some Members who have not yet got copies, I believe there are some who have read this Report and are in position to contribute. So, the Floor is now open for you to debate the Report.

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to thank you for allowing me to point out a small matter of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, as much as I would like to thank the distinguished Select Committee that gave us this wonderful Report we are about to debate, this Report more-or-less reads like a charge sheet against certain people mentioned. 

Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate and I pray that you allow the people mentioned in this Report to say something before we say a lot more.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my understanding of the position is that this House is receiving a Report which it commissioned the Committee to make. We are not here in a form of a trial of certain individuals or hon. Members of this House, and I believe the Committee has done its best, and we may hear more things about matters that have not been included in the Report, that is, the needful debate, and it may not be fair to those who have been mentioned in the Report to start with the sort of defence as you are suggesting. I would think the proper way is for - and I would advise that those who are specifically mentioned in the Report better listen to other contributions, and then at appropriate time, they will be given an opportunity to say what they know about the affair, and  I think we should proceed that way.

MISS. KABASHARIRA: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a matter of procedure, I ask that when we are debating this Report, I kindly beg the Chairman or any other person concerned that there will be no informal caucus meetings until we finish the debate.  Thank you.

MISS. NAMUSOKE: Point of clarification. Arising from what hon. Naome has mentioned, I am concerned and I seek clarification.  Am I not allowed to - because she talks about informal - am I not allowed to caucus with my neighbour here and my neighbour on this side?  Because it is very important to get that clarification.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This point of procedure was not clear to me, as to whether the hon. Member meant that I should take a legal notice of the existence of caucuses.  I do not know whether that was the intention.  

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Point of clarification. I do not know whether I have got hon. Naome Kabasharira right. Do I understand that she is saying that this is a matter of national importance, and that it is so important that we should debate from the national perspective, and that any attempts to take Members into partisan caucuses may minimise the consensus that we need?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only problem that I have is whether it is the view of the Member that the Chair should recognise various causes formed by the Members of this House.  If this is not the position, then I may not be in position really to give a directive to these informal caucuses not known to the Chair.  But if it is known to the Members, I think it is an advice which you have given to them and I think those concerned will take note. 

As earlier decided, if you are a Member of the Committee concerned and debate comes before us, you should give an opportunity to other Members who are not Members of the Committee to contribute first before you come in.  The hon. Member is not a member of this Committee.  Please, proceed.

MR. MANUEL PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First and foremost, before I thank the Committee, I have read the Report, I find that it does mention big names, it touches on certain nerves within our national fabric.  We have certain principles of Government namely, collective responsibility and others.  But I would like to appeal to my Colleagues that we look at the Report in its presentation and take the wisdom that the Report's presentation and the people that are mentioned are mentioned in their private capacities in involvement.  

I would like to bring this principle out.  There is an institution of Government.  That institution of Government assigns responsibilities to individuals.  That responsibility does not carry you to commit certain actions in that institutional capacity, you do so in your own right and I would like that this is understood such that there will be representation that may be made by people in their official capacity but the burden is carried by the individual for his commissions and omissions.  I hope this is now understood.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee for a good job done in a short time generally in a frightening atmosphere.  The Committee Members have dug deep, they have stepped where devils dare not go, and they have presented what I think is an interim Report because in their final statement they say, they are asking for more time so that they may then continue to delve further into the least they have found.  For example, some of the statements they made implicate people who are the influences behind some of these actions. Who are the people that stand behind the curtain  in some of these actions? I would like to request my hon. Colleagues that when you consider this Report, accept the appeal which is a reasonable request to grant our Members more time to complete the job that has been half done.  We may possibly want to know a little more.  

Privatisation as other Government programmes, had good intentions, but the procedures and the implementation weaknesses have let Ugandans down. We see very clear abuses of the law and the manipulation of the processes.  

Quite clearly, the annex in respect of Uganda Airlines which has been termed as advertisement of tenders, is a clear public notice that anybody could write, but it does not give specification, it does not give time limits, it does not give requirements, it is very absurd that this is the element that was used for rendering Uganda Airlines a cripple, cannibalising it, selling its in-flight services privately and ENHAS taking the monopoly for its ground handling services. It is a very clear case of manipulation.

In the case of Transocean, it is very interesting to note that the Board Chairman who clearly might have been placed in that position for political consideration, as an individual who carries this nation at heart, is the one who became a personal courier to take 456,000 dollars from Uganda to Mombasa to M/s Almetta to settle certain outstanding debts of Transocean Ltd.  Here is this Board Chairman in whom this Country put a lot of trust that he could lead a public company, but he messes, carries the responsibility of the courier to transmit this money. What is behind this is that Transocean Uganda Ltd, had agreed to a figure of 355,000 dollars which is owed Almetta, but the Privatisation Unit added this up to 456,000 dollars and entrusted the couriership to a whole Chairman to carry from Kampala to Mombasa.  The Committee found this irregular, I found this irregular and absurd.  

In the case of Uganda Airlines Corporation, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication then clearly contravened Section 3, 6(a), and 28(ii) of PERD Statute.  Yesterday I stood here and wondered whether hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was in order to speak at that time because he had been mentionede - you wisely ruled that everyone was going to be given an opportunity to defend himself. But the Committee has found that Section 28, Sub-section 2 of the PERD Statute was contravened by the hon. Minister.  Action must be taken against those that contravened clearly established laws. So, what action is going to be taken against the Minister then?  Because I wanted to isolate this question of collective responsibility and the individual who is involved in this commission or omission that led to giving away the catering services without fair competition; and the names that were mentioned were of very powerful people; and one of the cases quoted was influence peddling. It is also interesting, Mr. Speaker, to read how people name their companies with such names like 'Must Win'. Who is to fail? 

The case of Ground Handling Services, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication, is answerable according to the Report - and I agree - for privatising Ground Handling Services of Uganda Airlines, a public corporation, without going through the PERD Statute. He is now, once again, contravening the section of the PERD Statute, and I hold that he should be answerable.

Influence peddling, abuse of office, causing financial loss are punishable offenses. Through under-devaluation of Uganda Airlines shares that was sold to ENHAS among the values quoted by the experts, by the consultants, the highest was 8 million dollars.  The valuers among them, one that was the auditor for ENHAS who should have declared his interest and abstained from participating in evaluation, assesed 3 million dollars and that was the figure that was taken into consdideration for privatisation of the shares of Uganda Airlines from 8 million dollars which could have been a realisable figure. That caused a loss of 5 million dollars. That participation, I believe, is punishable by law.  

Without going into specific details of the Report, big names have been mentioned touching on our national integrity. There have been far too many scandals. In the process of UCB being readied for sale before privatisation, there was an institution called NPART - Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. I wish that the Committee had gone a little deeper into this, and maybe if we give them more time, they might. Now, we get scanty information that is beginning to surface, that some loans that might have been in UCB liable to go to NPART, were channelled through other smaller banks which were hurriedly established or licensed, and funds of privatisation and other institutional Government funds may have been channelled through those banks to settle with UCB and not carry loans to NPART. So, what that means is that there are loans which had been repaid but using public funds. I would like this particular matter to be investigated further.

What do we know in terms of scandals that have been presented to this House?  The case of Bank Paribus - I am sorry that my Colleague, hon. Basoga Nsadhu is not here -because when he was sitting on the Backbench there, he used to tell us quite a few things and he was given an assignment by this Parliament to check into Bank Paribus. I do not know whether Members have seen the Report on Bank Paribus. But some names that were mentioned in the Bank Paribus report have surfaced again in these Reports. So, is this now a trend, is this a practice, is this something that has been going on for so long, or have we stumbled on something that is a one time occurrence or have people errored in isolated cases?

MR. WAMBEDE: Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I am seeking clarification. Personally, I have not had the benefit of going through that Report of Bank Paribus. May hon. Pinto, for my benefit, clarify as to who was mentioned, and who is surfacing now, other than leaving us in suspense. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I mention the name of hon. Basoga Nsadhu and a few others who were Members of that Committee. I was going to challenge them to table the report and tell us the relationship between Bank Paribus and the people they found to be involved and those that are mentioned in this Report.  

Bank Paribus is an international bank in Europe. It was contracted to come to Uganda to finance heavy investments in Defence, in Construction, in Commerce and Trade. Uganda was a net loser - individuals were net beneficiaries. Some powerful names were mentioned in that Report. Now, my Colleague would like to see a copy of that Report. I equally would like to ask Government - because Government received the Report on Bank Paribus - to bring it kindly and lay it on the Table, so that we can delve further into it. Since the Committee is carrying on, let us get actual information dug into a little further.

Bank Paribus is a stinker, it was supposed to be buried under the carpet, it shall not be buried, it will rise again.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I forgot to tell you that no Member will contribute beyond ten minutes. So, those who are going to contribute should bear that in mind. You wind up!

MR. PINTO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Going along scandals as you can hear, there is this big one on Post Office. You remember UPTC contracting an international company called 'Marubeni'. 32 million dollars was spent digging trenches from Kampala to Jinja, from Kampala to Entebbe to mordernise telephone links; anybody who is trying to ring Jinja could tell me whether that money was well spent.  

32 million dollars sank in the ground. We ought to have -(Interruption)

MR. MUKASA PASCAL: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I applaud the Member for giving way for me to provide him with information.  

There is a definition of what that project of Marubeni was supposed to do for the Post Office. There was no linkage between various phones with the exchanges in various places of Uganda - of Kampala. Then there was some special projects done to take fibre optic cables to Mpoma Station and to certain extensions.  Now, to the best of my knowledge, no trench was dug between here and Jinja.  So, if we are going to speak, I know it is sweet to give flavour, but let us speak facts, Mr. Speaker. Let us be very specific. There is a specification for that project, it is available for public consumption, it is available to the hon. Member holding the Floor, if he cares to look for the facts and he will see what the limits of that project were. It did not provide, for instance, switching - that was the secondary stage.  There was no inter-connectivity even locally - all the wires were gone - you could not call the neighbour next door. The information I am providing to the hon. Member holding the Floor is, please, provide facts to the House and provide them where you think that project was not worthy 32 million shillings, instead of speculating. Thank you very much.  
MR. PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving me that information. Quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, the informer is the beneficiary -(Laughter)- of the inside information which we do not have and was therefore, in a position to give further details.  But I could ask, through you my hon. Colleagues, did Uganda receive value for money on the Marubeni Project?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR. PINTO: These are the representatives of the people -(Laughter)-.  Mr. Speaker, scandals come in numbers. There is what is known as STI Project - Sexually Transmitted Infection Project - 75 million dollars. People connected with that project or with health and the general public can tell you. 75 million dollars was borrowed to help people against this kind of disease.  Most of it went to those so-called implementers who ended up being beneficiaries.  

You have heard of the Japanese grant in Agriculture -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, whereas you may have facts about this, I would rather advise that you become relevant to the Report which is dealing with Privatisation.  We shall deal with other matters, you may give one example or so, but let us not widen the debate, because the Japanese grant has nothing to do with Privatisation. I would rather think we concentrate more on Privatisation and how it has been done.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am indebted to you for your guidance. What I was trying to bring out is a picture that we are dealing with in terms of achieving national objectives through privatisation, or getting value for investment that is channelled for particular objectives which are not achieved. I shall restrict myself now.  But possibly before I do, Mr. Speaker, let me bring out something that I consider very fundamental.  

That there was a letter written on 30th of May, 1996, by the Secretary to the Treasury, addressed among others to all Accounting Officers regarding Uganda World Bank 1996 Country Portfolio Performance Review, Procurement Procedures and Guidelines. This letter contravened sections of our Constitution in as far as Accounting procedures are concerned.  If the guidelines were used in privatisation, sponsored by World Bank, anything similar to what we have here you can see the peril into which we have led this Country.  

Under Article 153, the Consolidated fund is clearly defined. In 154, sub-section (3), it says: "No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless the withdrawal has been approved by the Auditor General...".  These guidelines went to establish Procurement Procedural Guidelines which produced Procurement Committees that would handle funds Uganda Government borrows from external sources, including the World Bank, which would not necessarily be subjected to the scrutiny of the Auditor General.  Instead money would be signed for and would be operationalised through other accounts which do not necessarily require the warrant of the Auditor General. In cases of that kind, Uganda is even more open to manipulation and misuse of public funds. 

In other cases of the loans under Article 159, sub-article (4), Section (c), Parliament may require the President to come here or use his other arms of the Executive to come and explain to us the utilisation of the loans that have so far contributed to four billion dollars, which is no small matter. I am mentioning this in relationship with the area of privatisation.  If privatization had been carried out properly, we would have generated funds which would have been able to support some of our programmes, including revitalizing the economy - alas this has not been so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you wind up.

MR. PINTO: I am winding up, Mr. Speaker, but let me wind up with this that I understand today that there are attempts to establish Tender Boards in each Ministry so that each Ministry which is a user, may then be in a position to determine who is going to supply what, instead of going through an impartial arbiter who would have been able to referee as to the quality and quantity of services. 

This is the final story, Mr. Speaker. It is about two Ministers - one from South America and another one from Africa. It was given by a consultant to our Chairman of the caucus to us.  

One Minister of Transport from South America was visited by an African Minister, and they subsequently visited each other six months apart, and the African says: "Tell me Diego!  How come you are so rich after only two years as Minister of Transport?  Where did you get the money to buy a speed boat, two Mercedes Cars and to build three houses?"  Adjusting his large spectacles, not like mine, Diego took Shehu by the arm and pointed at two bridges built across the river, "See those two bridges?" he asked, "see that small one?  Ten per cent of the small bridge should explain it". "I see!" answered Shehu, in amazement.  

Six months later, Diego visits the African Minister and says:
"Hullo Shehu, you have grown richer since I last visited you six months ago.  You have a whole ship, a ten storied building and a 40 sitter yacht, how did you acquire these so quickly, my friend Shehu?"  Adjusting his head gear and smiling from ear to ear, Shehu pointed to the big forest. "Do you see that highway through the jungle?" "No, I cannot see any road, Shehu.  It is all jungle."  Then Shehu replied with satisfaction.  "Yes, exactly, 100 per cent of that invisible road -(Laughter)- should answer all your questions".  Amazed, Diego answered, "They call me Speed Diego in my Country, but Shehu, this is amazing efficiency.  I have taken off my hat for you, you are the fastest accumulator of wealth, South of the Sahara."   I end here, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO (Buikwe North, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to begin by thanking the Committee for the good work done.  Mr. Speaker, like my Colleague hon. Pinto has said, I am equally concerned about what is happening in this Country.  What we know, started as privatisation is no longer privatisation - it is actually corruption and this is very dangerous for this Country, I do not know where we are going.  

The Report raised a number of issues that I may not go into details because of the time limit.  However, my concern is right from the fact that if you look at the Report you find that so many big shorts are involved.  A total of four Ministers, the Attorney General is mentioned, the Solicitor General is there - I am wondering what is happening to this Country, and with this type of set up, where are we going? 

This brings me to the issue of Government's commitment to fight corruption. Is Government really committed to fight corruption?  If it is committed to fight corruption, is it possible that it is committed and yet we have so many people on the Executive who abet corruption. In fact, the whole Executive looks like it is bicupuli throughout. This is very dangerous for this Country, and if the Government is to fight corruption, it has to come out and make sure that the Executive Arm of Government is transparent and it is acting according to what is expected of them.  (Interruption)

MAJ BUTIME: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Kakoba for giving way. I just want a clarification from hon. Kakoba with respect to the statement he has just made, that it appears the entire Executive is bicupuli all throughout. Can he substantiate further by what he means, because I do not understand.

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am not a Member of the Executive, but what I know is that the Executive operations are held by ideology of collective responsibility and therefore, I would imagine that the reflections in this Report of the two Ministers or the Ministers who are in this Report, is a general collective responsibility of the Executive and therefore, that is my reference.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Onyango Kakoba for giving way. I would like to inform him, just like I did before when I gave the Draft Government Strategy on fighting corruption in this very House, which we ably debated, that all programmes where Government as the Executive takes collective responsibility is for the development of this Country. There is no Government programme for condoning corruption. 

I want also to remind the hon. Member that recently, the Budget was passed, and there was no vote for condoning corruption. So, I want to put it to him that the Executive arm of the Government of Uganda does not condone corruption, and it does not have a collective programme to condone corruption where we take collective responsibility for condoning corruption - that programme does not exist, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Point of order. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The order is intended for who?
MR. AKIKA OTHIENO:  The order is directed to hon. Onyango Kakoba, Mr. Speaker -(Interjection)-  yes, of course the Floor is his. Arising from what has been clarified now, is it therefore, in order for hon. Onyango Kakoba to insinuate that the entire Cabinet is Bichupuli, to insinuate that the entire Cabinet is condoning corruption?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, I thought the best way to handle this should have been to seek clarification as to what the meaning of Bichupuli is. As far as I am concerned, I do not know what Bichupuli is, so I am not in position to rule over that.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But,  Mr. Speaker, I remember that a minister is on record here as having said Bichupuli is good for this country. (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I am very much worried about this process and I do not know where we are going at this time, when much of the countryside is hit by poverty, our people are still in poverty yet we see a lot of corruption taking place.  

I want to touch on the issue of UCB and my concentration here will be in the manner in which this bank was sold and how it finally found itself in the hands of the people who had at one time tried to get it and failed because they never qualified. And specifically my attention is drawn to the participation of Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh and  his subsequent resignation from that post of Presidential Advisor.

Mr. Speaker, personally, I believe  -(Interruption)

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kakoba for giving way. I am seeking clarification.  Mr. Speaker, you said you did not understand the meaning of Bichupuli, nor do I; someone obviously does across.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification about the meaning of Bichupuli and how the Executive of the Government of the Republic of Uganda qualifies to be called Bichupuli. Thank you.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO: I thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for that clarification he has sought, and I would like to inform him that if he wants to understand Bichupuli, I think the best reference should be the Minister who said Bichupuli is good for the country.  

MISS. BYANYIMA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I want assist my colleague, hon. Kakoba Onyango, and this House and attempt to give a definition of Bichupuli. Bichupuli is the highest level of corruption, it is fraud, it is combined wit, arrogance and shamelessness. (Laughter).

MR. NYAI: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Onyango Kakoba for giving way. I want to share this little information with him and my colleagues. The hon. Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation said in this august House that Bichupuli is very good for Uganda's economy.  So, for the Minister to turn round and now say they do not know Bichupuli -(Interruption)
MR. RUKIKAIRE: Mr.Speaker, I want to state here very, very, categorically, that amongst the things I said during that debate was my clarification that Government was determined to fight the use of Bichupuli and anybody who engages -(Interjection)- just a minute.  And anybody who engages in Bichupuli was committing an act of criminal offence and would be reliable for prosecution.  As an aside, I did indicate as a good economist what other implications could be. I remember, in fact, citing an example of coffee which was smuggled from Congo to here and eventually got exported as coffee from Uganda, but I made it absolutely clear, the Hansard is there, it can be read backwards that Bichupuli and the use of Bichupuli is a criminal offence, and any Ugandans involved in them must be prosecuted.  

LT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  Mr. Speaker, I remember very vividly that hon Rukikaire did state that as an economist, Bichupuli has been a positive foreign exchange injector in the economy. I swear that if they bring the Hansard here, that is what he said.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the explanation  by the Minister of State responsible for Privatisation as to the effect that he stated, that the Government was fully against Bichupuli and they were going to fight it, is it therefore, possible that some of the Members of the Cabinet who come now asking us what Bichupuli means are not actually part of this Executive?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Assuming that the encyclopedic interpretation of the word 'Bichupuli' given by hon. Byanyima, assuming that that is what should appear in the Hansard and in all encyclopedias, and that is the language as we understand it; that Bichupuli means high corruption of the Executive -(Interjection)-  yes, and arrogance -(Interruption)

MISS.  BYANYIMA: Point of order. Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to feel so much on the defensive as to put words in my mouth, words that I never said. I stated clearly, Mr. Speaker, that Bichupuli is the highest form of corruption and fraud, and it is combined with arrogance and shamelessness.  Now, Mr. Speaker, could the hon. Minister tell me in those words where there is a word 'Executive'?  Is this a guilty conscious, Mr. Speaker, is he in order -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister was just making an inference, but I can rule to say that the language of this House is known, and therefore, as far as I am concerned, Bichupuli is not a term that can be used in this House.  We proceed.

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr. Speaker, I was still seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From whom?

MR. BUTIME: From the hon. Onyango Kakoba, that given the interpretation of the word 'Bichupuli' to this House, can hon. Onyango Kakoba substantiate the fact that the Executive is Bichupuli. Can he now substantiate that particular statement, Mr. Speaker, given the interpretation of hon. Byanyima?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Members, let us follow things as they went. There was a term 'Bichupuli' used by the Member from Buikwe North. Then later he was asked what it was; he said the Minister in Government knows the meaning because he is the first person who used that term and said it was good for the country. Then it would appear that the person who had mentioned this Bichupuli word, hon. Onyango Kakoba, did not know the meaning, and then somebody volunteered information. The information was from the hon. Member for Mbarara Municipality.  What I do not know is whether hon. Onyango Kakoba accepted that as a definition. I think the best way to handle this matter is to forget about this term; as I said, it is not a language we use in the House. Let us proceed to the merits of the report.  

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My next point was the concern in the way the saga of UCB was handled particularly Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh.  I was perturbed when Saleh later issued a statement that he had resigned from that post of Presidential Advisor and this resignation was quickly accepted. I am concerned because at the time Saleh got involved in these affairs, he was a public figure, before he can answer anything he has resigned. I believe Saleh first had to answer questions that were surrounding this saga. The public deserves a better explanation from Maj. Gen. Saleh before he could have resigned, because as a public figure he is responsible and should be accountable.  I believe -(Interruption)-

MR. PINTO: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Kakoba Onyango that in the provisions of our Constitution, Article 164, once one is a public official, even if he stops being a public official he is still held accountable for having caused certain financial losses and may be made to make good long after he ceased in that position. So, rest assured that the framers of the Constitution did what is right; what is left is for the Executive to implement the provisions as required by law.

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you for that information, but my concern was if you we are going to have public officials behaving in such a way and then their resignations are easily accepted, I think this is a very bad signal for this country - and why particularly in this case! We have had officials who have resigned before and the appointing authority was very much reluctant to let them go. An example is hon. K.K. Kivejinja, his resignation took a lot of time, and here one person resigns, and within hours they have accepted his resignation. I believe that before Saleh could resign, he should have told us how he got his wealth first and foremost as a public official.

MR. LOKERIS:  Mr. Speaker,I get perturbed with a lot of circumlocution when we are here. When somebody is not allowed to resign very fast, the Members of this hon. House complain; when someone is allowed to resign and he does so very fast, we also complain; mathematically where should we be? Should the person deciding make his figures become zero? I want that clarification.

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, I take it that the hon. Member has just given information because I am not on record as having complained anyway. I want to turn to the recommendations of the Committee, and I would wish to agree with it that people who are responsible for this saga should be brought to book. 

I, however, disagree with one recommendation and that was the amended one to the effect that the Leader of Government Business should take up this matter and report back within three months.  As I was saying right from the beginning, I noted that there was reluctancy by the Executive to fight corruption. What assurance do we have that the Leader of Government Business will now be in position to report back after that office has failed to contain the malpractice by these Ministers? If she has failed to contain the malpractice by the four Ministers, what assurance do we have that this time she will report back? The Leader of Government Business has been reported as having been unhappy with the investigation of Parliament. What assurance can we get that this time she will do the right thing? In my view the people who are responsible should be held responsible and my best advise to them would be that they should resign before they are thrown out.  Likewise, if it was in a democratic country where we had much democracy,than we have now, I would believe even the Leader of Government Business would have resigned, because she has failed to supervise the Minister. What magic is she going to perform now?

MR. DOMBO: Point of information. I wish to inform this House that in Belgium where the Police attempted to extradite somebody to Nigeria and she died, the Minister of Internal Affairs took responsibility and he immediately quit Government. Why can it not be an example for our Parliament here?  Thank you. 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister in Belgium resigned after the Doctor certified the death of that person.  We are in the process of establishing whether the -(Laughter)

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I do not see why we have to go to Belgium; hon. Kivejinja resigned after the allegation that he had committed something and he is here with us in Parliament.  We do not have to go to Belgium. In fact, I would have thought that hon. Kakoba would have thanked Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh for having resigned in Uganda here; I think we are getting somewhere. Thank you.

MR. AWORI: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker,  I would like to inform the hon. Minister and his Colleagues that we do not have that culture of resigning when we admit fraud. Less than six weeks ago, it was established by the highest authority in this country that the country had been defrauded by more than US $1.2 million on purchase of decadent, useless, non functional helicopters. Nobody resigned!  Mr. Speaker, in the course of events, probably next week, I shall bring information to this House thatt once again, we have bought equipment worth US $28 million, that is 60 pieces of tanks and only eight can function.  
DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask your indulgence and through you, the indulgence of the House, to have us debate what is on the Floor, because the information which the hon. Member is going to bring in, how does he know they do not function, unless he is the one who sold the Government of Uganda non-functioning machinery? We sometimes tend to bring things we have heard and when we put them on the Table and actually dissect them, we hear they are also half truths, they are quarter truths, 80 per cent truths, and I think we should really bring to this House things that are of substance and well researched so that we are in a position to guide the country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think we should allow the debate to continue.

MAJ. SEWANKAMBO:   Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that I am still a serving officer in the Army on a long leave.  I can give service to this House if he can only tell me where these tanks are, the non-functioning, I go there, confirm and report back. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think let us conclude.  Have you anything to say, on the request by hon. Member from Kiboga?

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I can provide information here, I can provide information to him privately, but number one thing, I would like to challenge him. Can he come with a certificate of combat worthiness?  (Applause)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order. Mr. Speaker, I stand on a point of order in relation to information that is privileged information for the security of this country, that is privileged to specific people, and I do not know how an hon. Member like hon. Aggrey Awori would have access to that type of information, which I am sure as a member of the High Command or representing the Army in this House, that he is not privileged to that information. Is he in order to give such information which has a bearing on the security of this nation when he cannot substantiate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you trying to ask him to substantiate, because, you see, if you challenge him that he has not told the truth, then you are seeking him to substantiate.  Is that what you want now?  I would think really, since he has promised to bring up this matter in a week's time, I think let us wait.  If you want me to rule him out of order, I can only rule him out of order if he fails to substantiate, and since you are not insisting on him substantiating, I would rather think he withdraws - I do not know.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I would really would insist that he substantiates, because information put in the Hansard and to the whole public and to the whole world that Uganda has imported defective tanks has a big bearing on the security of this country. If he cannot substantiate now, here, because, he has given that information here, he should be ruled out of order, in my opinion. (Mr Nyai rose_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you see, hon. Member, there is a point of order, that the hon. Member from Samia - (Interruption) 

MR. NYAI:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence.  I am raising the point of procedure in relation to that order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR. NYAI:  Hon. Aggrey Awori made a statement.  The statement was banded around in this House. After it had long passed, hon Tumwine raised a point of order. Mr. Speaker, is that procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, the proper way of raising a point of order should be when something is done, then it feels out of order, you immediately raise the point of order, you do not wait for three hours and then say, 'you are out of order'. Please, proceed and wind up.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was just about to wind up.  Mr. Speaker, as I said, I agree with most of the recommendations - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would rather advise that hon. members, we concentrate on the report which is on privatisation. Otherwise, we may waste a lot of time on a matter that is not before the House.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, I agree with most of the recommendations in the report and the one is the prosecution of these culprits. However, I would like to appeal to Government to take the initiative, because we have had cases where people are involved in corruption, the suspects have been netted and they have been taken to court, and then the matter ends there. The investigative network, the Police and the Judiciary, should do their work properly. I had an idea in mind, that maybe in future, we should think of establishing an anti-corruption tribunal to handle these matters. Otherwise, if we are to leave these cases in the hands of the judiciary and all these other weak investigative network, the fight against corruption may not be achieved.

Lastly, I would like to appeal to the office of the IGG to do its work. I think the work of the IGG is to prevent corruption, but of recent, I have noted that instead of being preventive, the IGG's office has become reactive. It has to wait for reports to come out, then it reacts on them. A case in point is what we are discussing now. I was perturbed to read in the papers when the IGG's office was quoted as saying that they are going to study the report and then carry on their investigations. I do not know what type of work this is, but if the office of the IGG is the one which is supposed to fight corruption, first and foremost, it must be seen to fight corruption and it does its work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OFUNGI OBEDMOTH  (Youth Representative, Northern Uganda):  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand here to support the Committee on its work and recommendation.  I am extremely embarrassed and shocked with what this report is revealing.  I am one of those people who will never be embarrassed and I owe nobody apology to tell people I campaigned for Museveni. But this is not the Government the people of Uganda mandated the President to lead.  We mandated President Museveni, we campaigned for him to promote transparency and what are we seeing now?  Allegation of corruption after corruption is coming.  Where are we heading?  I have no hope as a young man of what we are going to inherit in this country, except death.  I even want to know from the executive whether they accept if there is any element of truth in this report before I can be pleased and I begin sleeping. 

The peasants who voted for President Museveni when they read this report, they might not be sleeping, because the roads, the hospitals and the services the President promised the people are not being delivered and these are billions of shillings are getting lost.  Where is this country going?  

I talk with a lot of concern. This is a case of not dilly dallying.  It is a matter of life and death for a generation like ours.  If all this money that is being lost in dubious missions and deals was channelled into education, was channelled to build hospitals, were channelled to build roads - I have ever told people here, I come from a place where there is no health centre in the whole county and billions of money are being lost.  How do I tell my father, how do I tell my cousin, that this system is still good?   How?  I am a little bit perturbed!  I have been a Youth leader in Kampala before I went to the North.  Since this report and revelations started coming out, I do not want even to move, because, in every stage I step in, the youth know me.  They will ask me, is that the Movement you sold to us?  And I try to explain to them that the weaknesses of the people within the Movement should not make you hate the Movement, but I expected by today to have woken up and heard that some of these Ministers who have been implicated in some of these scandals should have followed  Salim Saleh for me to have hope that we can still steer the Movement, win the referendum and have another Movement. 

On the issue of corruption, about three weeks ago, I got up here, I was wondering whether there was corruption in this country.  We have talked so much about corruption, corruption. Is it becoming an economic policy to create middle class?  I fail to understand and at time share the sentiments of people who see this Government is not committed to fighting corruption.  Look at all the list of Ministers, I used to respect are involved! If feel saddened to even talk about this matter, because, I was not the best fellow who qualifies to day, to stand here and begin criticising, my Colleagues within the Movement system of governance, which I campaigned for. 

The issue of the dubious activities Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh has been doing in this country is costing us a lot. We were still beginning to forget the dubious helicopter deals and then the UCB case comes to the scene.  What even pains me most is that when Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh was appointed Presidential Adviser, then he went to the North, busy solving the security situation of this country, he gave his business interest in Greenland Investment to the son of the President. In the presidency safe? Many Army officers have committed offenses, they have been court martialled, they have gone to Luzira, others have been demoted.  I know Salim Saleh. He has resigned. But we need additional action to be taken, if we do not want Salim Saleh to go to prison, why not demote him to become a private, at least, we have peace. (Laughter).

Everybody has read this report. I am not going to move from UCB to Transocean. The privatisation process has got somebody who has got to supervise it. Where has this Minister been? All these things were happening under his nose and he has been seeing. Today, I am even still surprised that hon. Matthew Rukikaire is still talking in this country. You are making some of us have a lot of pain to bear the criticism the public is telling us. If you are not directly involved, the fact that corrupt tendencies have taken place under the Privatisation, the fact that these things have taken place when the Minister was supervising, let the hon. Minister take responsibility for all this hopeless and dubious deals that have taken place in privatisation and resign so as not to cause for us the problems we have been having in this country.  

I remember very well, the hon. Minister in charge of privatisation went to Malaysia to meet the people who were supposed to come and buy UCB, spending tax payers money and the President eventually went to Malaysia, was seen on Television, the President also met these people who were going to buy UCB.  Now, it turned out to be that Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh through Greenland Investments bought UCB. Why should the Minister waste a lot of tax payers money, when from the very beginning, he knew that those people were thugs?   We could have met Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh here, make this subject open to Ugandans, today, we would not be having this scenario we are having today, if we had dealt in a transparent manner and met Saleh here. 

The President was further forced to meet thugs. As a Members of Parliament, I can take three months fighting to see my President and then we reduce the President of the Republic of Uganda to go and meet thugs in Malaysia! (Laughter)  It is a shame.  Mr. Speaker, it is a shame and a great embarrassment for this country.  I am talking with a lot of bitterness.  This is not how I talk.  I am a young man.  What are we going to have in this country, when we have Ministers arranging meeting for the President to go and meet thugs in Malaysia?

The trend this corruption and dubious deals is creating is a negative one. We have got a tendency that the Movement promised to fight nepotism. But now what this corruption and this dubious deals is creating for all Ugandans to see is tribal hatred. I know of so many colleagues of mine with whom I was at the University who come from Western Uganda, but they are suffering.  But the public image we are sending out, if these Ministers cannot take responsibility for their activities is that, westerners are the ones eating, they are getting this money and do you know what that is creating in the hearts of many of these people in the rest of Uganda? We no longer feel part of this country and for many who are benefitting from this corruption,  they have got a question to answer in future. You are not going to get surprised to see the youth and the young people of this country stoning these Ministers who are stealing this money.  You want  to enjoy money you have not earned through good means.  These houses people are building out of these proceeds from privatisation, we will take them by force. For Suharto to build an empire in Indonesia, students who were not armed brought Suharto down. But this Parliament must try as much as possible to make young people in this country not to get up to do this kind of thing and the Ministers must sincerely tell us exactly what they did, how they did it and leave us at peace.  By resigning we have got better qualified Ugandans with a clean image to take over this position.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Point of clarification. I thank the Member for giving way. Can I seek clarification from the speaker holding the Floor. He said that the Minister arranged a very serious meeting with the President in order to meet some thugs in Malaysia. I want know these Ministers who arranged the meeting for the President to meet the thugs. Who were these thugs that these Ministers arranged for the President to meet? Who were these Ministers? And who were these thugs?  Who else did they meet? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would advise that we do not interrupt the flow of the debate unnecessarily. But anyway, you were seeking clarification from him.

MR. OBEDMOTH: Mr. Speaker, I do not even need to answer; I was so clear.  That the Minister in charge of Privatisation went to Malaysia and I think the hon. Member should be somebody who should have been even reading.  Who does not know the scandal of Westmont?  And if I talk about these thugs in Malaysia, I am talking about them, and I think the hon. Member is aware of what I am talking about. 

As I wind up, I want people to focus on the individual Ministers and the Permanent Secretary involved and the Major General with his business colleagues, this is what Parliament will focus about.  And we must get an appropriate remedy to clean the image of this Government. Me who comes from Northern Uganda where salt is a luxury for people, where peace has eluded as for 14 years, I cannot stand such massive corruption, fraud. In fact, it is robbery, Mr. Speaker. It is no longer corruption, it is robbery in daylight. And I hope the relevant authorities that are concerned with these cases should take it over. If other people who have been involved in Parastatals are now reporting to CID everyday, why can we not have these Ministers to begin reporting because there is some evidence and there is some clue! They must begin reporting to CID and then we see that there is some justice being done. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MISS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Select Committee for this Report which they have tabled to Parliament. As I read through this Report on Page 5, it says that some of these problems have arisen because of bad contracts plus inaccurate legal advice from the Attorney General and the World Bank.  And I think some of these processes were supposed to be scrutinised by the Attorney General's office.  It is a pity, Mr. Speaker, that I should be standing here or we should be here in Parliament today, discussing issues related to the privatisation of UCB.  Months back when Parliament said, 'can you please delay the privatisation of UCB?'  We were requested and told that nobody was benefitting from UCB because the people who were managing it were very corrupt and that they had drained all the money from UCB. In one of the meetings, I remember very well we were asked who are the beneficiaries of UCB ?  I remember making a clear statement and saying, the tobacco growers in Arua were beneficiaries of UCB, that the UPE money which was being pumped by the President to the districts, especially in my district, would have to go through UCB and that the public servants were going to get their salaries through UCB. When we asked about the credibility of the people who were going to buy the bank or about the alternatives which were going to be provided in the districts where maybe the people who buy the bank were not going to operate, Mr. Speaker, we were assured there would be no problem.  But I made one statement, if the people who were in that meeting are here, that 'when the fireworks comes, nobody should call us again to pour the water.' Today the fireworks are here, and they have come because of the credibility of the people who have bought this bank, who have embarrassed us and made us feel so small.  

I want to agree with hon. Obedmoth, as Bakoko, how do I go and stand in front of my people to argue that there is no corruption being condoned?  When even 3.5 billion shillings alone just to counter fund a power project in Olewa, Arua was refused, and somebody has swindled this money.  When the roads to my District are not being constructed -(Interruption)

MR. AKAKI AYUMU:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, much as the contributor on the Floor is concerned about power in the West Nile Region, I would like to inform her and the entire House that, the 3.5 billion US dollars she alleges to have been swindled, refused, was actually not refused.  The money is now available, the final bidding for the actual construction of that power station is now on and I wish to assure her that, that power station will be constructed.

MR. AJEANI:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I thank the hon. Members who are telling me to be slow.  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The substantial Minister for Minerals has said that the money for Nyagak has now been found and we all know that the money for Olewa, 3.5 million US dollars from Netherlands, which was project related was removed by the substantive Minister of Energy and Minerals. Is the Minister who has just risen up here in order to tell lies to the Parliament when we in West Nile are suffering and the money is being swindled here?  Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, first of all, there is a time factor. We do not know when the substantive Minister did say he has no money. We have a Minister here in the same Ministry, maybe holding the portfolio of the other substantive Minister. Now, he says the money is there. Can we say, because the Minister one year ago said he has no money, and the Minister comes today and says he has money - I do not know how to rule on this. The Leader of Government Business and the Vice President is here -

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform the House that I have been very familiar personally with the Nyagak Project and at the time we were formulating the Budget for this Financial Year, we did have a bit of difficulty, not because the Government did not have a will to put the money there, but because our technical partners had not come fully on the board.  

I want to put it on record, Mr. Speaker, and to inform the hon. Members, the whole of Uganda and the people of West Nile, that yes, we have partners with whom to do the Nyagak project, we have identified the money, and I did direct the Minister for Energy to duly convene a meeting of the hon. Members from West Nile, to brief them about the time table for the implementation of this project.  This was in Cabinet and when we do confirm the Minutes, the Minister will move in accordance with the Cabinet directive.

On another note I would like the hon. Members, because a lot is said all the time.  Because since we sometimes debate rumours in this House, yes, we sometimes debate rumours. There has been a rumour circulating in West Nile, that because their son D'ujanga is no longer the Managing Director of UEB, Government will not actually continue with that power project. I want to state specifically that before D'ujanga became the Managing Director of UEB, the Nyagak Project was on the Government plan.  So, I would like, Mr. Speaker, to confirm that the money is there and the dam must be done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   

MR. NYAI:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order on two matters; one, that this hon. House spends tax payers money to debate rumours?  Two, that there is a son of West Nile?  Can she describe in which part of the Constitution West Nile exists?  Is she in order therefore, to talk about an entity which does not exist?  I know of Arua District, I know of Nebbi District, I know of Adjumani District, I know of Moyo District, where is West Nile?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I think what has happened is that, at one time, there was a region known as West Nile, and in some people's mind that has not been washed away and this might be the problem. As to the other matter, I think she was just saying, she suspects that sometimes people may be debating - maybe she has heard from her own information that people are saying that - but otherwise, Members of Parliament cannot base their debate on rumours. If this was the intention, then she was out of order.

MISS. BAKOKO BAKORU:  Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker.  From my understanding, there is still no money for the power project in Arua or in West Nile, and I want to say that it is very, very disheartening for me as a representative of the people to keep on going down and deceiving the people year in and year out for the last ten years. In my language they say about the orphan child, what normally happens is that the caretaker rubs its mouth with otigo (occra), so that when the father comes home he thinks this child is satisfied. And I hope I am entitled also to my own opinion and this is my opinion I am giving, Mr. Speaker.  So, what I want to say is, if we are saying we are fighting corruption, let us fight corruption and let us not condemn it for others, while for others we allow it to pass by. This country has come from very far. Some of us lived in exile for almost ten years, we returned to Uganda in 1987, because of the credibility of this Government. If this is what we are expected to go and explain to our people, when they are being denied services which they could benefit from, Mr. Speaker, I feel very, very disheartened.  

I want to appeal to this House and to the people here that people get paid in their currency. You get paid for what you have worked and earned for. It is not a political threat, I am saying the people who have stolen the money should pay it back. There is no way we are just going to pass it over with a mere initial of resignation or always saying, we are going to be forgetting about these issues. Otherwise, we are going to drain this country into a situation which must not arise.

Finally, I want to say that we could put our money into better use. Every year from October to March, the people on my road are shot because that road is bad. The drivers must go slow and the thieves, whether the rebels or thieves, wait to shoot them because they cannot drive fast on a poor road.  I think if we must develop this country, we must put the money in the right direction.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Bart Katureebe):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to welcome the Report. I think this Report contains very important matters touching the welfare of this country and I am glad they have come for debate, for scrutiny and in my view these matters are so important that they should be debated with compassion but not with emotion. We should explore everything and if indeed we cannot reach at the bottom of the whole saga, then if need be let more time be given, let the CID investigate, let whatever it takes be taken to ensure that the truth is known to this House and to the country - no matter what it is.

I have a personal interest in this matter because the Attorney General has been mentioned. I have also got a professional interest as Attorney General.  I want to say from the beginning that I, as Katureebe, Member of Parliament from Bunyaruguru, have no interest whatsoever, personal, business, social in any of the transactions mentioned in this Report, and I can say without fear of any contradiction that I am not a kicupuli or anything to that effect.  

As I said, these matters are so important that I would have wished that the Committee would have seen fit to invite me as Attorney General to discuss these matters with them.  I would have thought that the Committee would have seen fit to invite the Solicitor General as a Public Officer to come and help the Committee with their investigations.  I would have thought -(Interruptions)

MISS. BYANYIMA: Point of Information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am a member of the Select Committee on Privatisation. It was our wish to invite the Attorney General and other Senior Government Officials to testify before our Committee.  But Mr. Speaker, we were given a period of 45 days within which to finish our investigations. During that time, we realised that there was even crime committed in the process of privatisation and the more we investigated the more we found and then it was time to report.  That is why in our Report we have said that we would like some more time to get to the bottom of some of the issues that we have discovered especially in UCB.  Therefore, the Attorney General should note that should Parliament choose to give us more time to reach the bottom of this matter which I believe we have not reached, he will have an opportunity to meet the Committee and answer more questions.  

MR. KATUREEBE: Mr. Speaker, this exactly shows the point I was making, that there is a recommendation about the Attorney General and the Solicitor General and Members of the Committee are admitting that they did not have time to invite them.  I do hope, if indeed there is more time, I am prepared for what it takes, days, weeks to help the Committee. Because it is not a matter of helping the Committee, it is helping myself.  I am also interested in these affairs.  I am also an elected Member of Parliament, I have to account to my people. So, I would be willing and indeed I am grateful to hon. Winnie Byanyima -(Interruptions)

MR. DICK NYAI: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that the Committee presented the Report yesterday.  In that Report certain people were named and those people are here with us. Mr. Speaker, it was going to be my hope that these people who are named to be given the first opportunity to exculpate or otherwise. They are standing in these matters because eventually this House must debate the Committee's Report in its credibility - is it a true Report - and I think since the Attorney General has got the Floor, let him tell the House now  whether what the Select Committee has said about the Attorney General is true or false.  

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to just give a bit of information and clarification to the Member who has just left the Floor that these Reports were given out yesterday as Members were coming into the Chambers. As this House knows, we do have a consultative group meeting taking place as we talk now. The whole of yesterday, Government was involved morning and afternoon in the consultative meetings and it is only the Ministers who attended Parliament, who got those Reports. We left the consultative group meeting yesterday. Personally, I left Sheraton at around 5.45 p.m.  I knew there was a report, but because I had not come to Parliament personally, I did not get a copy. This morning, I came very early to Parliament and I was handed my copy at 8.50 a.m.  At 9 o'clock we started Cabinet and immediately after Cabinet, I came to this House.  Mr. Speaker, the Members who are mentioned in this Report need to be given time to read and study the Report so that they come and give their side of the picture.  

In the interest of justice, it is not fair for one to make an accusation, you are given 45 days, you make the accusation and you give me two hours to defend myself even when you did not give me opportunity to meet you over those 45 days. This Parliament, Mr. Speaker, is charged with the responsibility of keeping law and order and protecting those that have not been proved guilty.  So, the people who are mentioned in that Report should be given the opportunity to read and internalise it, and then come here to give their position. I think if we are to promote justice in this Country as a Parliament, we should insist that this becomes the principle, even when Parliament is given a Report which has been researched.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that at the beginning of today's proceedings, the hon. Member for Samia Bugwe North raised a point, and he was suggesting that people named in the Report should give their account before we debate the Report.  I ruled and directed that we give them time to listen, because more information is going to come by way of debate. But should any one of them feel he knows what is there and wants to make his position known just now, I will give him the opportunity to do so. But now the person who is on the Floor is the Attorney General, and I suppose the Attorney General was not named as hon. Katureebe in the Report, but he thinks that he is in position to contribute to the debate, so I could not stop him. He is contributing and he will not be given more time and another opportunity to contribute. He is free to contribute if he thinks he can, and I think he is in order. Proceed!

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Leader of Government Business jointly with the Attorney General. This information which has been made available to us in a concrete format has been floating in this House for the past nine months. We have expressed concern, Mr. Speaker, about privatisation, how it is flawed and how it should be revisited. Mr. Speaker, do I expect to see again the Leader of Government Business coming in this House to say, 'I was only told about this affair this morning'?  

I would also seek to know from the hon. Attorney General, all along he knew very well UCB, a major financial institution, in this Country is being privatised and privatisation, among other, things includes concluding major agreements? He is the legal advisor to this Government and this House. When and how did he intervene to oversee the process of reaching these agreements?  We cannot in this House be delayed in reaching a decision by the Executive pleading that they need more time. They have known all along there is corruption. Now we need to make a decision.  Are they corrupt, singly, collectively or otherwise? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not see the clarification which the Leader of Government Business and Vice President is to give in this matter. I think what she was referring to is that she received this morning the Report which is the subject of this debate. It is not generally the mishandling of privatization, but it is this Report she received this morning. That is what she said. So, that does not require any clarification.  

As to what the role of the Attorney General is in this matter, you will have to make a conclusion; you pronounce yourselves to various recommendations in the Report. So, what you do is, leave him to say what he wants to say, then you will make up your mind at the end of the day. As to how long you are going to take with this Report, that will be my decision. 

DR. CHEBROT: May I seek guidance, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My understanding of this Report is that it is an interim Report and therefore, it is not an exhaustive Report.  In my own understanding, if it is not an exhaustive Report, it means that there are going to be other issues which are going to come up. Now, what hon. Winnie Byanyima said is that, they needed more time to get more details, what exactly happened, and from the wrap-up statement made by the Vice President and from the Attorney General, it would appear that this Report is not in itself complete as yet. Now, what I want to know from you is this, is there going to be an addendum added on this Report so that we can continue with the discussion of this Report, or we can discuss this Report in its interim phase and then continue to discuss it later on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is this, the Select Committee was given a mandate to probe what the House wanted to be probed and it was given the time within which to complete this work. They have done the work within the time, but they say, 'had we to be given more time, may be more things would come.'  You may say, 'no, enough is enough.'  So, you cannot now call this one an interim Report.  They have made a Report within the time given.  Should you think that you need more information, then you will extend their mandate and give them more time. But take this as a Report which has been made by the Committee. What it has done is that it has not considered all the units that have been privatised; it has selected those which it had considered are serious items. So, you consider it that way, you will know that because of time, they have not been able to look at all aspects.  Should you feel that they need more time, then you will approve their request that you give them more time.  

MRS. EGUNYU: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking clarification on a point of procedure. Mr. Speaker, it has come to the attention of this House that although the Attorney General's Office was implicated in a number of issues, they were never consulted. I am wondering if procedurally we can consider the Report as complete in the circumstances. 

Secondly, I would also like to raise a constitutional matter and that is the right to be heard.  Are we being fair in all circumstances in proceeding?  I know there is evidence in other cases, but I feel that those like the Attorney General who are actually the epitome of our legal profession and who deserve the respect and dignity of that office, should have been given a hearing.

I believe that these people have a right to be heard and I believe that the Report is incomplete in the circumstances, in as far as the Attorney General's Office has not been consulted.  I thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated to you yesterday, the Report was made and the recommendations made. It is these recommendations at the end of the day that you will be asked to approve or not to approve. Now, should you think that because the Attorney General was not heard and this is very material, in considering the specific matter affecting the Attorney General, then you could pronounce yourselves and say, 'no, because he was not given the opportunity to be heard, this we do not approve.'  So, I do not see any problem. You can debate in spite of Attorney General not having been heard. This will be a defect in the handling of the Report, and therefore, you will use it to pronounce yourselves as you may feel.  

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I do hope that hon. Awori and others will now get interested in getting to know the other side and not merely playing obstructionist. Right from the beginning yesterday, hon. Awori has only been interested in highlighting what other people have mentioned in the Report.  When they now stand up to speak, he is now - I do not think this is proper, Mr. Speaker.  

The point I was making is that we have a Constitution and the Constitution in Article 90 gives Committees of Parliament the right to summon Ministers, to summon any public officer, to produce any document. Why did the makers of the Constitution put that Provision there?  So that the Committees of Parliament are assisted, so that the affairs of state are run from the position of information and knowledge, so that people who may be affected by what takes place are given a chance to be heard, especially people who cannot come to the Floor if this House to defend themselves - individuals or public officers.  This is the point that I was making and Mr. Speaker, as you know very well, one principle of law is that you must listen to both sides. 

However, notwithstanding all these, Mr. Speaker, I want to proceed to explain a role of the Attorney General in giving advice to Government and Government Departments, how it is given, the difficulties we have - I would develop it to the problems of Government contracts and then bring it down to the contract at issue.  I hope hon. Members give me time and listen to what I have to say.  

The Attorney General, under Attorney General's Chambers is mandated by the Constitution to give legal advice to Government and Government departments. Legal advice is what it says it is, legal advice. The Attorney General gets opinions and an opinion is what it says, an opinion, based on the facts as he knows them or as given to him by client ministries and based on the law as he interprets it.  

The Attorney General's opinion can be challenged in Court or even in a Government Department can write to the Attorney General and say the opinion you gave us lacks in material particular, and the Attorney General can review his own opinion, and indeed Government Standing Orders are clear on even where opinion is given by State Attorney to Government Departments.  

If a Government department has received an opinion by a State Attorney which they find is wanting for one reason or the other, the Standing Orders say, the head of that department or a Permanent Secretary shall write to the Solicitor General and point out that the opinion received from the State Attorney had a problem, and then the Solicitor General or the Attorney General as the case may be, will write back.  

In giving opinions, Mr. Speaker, we do consult.  By the time I send out an opinion, I will probably have consulted two or three lawyers within the Government Chambers. Therefore, when people say that there was inappropriate advice or wrong advice, I would have wanted to know which particular opinion was wrong and why, and indeed if I was convinced that I have given an opinion that I did not have full facts and that my reading of the law was wrong, I would revisit it because there is nothing personal at stake. These are matters of State.

When it comes to Government contracts, I am very concerned about Government contracts and it is not a new concern.  I am concerned about Government contracts because eight years I spent in the Attorney General's Chambers dealing with Government contracts and I know the problems that we had.  My concern is based on my experience.  It is not only now that there are problems with Government contracts.  

I can recollect one particular case way back in 1980 where the Solicitor General gave the opinion against a particular contract,  and it took a whole Head of State to ring from State House Entebbe to the Solicitor General to say, "I do not agree with your opinion. I am going ahead with the contract." - the other one which he wanted to sign. That contract was signed and in the end, Uganda paid a heavy price for it. If hon. Members want to verify that, they can check this with our Speaker, hon. Ayume, who was the Solicitor General at that time. So the problem of Government contracts is not new. 

A number of contracts are being cited here as where the Attorney General gave bad advice and bad contracts were made; and these are the ones being given as examples where the Attorney General and Solicitor General should account for. Indeed, these contracts were made, for example, Nile Hotel, UFL, Foods and Beverages, Lake Victoria were made before Katureebe became Attorney General.  So I do not know how I would be made now to account for transactions that took place before I was made Attorney General! However -

MISS KIRASO: Point of information. Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the hon. Member. But I wanted the Attorney General and the House to distinguish between the way the names and the offices were put in the report. I thought somebody had already put it very clearly that the name of hon. Bart Katureebe is not mentioned in that report for exactly the same reason that he is putting across. When we say 'the Attorney General's office' - he is now the Attorney General. Maybe he may need to go back and ask, that if this and that contract or agreement was fraudulent, who actually was in the office at that time? Nobody has mentioned the name of hon. Bart Katureebe and I do not think anybody can mention it. Sir, the committee has a lot of respect for you.  Thank you very much.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I welcome that information but I was only saying this to emphasize that this problem is long standing. Then to show the House what I now as currently Attorney General I am doing about it. That is what I am trying to say.  Mr. Speaker, because of my knowledge about problems of government contracts, because of my knowledge of the problems in the Attorney General's chambers which I have had occasion several times to report to this House's committee on legal affairs, I myself long before this report came out, originated a Cabinet paper with proposals to Cabinet on how I see we can improve on the making of government contracts, on how I see the Attorney General's chambers could be assisted, on how I see Cabinet could be brought in so that loop holes in the making of government contracts or even where mistakes are made by the Attorney General's chambers can be sorted out, can be ironed out so that ultimately what we have are good government contracts. This paper has already been approved.  Decisions have been made and I am sure those loop holes will be plugged. 

I want now to talk about this contract here; the Uganda Commercial Bank contract. First of all, it has been said in the report that foreign lawyers were employed. To my understanding, there were several advisors in this transaction; the merchant bank and people who were recruited by Government; Morgan Grenfell failed to advise on the financial matters of this contract and these people insisted that they needed a firm of lawyers who had handled similar transactions like this to be lawyers to advise Privatisation Unit to prepare the draft contract. That is how these lawyers were engaged. There was a bid, there was a tender and they bidded and Straton & Caplan of Nairobi were then appointed. I see nothing wrong with that in my opinion.  

Secondly, it has been said that they were given so much money in terms of 144 million shillings. I have had a lawyer look at our rules of remuneration as advocates here in Uganda. If those rules had been used according to the calculations that have been made for me, then the lawyers would have been entitled to over 550 million shillings. But that is not the point. The point is, they prepared the contract and I assigned two senior lawyers, the commissioner for contract negotiations and a senior principal state attorney to work on this contract. 

There were many difficulties, there were many clauses that we needed to change and we changed and they would report to me and we managed to change quite a number. Where I had difficulty, I even had to consult my colleague the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning - I am sure he can testify to that - so that the interest of Government, as much as we could was secured. Indeed, I would have wanted to debate whether the clauses that were put in the contract were not in the interest of Government. For example, it is being said that the powers of the board were taken away. In fact when you read the shareholders agreement, and I would suggest to all Members that we read the agreements together, when you read the shareholders agreement, it says that the board shall give its powers of management to the manager subject to the management contract; and in the management contract, it says among other things that the manager under that management contract shall comply with all directives issued to it by the board from time to time and shall comply with the policy directives given by the board to it. You will see from the management contract that the board is entitled on a monthly basis to get reports from the managers of what they are doing, what transactions they have done, what monies they have transferred. All that is there. We put it there so that because as Government of Uganda, we are supposed to have the majority of the board and indeed even when it comes to the payment of fees, they are not supposed to pay themselves fees without first raising an invoice, submitting the invoice, submitting the invoice to the board with attendant costs of whatever they are claiming and the board approves when the majority of Government directors are present. These are contained in the agreement. Now this is what we would have wanted discussed.  

But is the problem that this agreement whether good or bad has not been performed? I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that part of the problem of bad contracts as is used might stem first in the identification of parties right from the beginning; even the parties to the contract. If the parties to the contract are fraudulent and they have no intention of being bound by what they have put down in an agreement, then no matter what you put in the agreement -

MR. MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Could the hon. Attorney General clarify to us, if so much care was taken, how comes the offer was from a company known as Westmont something, and yet the contract was made with Westmont? Can he clarify that, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Speaker, I will come to that point but let me develop the point I was saying first. That people make contracts with a view to be bound by them. People make contracts on a basis of good faith. If there is no good faith, then it does not matter what language you use, because there is no way you can prevent somebody from breaking a contract if he wants to breach it. Indeed what has happened despite these provisions, I have now been informed that notwithstanding the requirement that you are to submit your invoice for fees to the board, these people transferred out 1.5 million dollars as their fees without subjecting it to the board and contrary to the agreement.  Now this is not the problem of a bad agreement. It is a problem that the people we are dealing with are wrong people. 

MR. AISU OMONGOLE: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am trying to seek is, we as a committee noted most parts of the management contract as fraudulent. One party in the contract was the Government of Uganda.  Is the Attorney General trying to tell this House that Government went into this contract knowing very well that it was fraudulent, or Government was a fraudulent party to this contract? Thank you.

MR. KATUREEBE:  All I am saying Mr. Speaker is that Government went on the assumption that we are dealing with good people and indeed Mr. Speaker, this House was told -

MISS BYANYIMA: Point of clarification. In this report, we found out that the managers or the people who won the management contract, Westmont, were paid six million dollars for three years' work in advance. What I want to be clarified upon, if you trust engineer Byanyima so much, is it really a reason to give her a three year pay cheque in advance? Is it normal for him as an Attorney General who makes many contracts that somebody is paid for work not done, three years in advance? Is this a good contract in his own estimation?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Speaker, I am stating the facts in the contract as I know them.  I am not aware of a clause in the contract under which people were paid in advance.  I have said specifically for example, that they are required to submit invoices.  This is what I know to be stated in the contract.  If on the other hand other things have been done and I have no reason to doubt what hon. Byanyima might be saying, if other things as investigations are coming out then it proves one thing that maybe the people we thought were going to be faithful managers of our bank breached the contract that we signed with them - that is the point I am making.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we were told and this House was told and this House approved the privatisation of UCB on the understanding that the persons that were coming would be core investors who would put in money, manage the bank and turn it around. I believe, hon. Members, this is what should be on the record of this House.

MR. DOMBO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The Attorney General has said that the people who were managing UCB contrary to the provisions in the contract paid themselves. That means they breached the contract and that means it is also a criminal action. I want to find out from Government and him as Attorney General what action has been taken.

MR. KATUREEBE: Mr. Speaker, I really wish hon. Members could put things first.  What we are on now and which I believe the committee has been rightly doing is first of all to establish the facts.  This is what Bank of Uganda has been doing to establish the facts because whatever action we take on these contracts - and I want to advise - we must take them from a position of strength knowing that we are in the clear and it is the other party in breach.  We do not want to give them any chance for them to say we were okay, it is you who terminated the contract unlawfully.  I do not want them to do that. I want to have all the facts and indeed the facts are coming in. Indeed, I am beginning to form my own opinions which I do not think would be prudent to debate now on what action should be taken. So hon. Dombo, I agree with you. Let us establish facts, and that is how we proceed.  Establish the facts, what happened, are they in breach and if they are in breach, what remedy is available to us within the terms of the contract where we are not in breach as Government? 

MR. AGGREY AWORI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Attorney General on the key article of the sale agreement. The most operative part of the article of the sale agreement was that this agreement binds the seller and the buyer to three years and cannot be transferred.  In other words, UCB will not be sold to another party within a period of three years, so I understand.  Mr. Speaker, could the hon. Attorney General clarify to this House whether that article was inserted because of his foresight that there could be a problem? 

Two, was he at any period approached by anybody to revisit that particular article before the fraud was committed?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Speaker, you see the problem with hon. Awori, he reads one little thing and jumps up. He does not read the entire thing.  (Laughter). If hon. Awori had read the entire agreement, he would indeed find that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would advise that you generally address the issue.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Yes, I am addressing the issue, Mr. Speaker. You would find, Mr. Speaker, that there are clauses for review, for amendment and for termination and cancellation.  Those provisions must be read together Mr. Speaker.

Why have I dwelt at length on this point? Indeed I have dwelt on it because this matter is of concern to all.  We had to put a clause in this agreement that there shall be no transfer, assignment or in any way dealing with shares bought by Westmont until after the expiration of three years and without consent of the Government.  This was to ensure that as far as we were concerned, Westmont would not go and say the next day that we have now brought in somebody else and transferred to him our shares and it is also important to point out  that what Westmont bought was not 100 per cent UCB but 49 per cent shares.  Government is still the majority shareholder of Uganda Commercial Bank to the best of my knowledge.  Now if therefore as is being reported, Westmont has in any way transferred its share holding to any other person be it Salim Saleh or anybody else, then they are in breach and we should hold them accountable for that breach and take the necessary action within the terms of the contract.  That was why that clause was put there. The contracts that we have made as I said, presuppose people acting in good faith, presuppose people respecting what they have signed.  But if you make secret deals and indeed it is now becoming clear that maybe what has happened is a fraud, then all actions be it civil, be it criminal, be it prosecution, all this will be studied.  The Director of Public Prosecutions is already with this matter to study and I am sure remedial action within the law, within the terms of the contract Mr. Speaker will be taken.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, speaking for the office of the Attorney General, I want to summarise. I accept that I take responsibility for what we do in the Attorney General's chambers. I accept that and I accept that sometimes an opinion is given which people may disagree with. That is perfectly in order. We have been sometimes challenged on our opinions, matters have gone to court and we have been proved right. Sometimes we have been proved wrong.  Some hon. Members here who are lawyers - (Laughter) - have sometimes come when we have cases against Government and so on and we have sat down where we are wrong, where they are right and sometimes we have settled cases out of court, and that is how it should be; this is the way we are running Government; with consultations. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to sitting down with the committee if indeed more time is given so that in greater detail we can explore some of these things and even to understand some of the problems that we have. I hold myself responsible for the opinions given in the Attorney General's Chambers, including my own, I hold myself responsible for mistakes that we may have made, if any. I hold my staff responsible for any credit that they may have, but I only pray, Mr. Speaker, that in future when Committees of the House are investigating, especially public officers who cannot have the opportunity of coming to the Floor, let them be given an opportunity to come to the Committees and explain. (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am being disturbed by some figures I see in the report and I thought the Attorney General would probably be in a better position to advise on this or give me clarification. I see on the list of the consultants the companies that were listed to deal with UCB sales they were ten of them listed by the committee and all these companies were paid a total of 4 billion shillings. Now, out of these ten, I see that the majority are actually law firms. I understand that out of ten companies at least 7 of them are law firms drawing considerable amounts of money,  over nearly 1 billion and that is excluding the Attorney General's office. Now, I was wondering what was the need of employing all these law firms. I know some were for Westmont, probably to take care of their interest. 

The Attorney General has told us that Morgan Greenfell also advised that we should employ Stratton and Kaplin, that makes at least two and the third should have been Attorney General's office. The question I am asking, why the need for so many law firms dealing with one privatisation process, just one company, and the total amount of money that is paid to them is colossal; was all this necessary in view that Government was negotiating for this thing?

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all let me inform hon. Ongom that the Attorney General is not paid anything beyond his salary for the services, so he would not have come here, but also -(Interruption)-

MR. ONGOM: But it is not in the list.

MR. KATUREEBE: This list, Mr. Speaker, I need to seek some further information from the privatisation unit. All I was saying is Stratton and kaplin were the transaction lawyers for UCB. I have to find out and I will give you the information when I  have got it about the other firms.  

MR. SETH WAMBEDE (Bungokho North, Mbale): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. On the date of 26th January,1986, there were dances of gunfire on Kampala streets. What followed that morning was an address and that address was for a fundamental change. It was indeed fundamental. We danced for the fundamental change that had been brought in. That was good. We were eager and had been eager to join and build along the fundamental changes. Year by year, or slowly by slowly, the weevil came into the peelers, the weevils entered our fundamental change. I thought we had moved from writing chits, away of acquiring in terms of allocation to better things, but alas! Everything has gone amiss. From the out set, personally I have cried about privatisation. I have always asked why we have clung on only one method of a core investor when in the statute it clearly says Ugandans must be made to benefit. Out of a strategy of a core investor, we have been cheated, we have be looted, defiled, name it. People have looted with impunity. Maybe, the titles of Maj. Generals have made them insulated from all the punishment. I understand Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh is an active member of the Army. I do not know how he resigns all of a sudden and it is accepted. I fail to distinguish between Maj. Gen. Tinyefuza who was refused to resign and Akandanaho is accepted. I do not know. I have failed to distinguish between the two.  

The son of Mbale in the names of Wakweya was summarily dismissed. For what?  For banking a cheque of 500 million shillings from the Bank of Uganda to Nile Bank, moreover on instructions. He was dismissed and only paid one shilling. Those who have looted billions of dollars or responsible for losses are insulated, are immune to any discipline. I find this extremely difficult to comprehend. I know, many of the Executive Members are feeling shy, they must be saying, 'oh! my God what is this?'  But, I know it is because of the collective responsibility, but given a chance somewhere, they will say this is too much. 

I feel bad to hear hon. Members like Dr. Martin Aliker being lumped in the same circle of Executives when actually he is innocent. There are innocent Cabinet Members who are being lumped together because of the misdeeds of a few individuals. I know it is a collective responsibility, but to save the embarrassment, go back to the appointing authority and say, 'your Excellency, the situation is bad. Can we kindly put our Colleague aside and continue.'  But that has not been the case instead somebody jumps on to the Floor to defend because of collective responsibility and I bet some of those who are defending do not know what is taking place in those Ministries. They are very far from the truth. Instead of listening for an opinion and go back to advise the appointing authority, you just jump up and say no, no, you see, I do not know how I can describe it.

Uganda Airlines, the name of hon. Sam Kutesa have been mentioned. I feel pity for a person I have always respected. I know this is business. When you mention Global Airlinks with others, that is business and you have a right to prevail over your business.  But, a man of a Minister presiding over the Chairmanship of the Government parastatal while as well as controlling the funds is a case for conflict of interest. Hon. Kutesa could have distanced himself but but he did not care to do so. Even today, I am told he is still the Chairman of ENHAS and Uganda Airlines where even the workers have been denied their shares. I do not know how hon. Kutesa can exonerate himself out of that. As a matter of integrity, and a matter of distinguishing roles, I beg hon. Kutesa to resign from that Chairmanship -(Interjections)- I am told he should resign even from Cabinet. I do not know but we shall see.  

The Uganda Transocean business is another area you can never go near. I know Ddungu and Company. In a year, Mr. Ddungu registers about 100 companies.  Government pays him money for hiring his Coin ware house, but over the two years, the bonded ware house is in a mess; nothing has been done there and we continue giving money. He has only 8 workers, but I am told for the past 8 months those workers have never been paid. That is Ddungu, the one that DRIC said do not give him this and eventually it was given to him. That was a core investor and a strategic one too - I do not know!

Coming to the UCB, I do not know how I can describe it. Only those who can go to it can know what it is, but to somebody who  claims it to be clean, it comprises a den of looters. They have looted the country as per the annexure. How much money was spent in terms of payment for consultancy? Shillings 4 billion, how much did the Government capitalise with it?  Shillings 72 billion, how much money was put in? Nothing, on top of looting it. Actually they were paid in advance; it is a shame. If I were the one being talked about, I would cut the debate short and say, 'hon. Members, I am very sorry for what has happened. Maybe, I will resign but you forgive me.'  But in Uganda we have never learnt, we have never had a culture of saying 'forgive me'. It is only today that I have seen it from the Attorney General; he has accepted the blame on behalf of his department - I must praise him for that. (Interruption)

MR. DOMBO: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, on the issue of corruption, especially in the process of privatisation, we have gone beyond the process of confession. Right here on the officer's bench, the Inspector General of Police is present and we expect some action immediately after this debate. (Laughter).

MR. WAMBEDE: Hon. Dombo, I must thank you for drawing my attention to the presence of the Inspector General of Police, Mr. Odomel. I hope they have come with handcuffs to take the culprits.  

On the point of UCB, Mr. Speaker, when the payment for UCB came in through Greenland, we called the Minister of Privatisation and asked him. He said, "No, it is not true. The money came from City Bank, it is not anywhere connected with Greenland Bank."  We said, "Mr. Minister, thank you, time will tell and will bail us out."  The fact has come out. You know, a thief is always a thief. He will always deny that it was not true - I am not meaning him, but I am only expressing. We asked him, "Why have you continuously extended the timeframe for the Westmont people to pay up?" He said, " You know I was from Malaysia. The Malaysia economy has collapsed and you know we have to be considerate" - I said, "Are you sure we are not dealing with briefcase company business?"  He said, "That is absolutely untrue. I have established the fact these are core investors who will turn round UCB." It has been turned around! (Laughter) That is the nature of our friends who cannot accept any advise; we called it to his attention but all the same he did not.  

The issue of privatisation should not merely stop here; we must review it and if anything rule out other methods of selling but say by flotation. We hurried for privatisation. We are not yet mature for privatisation. We should have put in place financial institutions like the capital markets, but for reasons best known to the players, they have continually sat on these capital markets until maybe recently. I do not know whether they are operational. If we want to benefit Ugandans why not float these shares?  Do not tell me all these Ugandans are very poor and cannot afford 10,000 or even 100,000 to buy a share in UCB, you cannot convince me; but here we have clung to the concept of the core investor under the guise of cheating Ugandans. 
We need to review that agreement. I pity myself to have fallen short of ways of stretching out to reach the Solicitor General and the Secretary to the Treasury - especially the Secretary to the  Treasury is a person who must have known this, who must have supervised all these, even the crumbling of our banks. He is only fronting for the World Bank. Anything to do with the World Bank he is superb andwill convince you there and then. But monitoring our performance it seems is not his part.  

Hon. Members, let us make an attempt, however feeble it is, to petition the appointing authority of the two Ministries, the Solicitor General and the Secretary to the Treasury. Let us not debate and leave it here.

Having said all this, I am not a lawyer,but I may put myself in the wig of a judge and find it extremely difficult to forgive the Minister of State in charge of Privatisation as an immediate supervisor. I find it hard to exonerate him. If I can assess,and take up the role of a judge, I find it difficult.   

For the Attorney General, it was not his immediate role but he must be cautioned - (Laughter) - that next time, he must take extra care to scrutinise those agreements.

For hon. Kutesa, I could send him to prison, but there is time for him to appeal. I find it difficult to acquit hon. Kutesa but to send him to prison and only appeal.  

For hon. Nasasira, it is unfortunate but I could put him under house arrest. Why?  Because he came in when all the deals had been concluded by hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, whom I do not want to suffer a double jeopardy.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to categorically state that hon. KK, when he was the Minister is the one who had wrapped up all the deals, when actually the Minister he is talking about was in the Ministry from November 24th 1994 to July, 1996, and in the report - I have tried to peruse through it, I do not find exactly what deals I was involved in. Is he in order, therefore?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Unfortunately, he has sentenced you, but he has pardoned you, because he does not want you to suffer double jeopardy, but otherwise, he can be informed of those details.

MR. WAMBEDE MASSA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I had pardoned him not to suffer double jeopardy but in any case, hon. Nasasira appeared before the Committee and said, "Members, you may send me to the gallows but thre is no role that I played in this." He stated that it had already been done by his predecessor, that is why I was saying that - Mr. Speaker, therefore, for that matter, I would put hon. Nasasira under house arrest.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Since this is one of the assessors, he is just giving his opinion, the others will take into account your problem.

MR. WAMBEDE MASSA: Then the last person, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, who presided over that Ministry, should be retired in the public's interest, because he was  a Minister, he did not bother to stretch any inch to see what was taking place in his department.  He over delegated, he abused the powers of delegation.  Mr. Speaker, those I have sent to the gallows, they should accept their ills.  Thank you very much.

MS. KABASHARIRA ASIIMWE(Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee so much for the work they have done for this country and this Parliament.  Mr. Speaker, I joined politics immediately after I had finished school and I joined politics because of the then system of Government, that is NRM.  I joined politics because of NRM's good policies. Hon. Obedmoth said that he is still young, I am also still young. (Laughter). We young people are very much concerned where this country is going because some of these people - why I am saying we are young and we are concerned, some of you have got children, they have already gone beyond the age of a young person, some of you have reached a retirement age, some of you have accumulated wealth and you do not care, but what about us?  So, I always ask myself, even before I read this report, there was a lot of concern - (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Naome for giving way. The information I wanted to give is that most of the people when they are young is when they are enthusiastic, energetic and are ready even to sacrifice, and that is when most of the things can be done. But the tendency which she has pointed out of when people start getting old and start feeling that perhaps life is leaving them, they get a lot of pressure always; that has been the trend of those who are young by regarding them as old regardless of whether they were very active when they were young.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, that is an opinion. Proceed.

MS. KABASHARIRA ASIIMWE:   Mr. Speaker, I thank him for the opinion, not information. I was still in school when elections were held during Obote's regime II, and our President today went to the bush, because he was in that Government and some people followed him to the bush. They went to the bush because there was no transparency, there was a lot of corruption, there was nepotism, there was no democracy and they decided to go to the bush and fight so that they can bring those things here in this country and when they came, we welcomed them, we liked what they were doing, because they had actually fought corruption and they had brought democracy.  But today, Mr. Speaker, you ask yourself, what happened?  Does history repeat itself?  That even in the Government of Amin, people accumulated a lot wealth, the top officials of the Government, during Obote's regime, the same, Obote II, the same. Now, today, it is the same, because when I look at the people who are implicated in this report, they are all Government officials and I ask those people who went to the bush today, because we have them (Maj Kazoora rose_) including that Major standing, this Major General, to tell me, is this what you went to fight for? I want the answer.

MAJ. J. KAZOORA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I am being challenged by hon. Kabasharira and I beg your indulgence that my information, I give it a background.  
As a young boy at Nyakasura, I read literature and one of the books I read was Animal Farm. When these things happened, Mr. Speaker, I went around and looked for that novel which is here.  I have bought another five copies for the Library of Parliament.
At the beginning of the revolution when animals were chasing man, they had a seven point programme - (Laughter) -  and with your permission, I can go through them, they are short.  
One was, whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.
Whatever goes upon four legs and has wings is a friend. 
No animal shall wear clothes.  
No animal shall sleep in a bed.
No animal shall drink alcohol.
No animal shall kill any other animal
All Animals are equal.
Towards the end of the book, there was an old animal and this was Clover.  She could not read properly when she looked at the amendment and she asked Benjamin, "Can you read for me, my sight is failing", she said finally. "Even when I was young, I could not have read what was written there, but it appears to me that the wall looks different. Are the seven commandments the same as they used to be, Benjamin?" For once Benjamin consented to break his rule and he read out to her what was written on the wall. There was nothing there, nothing except a single commandment.  It ran, 'All animals are equal but some are more equal than others.'  Then after that, it did not seem strange when the next day, the pigs who were supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their twitters and installed a telephone.  Napoleon was seen strolling in a farm house garden with a pipe, smoking. The pigs took Mr. Jones' clothes out of the wardrobe and put them, Napoleon himself appearing in a black coat, while his favourite sow appeared in the wittered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been used to wear on Sundays.  At the end, the last sentence of the book, Mr. Speaker, it says, the creatures outside looked from pig to man and from man to pig and from pig to man again, but already it was impossible to say which was which.

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I had wanted to seek this clarification from Maj. John Kazoora in his information. I know it is procedurally not correct, but from the circumstances he has given, it had looked like hon. Naome is that old woman who did not know how to read, and Benjamin is Maj. Kazoora. Could we get the comparison?

MR. WACHA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to give hon. Naome further information arising from Animal Farm.
There is a piece towards the end of the book, where the pigs stated that they did not eat apples, eggs and drink milk because they had to, but because they were brain workers. Now, over the weekend, Maj. Salim Saleh said, he did not acquire UCB because he wanted to, but because he is a nationalist.

MISS. KABASHARIRA ASIIMWE:  I thank the Members for that information and indeed which is which.  It is a question and the public is concerned.  Mr. Speaker, when we were looking for votes for today's His Excellency the President, we campaigned on the Movement ticket and there were some pertinent questions which were being asked.  People were asking, what have you done with privatisation, where have you put the proceeds?  

The other day, a certain old man visited me and he asked me - he is a peasant, he even does not know how to read, I think. But he asked me, that do you know a word called omubagi in Runyankole?  Omubagi in Runyankole is a butcher. But what he meant is that, when someone sells his property, the land and houses that he has, then he starts buying meat and drinking alcohol without giving anything to his family, in Runyankole he is called omubagi. So, he asked me, "Is your Government a mubagi?" I asked, "Why?"  He said, "Because you sold all the things that were there and we do not see what you have done from the proceeds." That was a peasant from the village, who is not even educated. So, Mr. Speaker, when such a situation goes beyond, even here, hon Obedmoth said, our peasants when they read this report, they cried foul. I want to tell you that our peasants do not read and most of them do not know what is going on. If they knew what was going on, today, the corruption that we have, they would have even demonstrated and even come to kill us and stone us.  It is good that they do not know what is going on, but the situation is alarming.

I at times ask myself whether His Excellency, when he is going to appoint some of our Ministers and by the way, on this note, I want Members not to bundle all the Ministers  that they are thieves; some of our Ministers are very clean.  We should not mix the four Ministers that have been mentioned and we bundle them together with other; some of them are clean and are doing a good job.

Why I am saying that is, I do not know whether at times His Excellency the President also looks back and sees what we really need when he is appointing some of these Ministers. Because when this Report came out, we talk as Colleagues, we exchange views.  I got information that some of these people when they were in the bush their integrity was doubted. I was asking and someone told me about hon. Rukikaire who has been responsible for our privatisation. In the bush he was supposed to be in charge I think of external whatever, to bring some assistance, logistics from outside. He went with someone who is also a Minister today to solicit some finance somewhere in another country which I do not want to mention. When they went, they were given whatever they were given, it never reached people in the bush. (Laughter).  This is information that we have been getting when we talk with colleagues and we get concerned. If that thing is really true, because they said that they were supposed to be court martialled -(Interruption)

MR. RUKIKAIRE:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, even before my turn comes for me to be able to address this House on many of the allegations which have been made, I think it is only fair that when a statement like that one is made, some substantial or substantive evidence of such an allegation should be made, not simply to say that when we were in the bush, I went with a Minister and the money did not arrive. The money had come from where? Who was supposed to be the recipient who did not receive it?  And which year was that one?  I would like that information to be given. Because it is very important for us to substantiate what is being said here.  

MISS. KABASHARIRA:  Mr. Speaker, I have told you that as we talk with other people, there are people who were also in the bush and who know that.  The honourable who has asked for the information, he will get time to explain about himself whether that thing is true or not when he is answering. But I have told you what I have heard and it is a matter of concern.  Because I compare it with what is happening today and I agree that someone is not really concerned with this country, that someone does not like even our President. I feel so sad when you go out of this House in the public, you are a Munyankole or a Westerner if I may call it that. When you go out and maybe you are just passing or even buying anything, people are talking about you, backbiting you, 'look at them'. If you are buying something, they say, "Can you also fail to have money, a Munyankole?" Why do people say that?  It is because of the few individuals within this Movement System of Governance; very few Banyankole who have caused us to have a bad name. We are not bad; our President is not bad. But these people!  Because, Mr. Speaker, when you read the Report, there is no way you can deny it. Because they will tell you, you see, hon. Rukikaire from there, hon. Kutesa from there, hon. Nasasira from there -(Laughter)- Tumusiime from there, Salim Saleh from there, Mutebire from there. It is a concern to some of us -(Interruption)

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, in addition to what hon. Naome Kabasharira is saying, those individuals she is talking about have become so strong and so comfortable in their corruption, safe and secure that they are now putting the rest of us who investigate them and think something is wrong and want to point it out, on the defensive.  They say, particularly if you are a Munyankole like myself, 'what is wrong with you? Why have you not accumulated like the rest?  You are lazy. You are not enterprising' (Laughter). The arrogance, the decadence that has landed on these people is astonishing, is frightening and can result in criminality.  I only wanted to add this to the speech by hon. Naome that, they are not only wallowing in ill-gotten wealth, they are putting everybody else on the defensive.

MR. DOMBO:  Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am not a Munyankole.  But one thing I wanted to get clarification about, Mr. Speaker, I have all along known hon. Sam Kutesa as a representative of Buganda, especially Mawogola, in the Parliament of Uganda. How is he associated to the Ankole eating group, Mr. Speaker? (Laughter)

MRS. OKORIMOE:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to give hon. Naome further information. Some weeks ago, I was in Entebbe and I was told that corruption is like alcoholism and drunkenness, that when you drink one bottle of beer or two, you are still laughing and joking. When you drink three, you start saying, 'whom do you think you are?' When you drink six, you say, 'I have everything and get out of my sight. Who are you?' Thank you. 

MISS. KABASHARIRA:  I thank Members for the information, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Member is now well informed, she can contribute without interruption.

MISS. KABASHARIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I kindly ask these hon. Ministers and officials who have been mentioned to save this Movement.  I am now talking on the Movement. To save this Movement and to save the name of Ankole and the Banyankole, we are tired.  And save this country.  People are dying of poverty.  When people hear that so and so has billions, they have no 100/- shillings for buying salt, they ask so many questions.  When you go there as a Member of Parliament, they ask you.  Those who understand they ask you that what are you doing for us?  Mr. Speaker, I ask hon. Rukikaire, hon. Kutesa, hon. Nasasira, Maj.Gen. Salim Saleh, Mr. Mutebire, Mr. Muganwa Kajura to save us the shame, because we want the referendum to go through.

I got concerned when I read about the helicopter saga.  I have always regarded Salim Saleh highly especially in matters concerning security and the army, because I take him to be very well experienced. I got shocked when I learnt that he was in the helicopter saga. At least, if he was only taking the commission or eating the money, but not bringing us helicopters which were really useless. How did he expect someone to go and fight, we are confronted with these wars from the North, from the West?  How was he expecting to fight that war and end it?  Really, I think I do not know I am not a judge.  But I think something must be done to save this country.  

I want this Parliament to say thank you to hon. Manzi Tumubweinee. Hon. Manzi Tumubweinee stood firm and explained to us that Commercial Bank should not be sold. If we had followed his advise, we would not be here talking this. (Laughter). Mr. Speaker, Members are saying that maybe he was bought.  I do not know.

MS. KIRASO: Point of information.  I actually wanted to remind the House. I am surprised that we, the same people who voted on that subject and went to the division lobby, can turn round and say that hon. Manzi Tumubweinee was bought. I wanted to remind hon. Members that you were thoroughly lobbied, some of you went and even confessed that you had seen the light. (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, we came to this House, we went to the division lobby, 37 of us lost and lost honourably. So, Members should not say that Hon. Manzi somersaulted, he did not somersault. It is this House which accepted and somersaulted.  

MISS. KABASHARIRA: I want to thank hon. Kiraso very much for that information.  Because I am among the 37, I am on record who signed that this bank should not be sold.  Because hon. Manzi had convinced me, hon. Rukikaire convinced us and took us to Rwakitura, took us there and tried to convince us and -(Laughter) convinced our President and lied to him, and the President accepted. Because the President sent his messenger hon. Rukikaire, we do not expect him to do everything.  It is hon. Rukikaire who should have told him the truth.   But hon. Rukikaire knew that those people were thugs, because hon. Manzi had explained very well that those people of Westmont were not going to manage this bank, they even had no money.  And I am sure hon. Manzi must have told hon. Rukikaire.  So, I do not know why hon. Rukikaire went and deceived our President?  And our President convinced us that - I am happy that it has come out, I am happy that I am among the 37 people who signed against.   So, Mr. Speaker, I do not know what these people are going to say?  But I hope, they will provide us with good answers to these questions. If they have no answers, they should save us early and resign. If they do not want to resign, we shall use our powers and I think you know them. I warn you early, I am very good at mobilising, I will mobilise because I am tired. (Laughter).  

In conclusion, I want to request Members kindly that we should handle this matter as a national matter. In this matter, we should not look as if we are Members of Parliament fighting Executive, as if Executive fighting Members of Parliament.  Because, Mr. Speaker,  I observed it.  Let us move together, because this concerns all of us.  When a problem comes, they will take all of us and we shall be in trouble.  So, let us fight this problem together. Even those who are implicated in this, you should not look as if you are outside, you should be part of us and explain to us.

I got concerned.  When we were just beginning, I rose on a point of procedure that at times we do not gain much from this form of consultative group meeting, the so called 'caucus'. I was so surprised that before we finish this day , someone signed on behalf of hon. Gilbert Bukenya calling for a meeting tomorrow at 5.00 p.m.(Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, I like the caucus, but this is not the right time. If the caucus is to take place, let them invite these people who have been implicated in the Report to talk to them and tell them what to do, but not the Members of Parliament. Mr. Speaker, I am concerned, the chairman is here, this person who has signed on his behalf, he had better talk to her, it is not good. We do not want the caucus meeting until we finish. 

Let me ask a question before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, that sometime back, when hon. Omongole brought the Motion on this Privatisation, the Minister in charge of Privatisation raised concern that they were in the middle of privatising some of the properties, that if we stop them, it is going to make this Government lose money.  Now, I am concerned, what we have found out in this Report, should they continue the privatisation process or we should postpone it until we have finished this Report.  I thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO ( Otuke County, Lira):   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to begin my remarks by asking this House to look at ourselves and Uganda as a country and compare it to a ship which is sailing in a deep sea.  We are all together in that ship, and that we in this House are like members who are privileged to sit together, with a captain to guide that ship to a successful sailing across the sea and to land safely.  Any mistake made inside that ship will result in all of us sinking and collapsing. It is in that spirit that I wish to contribute to this very important Motion.  I am not here to wreck the ship.  Because if the economy of this country collapses, I suffer, my family suffers, my people suffer and all the people of Uganda suffer.  If there is instability, if there is insecurity, unless you decide to go into exile and suffer there, if you are inside, you will suffer. We cannot afford any more in this country to allow the situation in which we are to continue.  Hon. Obedmoth, one of the youngest Members of Parliament today has spoken for the youth, and to say that they, who may have still a longer period of life to live, if longer life to live means that everybody is guaranteed something to 60 and beyond, and that possibly they have 20 or 30 years to go, and that some of us who are in the late 40s or in the early 50s, we may have only ten or 20 years to go.  But I think that logic is only important to the extent that however short a period you live in your country, you want to live in happiness. Some of us are old enough to remember the British days. Young as we were, we also saw Obote I in the 60s, we saw Amin, we went to exile and came back.  We in the 60s were speaking like hon. Obedmoth. I was a student in Makerere when the coup took place, I was the President of NUSU at one time. Colleagues who are now in Government, we were together at that time, including President Museveni who were contemporaries - the Amanyas, the Rugundas, the Amama Mbabazis - these are the people who at that time were speaking like Obedmoth and Naome are speaking today.   

Our hope at that time was however shattered, but we have not yet given up.  But what annoys me, Mr. Speaker, is that some of us who were speaking like Obedmoth is doing today, are the same ones who are instrumental in possibly failing to shape the future of this Country properly, and to see that what we went through in the past never occurs again. Let me however remind this House on a few constitutional provisions and a few constitutional responsibilities we have by quoting a few articles in the Constitution.  

I start, Mr. Speaker, by quoting Article 117, and this is really to respond to what the first contributor, hon. Pinto, said.  Article 117 reads: "Ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their Ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet."   I want to remind this House that the concept of collective responsibility which some of you are thinking either in the British sense or in other Commonwealth sense of collective responsibility and accountability to the House, may not be what is considered here, but I do not want to go into that debate now.  
I want to say that the first accountability of a Minister is to the President and that the Ministers are collectively responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet - that is a very important provision we have.  Now, this is important because we are going to ask in this House as is conceived in Article 118 - the power of censorship - that Parliament now can move against the Ministers individually, although Ministers are individually accountable to the appointing authority, the President, but collectively accountable.  Now, if this is the case, then I also ask this House, Mr. Speaker, to look at Article 111. In Article 111 we are talking of the Cabinet and in that responsibility of the Cabinet, we are saying: " There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice President and such number of Ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State. The functions of the State shall be to determine ..."  

This, Mr. Speaker, must be read together with Article 99.  In Article 99, this is the crux of the matter, because the House has got to decide how we move. In Article 99(1) it says: "The Executive Authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda," and then it says in sub article (4), "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the functions confered on the President by clause (1) of this Article may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers subordinate to the President.", including the Ministers.  Mr. Speaker, my argument is that these are the executive functions conferred upon the elected President by the Constitution. All these people on the Front Bench were never elected to be Ministers; none of them.  But the President was elected as the Executive - not even the Vice President was elected as a Vice President - she was appointed by the President. So, in other words, the President cannot be spared the blame in the misuse and in the misconduct of his Ministers. The high time has come for the President to realise that in surrounding himself with Ministers who are not properly effecting Government policies, and by the President allowing and not taking good and timely decisions, the President is fettering his powers; his powers are being eaten and we are now going to point a finger not just at the Ministers, but at the President, and this is a constitutional matter.

May I conclude this contribution by drawing the attention of the House to Article 155 (1).  You know when the President starts saying, 'this one is my cousin', he is just undermining himself.  When you look at Article 155 (1), it says: " The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year ...",  this is a financial provision. Even the budget of the Country, it is supposed to be laid before this House and the President is allowed to delegate it.  The Constitution, even for financial purposes is looking at the President - it does not say 'the Minister of Finance', this is the President. However, it says, the President can delegate and so on. In Article 164 which deals with accountability, Mr. Speaker, Article 164 is dealing with finances under the Auditor General. It says: " The Permanent Secretary or the accounting Officer in charge of a Ministry or Department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that Ministry..." This is very important for those who are saying, what should be the sanctions? (2) says: " Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from the use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she ceased to hold that office".  Under the Constitution, you still have - even if you resign - this Parliament must move and ensure that you refund all that money.  One Minister said - he was talking of certain things which were too deep - even if it means really moving against his personal properties, his accounts and so on, he has to make good the loss once we determine that so much loss has occured. It is not talking of the money which you have taken and benefitted from, it is talking about the loss you have caused.  It is the loss which we are talking about, and if we determine that you have caused this Country a loss of so much amount of money, you have been stupid enough to sign a contract and in return like most African leaders do, you get a second hand Benz in exchange for 6 million dollars and you sit behind - sometimes they do very cheap exchange for whatever corruption.  They give these foreigners money and in exchange just a small one per cent out of so much is given to them. Still you have caused the Country loss and constitutionally we shall move.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds. These are constitutional responsibilities, and I would like you to really acquaint yourself with all these provisions so that when we are moving to save this Country from any wreckage, we know what we are doing.  

I would like very briefly because of time and other Colleagues who want to speak, to delve into how we can fight corruption.  I really want my Colleagues to hear this and the Country to know, that you will never eliminate corruption in any society - never.  Not even in your own house, with your houseboy, housegirl, your children. Something will go wrong. But the issue is that once a society decides to fight this corruption, corruption shall always be in society. What is important is the determination of society to fight it. You will never have a corruption-free society, not in Belgium, not in America, not in Japan, not in Britain, with all their democracies. But in those countries, when you are caught, it does not matter whether you are a former President, whether you are what, you will face the law and I think this is really what we, in this House, and the country should determine. We should determine to fight corruption and those who are caught should face the law and that is it.

I have about four or five ideas, that if you want to fight corruption, make corruption totally dangerous and unattractive.  Secondly, remove political instability and fear.  There is this fear among African leaders, people in responsible position, sometimes it is great, sometimes when you start seeing people banking too much money abroad, instead of even investing here. Because of the history these African countries have gone through, they say, if tomorrow I am not in power, what will happen?  The only solution is to democratize and democratize fully, and create a situation in which when you are out of power like Omara Atubo, you will not run away to a foreign country, but remain very happily in Otuke and move freely, without bodyguards and so on.  You will remain a cattle keeper if you want to be. So, politically we have got to address this issue, but unfortunately in this House, when you talk of politics, they are always saying they want to democratize. And then you start mixing issues between Multiparty and Movement System, which I think is absolutely wrong. We have got to be objective on this issue and see how much we can create a situation in which instability is removed, fear is removed, and people who are going in for corruption go in knowing very well that the law will face them.  
Of course you have to create checks and balances and institutions, which we have done. Allow political competition for power. I do not want to go into this too much. In this competition - this is statistics, but I have not come with it here, which shows that in countries which have monolithic systems which tend to deteriorate, corruption is higher, and I think we have got to address this issue, that when we liberalise the economy, and we fail to democratize our political system, does it have a negative effect on the economy?  Can we, by democratizing our politics, allow a situation in which we have better checks and balances in our society?  

Finally -(Interruptions)

DR. NKUUHE: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, corruption is normally given in social terms.  But there is a mathematical formula.  There is a document here which shows corruption in mathematical terms; it gives a mathematical formula to define corruption.  c = m + d - a; whereby c is corruption and m is the monopoly of power; d is discretion and a is accountability.  In other words, corruption is equal to monopoly of power plus discretion take away accountability (Laughter).

MISS. KIRASO: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the hon. Member on the Floor who is saying that monolithic Governments always suffer this kind of thing.  Because I would like to put a system on one side and a Government on another.  Are you trying to exonerate the individuals and blame this corruption on a system of governance?  I would like to be clarified.  Because we are addressing the issue of the individuals who are working in the system.  In other words, we are talking about the Government, not the Movement kind of politics being bad or accelerating or even bringing about corruption.  That is my problem.  I think it can even happen in multi-partyism, if the individuals who are serving in that Government are not proper.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, honestly, to me, the argument is simple.  It is the political system which makes a Government.  From a political system, like the Movement System, you have created these Governments and the Movement System is monolithic.  You have created a Government through non-competitive politics and therefore, you do not have an alternative competition in which people can come and expose, and ordinary people can say, this is an alternative Government in waiting.  Just like you can say, what creates Clinton's Government? What system creates a Government in Britain?  What system created the Military Government? What system created a Government in Indonesia?  Now, once the system creates the Government, then you have got the political base from which to operate.  In Uganda today, the Movement Political System is not democratic enough to allow for the competitive politics which in itself is a way of fighting corruption, and the formula has been given here -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, the problem you are going to have is that these Members are just asking questions about what is going on.  Then they are going to ask you, are we not doing so?  Proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, let me conclude my remark by admonishing this House and those in Government, one, to watch very carefully against foreign interests and other new colonialist interests which would like to dominate African Countries, using these other forms of privatization, liberalisation and so on.  If you look at the beneficiaries - take the total amount of money which we have lost in this Report, you will be surprised to find, Mr. Speaker, that most of it has gone outside Uganda.  I would be very happy if this money actually was pocketed by my Colleagues and was used to develop their home areas.  At least it would have helped us.  But Mr. Speaker, it is an extreme position, but it is unfortunate that even this money which we are talking about has not benefited even those who are being suspected; the money has run out of this country and it has been a great loss.

Finally, we have heard about the Movement coming to this country for a fundamental change.  I am one of those who joined the Movement for a fundamental change, and I participated in it for a fundamental change and I am still in this House in my individual capacity and elected on merit, and on a very big merit by the way, from my constituency, because I want this country to be better than when I found it.  I do not want my children to face what I went through in the 1960s, 70s and 80s.
The opportunity is not yet lost. What we have before us is an opportunity to correct the situation. What really happened when the fundamental change was born, when people welcomed it on the 26th of January 1986, it was like a new born baby welcomed on that day.  All people welcome a new born baby when it is born, but after some years, you start seeing the true nature of that new born baby, and this baby is now about 12 years or so old.  The people of Uganda should now move from celebrating a fundamental change to celebrating a fundamental reality.  We know now what the Movement is, how good or bad it is, how we can correct it and how we can save this country from sinking into deeper and deeper water which will destroy us all and we are not going to allow it.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ABDULLATIF WANGUBO (Bunya West, Iganga):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for having done a good job, a job that has all along been awaited in this country. Handling of the divestiture programme had been marred by what appears to be Government common responsibility under the heading 'corruption'. We have had on a number of occasions complaints from all over about corruption.  Unfortunately, the top executives of this Government have always said, they failed to act for lack of evidence.  Just when this sitting this afternoon had just started, Her Excellency, the Vice President, told us that the Government does not condone corruption, neither does it condone collective responsibility in that respect.  His Excellency, the President, at the beginning of this session did say that he had not acted because he had never had evidence; this time, we are blessed by the Committee to have given us what appears to be good evidence in that line of corruption. One therefore wonders what is likely to happen. Are we assured that Government his time will act?

In accordance with the Presidential directive of 4th January 1995, the EDP is implemented under the following operational structure.
1,  That the parastatal monitoring unit which monitors financial flows to and from public enterprises;
2.   That the privatisation unit handles all matters related to divestiture and that line Ministries play a key role in the divestiture and reform of public enterprises.  This is both at policy making level, whereby the line Ministry is a co-opted member of DRIC, and in the implementation, that there are technical working groups comprised of officials from EDP the line Ministry, Solicitor General's office and the enterprise itself. Now, one wonders what has happened, if such corruption is now coming up, is being found out by the Select Committee when all these have been participating in the process.  Must we now say all these have been corrupt or have they been silenced by the powers that be?  This now goes to query the statement made by the Vice President, that collective responsibility in this respect is not condoned.  What has happened?  Where have all these players been when such corruption has been going on? 

Finally, in that line, according to the Presidential directive, he says, the Minister of State for Finance (Privatisation) is the responsible Minister for the operations of privatisation as stipulated in the PERD Statute.  Now, what has the Minister in charge got to tell us?  Does he want to tell us that he is not aware of what has been happening until now that the Select Committee brings it out?  If he is aware, then what has he done? 
Mr. Speaker, in an interview of Mr. Gerald Ssendaula, the Minister of Finance, by the Focus Paper, there is a question that was asked regarding the divestiture programme. "Are these enterprises being sold at optimum price?"  Then he answers, " It is a debatable point. We have used professionals to carry out proper valuations and advised us on pricing. In the end, the final price accepted represents the market price.  All privatisation has so far been conducted on an open bidding basis with the enterprises being sold to the highest bidder."  Is this what we are getting hon. Members?  Should we say that in that respect, the hon. Minister of Finance, hon. Gerald Ssendaula, was only trying to cover up?  Was he answering just to give a window show to the public? 

The Committee in its findings on page 23, noted that contrary to the PERD Statute, the then Minister of Works, Transport and Communications and the CA went ahead to privatise Uganda Airlines Ground Handling assets. This was a deliberate breach for which the Minister of Works should be answerable. Then on page 33, the Committee gives us the bids that were given, Ernest and Young gives US$5 million plus, DFCU gives 5 million, Deloittee and Touche gives 3.3 and that is the lowest, which surprisingly is considered and it is taken for a price, yet the Minister of Finance, says, enterprises are sold to the highest bid. Now, which is which?  Should we say then these are condoning corruption or should we say they were unhappy with the highest bid?  Why were they motivated to take up the lowest?

Mr. Tsomgen some time back was relieved of his duties as Inspector General of Police, just because his constables or one of his constables shot and killed two students at Makerere. That was assumed to have taken as a responsibility for which he was answerable, not that he shot the students, not that he was there to command, but because he headed the department, that is the security organ that did kill the students.  What do we have to show for a whole Minister who is responsible for privatisation, which privatisation has been marred to that extent as has been given?

Bank of Uganda has taken up steps in taking over the management of Greenland Bank.  This, we should assume is a step in the right direction to salvage the situation from getting worse, but Mr. Speaker, nothing has been mentioned about U.C.B.  It is UCB that is being stripped, it is UCB that is being vandalised, and nothing is being said about it; it has been left to continue while another bank is being taken over. Can we know what is at stake?  

There is rampant talk all over that Major Salim Saleh is being witch hunted by Parliament. To those that do not know what is inside the story, it is witch hunting, to those that have read this story and to those that would appreciate the confession that has been made by the Major General, there is something to talk about. Can we have a public statement, at least from the Minister of Finance to the public, to tell us what is actually happening, so that the public is not misinformed, so that the public does not take this Parliament as witch hunting.

The divestiture report that is given every after six months, gives the names of the buyers and the enterprises divested.  Following what was revealed in the report, of companies changing names but being taken by the same people, I would want to propose, Mr. Speaker, that in future, the release should indicate the names of the proprietors of such companies that take over the divested companies, so that we get to know who is actually taking up what.  Otherwise, we may end up getting all the economy into just a few hands and therefore, enlarging the gap between the rich and the poor.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to appeal to this House to adopt the report that has been presented to us in its entirety, so that we get something done on the ground.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noted those who wanted to speak, and their names have been recorded. We have sat here for over four hours and I think it is an appropriate time to adjourn the debate. The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2. 00 p.m. sharp, to continue with the debate.

(The House rose and adjourned until 2.00 p.m. on Thursday, 10th December, 1998).
