
Wednesday, 6 December 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliament Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, I also rise to support the Motion.  Mr Chairman, this one is a very important matter to prove where we are still one Parliament since we started here in 1989.  Most of things took place here when we were together.  I am surprised today when we were coming almost near to the end, we are trying to be divided.  Yesterday, what was being put here surprised me a lot for one thing.  Nobody was able to tell us who was the person affected so that we all know.  Nobody could say that this one is good or bad.  I think we should be honest.  I do not know why we are divided.  I think for heaven’s sake, people are waiting for the Electoral Law very much more than even this one.  So, I think even if we bring all our Brothers here, they may not do the same job.  I am appealing, Mr Chairman, to this House that let us not divide this Committee.  Let us work like the CA then.  We did not have any problem with the CA.

What is rigging by the way?  Rigging means you are not known somewhere.  But if people need you, you will not fail elections.  So, I am appealing to the hon. members that let us finish these small things and then wait for the major ones, thus, the Electoral Law which people are waiting for.

MR MORO BENJAMIN (Koboko County, Arua):  Mr Chairman, I would like to stand here and support the Motion.  I was a bit disturbed yesterday when I heard our Colleagues exchanging different views.  It appears there were two groups.  One group saying this, and another group saying that.  While in fate, we have come to work for the good of the country and the future of our young generations to come.  One time I heard you somewhere when you stated that some Members of the Movement think that they are more Members of the Movement than others when the true fact is all Members are equal.  They are Members of the same Movement.  If I heard you correctly, I thought that was the correct line that we should take.  I do not know how human beings can forget so easily.  I only know of one animal that can easily forget.  How it is that we in this hon. House cannot really recall our past where there was a lot of suffering; where many people lost their lives?  Others could not get jobs because they were discriminated.  We had a long history of this country.  

I think that is why in 1980/81 one person, the group of his followers decided to go into the bush to fight a war where he thought he could put things which went wrong or right.  But when I hear to these talks of ours, which started towards the end of CA, I feel really very sorry.  This group of people went to the bush, they fought a war of the people they did not harass, the civilians like other people.  They brought the civilians closer to them, and I think the civilians were dying from where there were enemies.  They treated the civilians like their brothers or their sisters.  Unlike other groups, when they go to the bush instead of coming to fight for the people, they fight for themselves.  They beat the people, they rape the women, they defile children of girls, they cut off the noses of the people and ears too.  Mr Chairman, do you think such people are fighting for the cause of the people?  

To me, I say, no.  Such hostile people do not fight for the right of the people.  Now, when these young men fought for the five years, they came out with a problem.  It is a Ten Point Programme.  Unfortunately, my Friend Butele is not here, the expert of the Ten Point Programme. (Laughter)  

The Ten Point Programme was to put right what had gone wrong.  I am very happy when the NRM came to power and brought people together and started organising elections.  In 1989 elections were organised.  These were a Movement type, whether you were a UPC, DP, UPM, CP, or without a party, you came together.  There was no fighting, there were no threats, and there were no youth wingers with sticks to chase enemies.  Things went very, very smoothly.  But I started seeing the signs.  In the CA, there was a bit of confusion.  I hope in our next elections such kind of things should not happen.  We must be one.  Our President has told and has shown practically how we should go together.  That is why he collected all the forces; Moses Ali’s forces, Amin Onzi’s forces; Alai’s forces and the rest.

MR AMIN ONZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give information.  I am trying to say that there somebody was uniting people and indeed it was not only the forces.  The President tried to unite all the other forces politically.  If we have a very good Commission headed by a very good person, things can be run smoothly.  I looked at the names selected on the list, in fact, even if we were to pass this yesterday, I knew exactly whom I could say, this and that.  Some are bankers.  If you are a banker, you only know how to deal with banks.  You cannot do administration or you cannot do politics.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend that, the basis on which this must have been selected is given in Article 62 of the Constitution.  It says, ‘people among other things who have experience in public affairs,’ and I think bankers could easily fall in that class. 

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information.  But he says, experience.  Experience is derived out of many mistakes.  You make so many mistakes, then you become experienced.  So, I am appealing to us that the Movement must be seen as the Movement of the people.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Motion.  It has been long overdue.  People had reached an extent of wondering what the government had really promised from the beginning.  Either it was serious or not.  This is one of the indicators to show the people that government is committed on what it had promised.  I would not want to see a situation whereby somebody is delaying such an exercise.  This Electoral Commission needs ample time.  We do not want to have an experience of where by what happened in the CA some places the registers were not exposed to the parishes, in some places the voting cards reached very late.  We should give these people ample time to set up their office and arrange everything to be in place so that at the end of the day, we ourselves do not blame them that anything is missing yet we are the people who have delayed the exercise.

Mr Chairman, if I come to the names which were selected, to me the criteria which was used for number one and two, if it is the same criteria which was used for the rest of the names, then I stand to support all the names.  These are the people whom I have no question mark and from the past records and what they have been doing, it is a clear example that even those people who selected them were serious on the exercise that is going to be done.  I would not like to see a situation whereby we are creating this unnecessary delay of saying we need extra days of consultations.  Let me just give an example, we have been passing here Bills.  Bills can be given to us for almost a month or two.  But Members at times take them and when it comes debate, he looks at it as if he has just received it.  In fact, this business of saying that I am taking the names for consultation, we ask ourselves what nature of consultation.  

Mr Chairman, I stood to support the Motion and to show my great support that I do not want to waste more time.  We should embrace these names and set the ball rolling.  Thank you.

MRS WAFAANA MASABA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Motion.  Mr Chairman, the democratic principles have been set in Motion.  They should not be derailed.   We sat here and extended our lives for sometime.  The ‘wanainchi’ have not forgiven us yet.  Today, the Constitution has been promulgated.  Nobody has challenged it.  Now, it is our business to see what we set the ball rolling by having an Electoral Commission elected.  all of us or rather the majority participated in the CA elections.  Nobody can say he or she does not know Commissioner Akabway.  I think he tried because that was the first time we ever had a Commissioner who managed this CA elections.  I am sure Mr Akabway knows what went wrong.  He is ready to perfect it and I support him.  

When you look at Chapter 5, Clause 60, it says that, a person holding any of the following offices shall relinquish his or her position in the office of appointment.  some people have expressed fears but the law is very clear.  If hon. Nkurukenda, hon. Kasujja, are going to accept the appointment, the law is very clear.  They are not supposed to participate in Parliament or even in Local Councils.  So, I do not see why Members should worry.  As for the women, I know quite a number of them because I have met them in various women organisations.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS LAGADA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support this Motion.  Unfortunately, I was engaged up in Lira in some function, so I was not here when this Motion was debated.  But I read in the Papers, what the papers reported, and I must say from the little I could gather from the press, I found the objections which were raised not really acceptable.  I have looked at the list of these names, I can say that at least of these seven, I know five of them and I am satisfied that they are people of integrity, that they are people who qualify to be on this Commission.  Therefore, I have no reason to doubt the other people that I do not know.  I want to say that when you have names, which have been proposed, definitely one person or another is going to be unhappy.  But I would think that our last experience of the C.A should benefit this House.  

So, I would urge the hon. colleagues here that we go ahead and approve these names and allow Uganda to go ahead into the electoral process.  I am sure all us know that the country is really anxious to see that elections take place in the stipulated time.  The longer we delay with these names for various reasons, the more we hold up the process and then when the time comes, these people will have a very short time to put a proper machinery and we shall be the same people complaining they have not done a good job.  We should be doing our country this service, to hold up this process any longer.  

With those few words, I urge people that, let us pass these names as they are and let us proceed with serious business.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Mr Chairman, I support this Motion. (Inaudible)- it is waiting for these people to start work.  These people have to put in place the Civic Educators who are going to educate all Ugandans so that they vote wisely.  These very people have to put in place the returning officers, the presiding officers.  From the experience of CA, many of us complained of these three officers, thus the Civil Educators, the Returning Officers and the Presiding Officers.  Now, if we delay approval of these people, then we are delaying everything.  We are taking Ugandans at our own interest individually.  People have alleged here on some of the names.  There is none who has come up to prove that these allegations are true.  People have said, somebody is on the Presidential Campaigning Team; which one?  Can you give evidence?  There is no proof.  My hon. Sister has already quoted a constitution, which says ‘Anybody who takes up appointment on this Commission will relinquish his or her post which she or he is holding right now.’  If we are looking for non-politicians, where shall we get them?  Who is not a politician in this world?  Even those lining behind me or support me are politicians.  I do not see why Members want to delay, yet the Constitution says, after the promulgation of the constitution, this present government is given nine months.  We are already not counting nine months.  We are less by two.  Where is the time?  I know some people are thinking of a Select Committee.  But we know how Select Committees of this House work.  We shall say one week, it will end up in one month, and by one month, we are saying already we have seven months.  So, I am urging the hon. Members in this august House not to delay any more but to approve the list of these people.  Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I want also to join my colleagues in supporting this Motion.  I know and wherever I moved, most of the people are in the moods for elections.  I do not see any reason why we should continue wasting more time debating this.  Definitely for the time we were asking to consult, I believe we have consulted enough and whoever has evidence is free to tell now or never.  I have seen even from the young ones when they look at may be portraits for the President or the politicians, some of them have to make a choice and with that, I know that every person is a political animal.  So, when people come and say that we have to screen and then get those who are neutral, I believe in Uganda we do not have that technology which we can use to see the inside of the person and prove that that person is neutral.  So, with those few remarks, I would suggest that may be we vote.  Thank you.

MR KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Motion.  First of all, I would like to recognise that this country has moved far in the process of democratisation.  I believe, since the NRM came to power, although some mistakes have been made, the government and the Movement including this House have moved steadily and fastly in refining and defining democracy in this country.  It is for this and other reasons that this country is respected all over the world.  I want to suggest that it is true that, this House has contributed to respect that the world give to this country in the process of democratisation.  The creation of the Commission, is yet another step towards conclusion of democratisation of this country.

I have listened to the debate very carefully.  Two positions have stood our clearly. The first one is the method by which the names of the Commission introduced in this House.  The second one is the lack of consultation.  It can be dangerous to overdo things.  The impression I get sometimes is that when I am not consulted, then nobody has visited me; that can be dangerous.  I believe, quite a lot of consultations have gone on in process into the seven names also that have come in to this House.  That is why it is not surprising that there are names that people expected to be on this list and they were not.  The Monitor told us this morning that they printed the list and that list is not very different from the list we have here.  So, if any Member of this House was interested in what was going on, surely what prevented him research those names? (Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE:  I am sure for her to head that finance department there, she must be great, and I can assure you if she is given the task of managing the finances of the Electoral Commission which I believe she will take, she will do a good job!  So, that is somebody.  

So, when it comes to regions, please hon. Members, we have so many regions and so few places to fit in the regions.  Now, we certainly cannot get North, East, what and then we get seven; as long as there is somebody whom you think will do a good job - after all we are not putting there to elect people.  They are not going to participate in the election but they are going to organise our elections and I am sure they will do a very good job.  

I would like to request hon. Members, since yesterday you were given the opportunity to consult, I believe many of us were on the telephone, you know, consulting - that is why you see the House is now very ready to support the Motion.  Because our expectations are filled by the way you conducted this meeting by adjourning tomorrow, and today, we are debating, and I believe and I have no hesitation in inviting the hon. members to really join me in supporting this Motion so that if need be, we even go through it today - I can assure you, you people who are intending to contest election, we would like to see these things go through quickly, we are tired -(Laughter)- the fundraisings are all over the place, the whatever, the tension, the pressure and all this kind of thing!  

The sooner, Mr Chairman and hon. members, we support this Motion, for me I know five people on this - Mr Kasujja is certainly a wonderful man, I worked with him in my Committee on the Commission; we wrote almost, I do not how many chapters, three of us with hon. Serwanga.  So, I have no doubts in my mind that he will execute the same job in the same style.  The two whom I do not know, I believe will be like the others, because why should be the wrong ones joining the good team of five?  So, I have no hesitation in supporting this Motion, supporting all the Members, and I invite you all hon. Colleagues - very soon we shall like these people like we did like all these people who were there.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Mover to wind up.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I would start, Sir, by thanking you as Chairman for the way you have handled this House, not only on this occasion, but ever since you took over the challenges of chairing this august Assembly. (Applause)  Having said that, Sir, I now want to thank all the Members of this House who have contributed to this Motion on either side.  I saw a spirit of openness, which is very, very important in our interim administration, and I saw a spirit of wanting to reconcile and we come together and come to a decision which we think and convinced is good for our country today and tomorrow.  I thank you, hon. Members.

Mr Chairman, I will be brief, I will only repeat that exhaustive consultations were carried on in this area, it has been a matter that has been going on for several months, and therefore, the products of this consultation as a process is the team we put together and the team we presented to this hon. House with a request to approve convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that it will not do a good job, it will definitely do a fantastic job as long as they work as a team which I think every Ugandan in a position of responsibility must now learn to cherish.

There was a call that once the Commission is set up, it should be adequately facilitated.  I want to assure hon. members that government intends to give full facilitation to this team so that they do the job the whole country and the rest of the international community expect them to do, and in any case, Sir, it is now a constitutional obligation that this Commission must be adequately facilitated.  

I will just say two or three words on this scare of a criminal case hanging over any of the seven members.  I only want to assure the House, as I did yesterday, that thorough research has been done in this area and there is not a single criminal charge handing over the next of any of the seven members that are being proposed to be put on the Electoral Commission.  About any one of them being on a presidential campaigning team for one of the intending candidates, I must say, Sir, through my interaction with each and everyone of these members, I have found out that none of them is on any of these teams. So, the fear must be imaginary.  


About the procedure, I must say, it was not government’s intention that we should politically ambush hon. Members.  But as I said, if yesterday there was that likelihood, the way you handled the exercise, I think has gone a long way to prove that it was only the desire to do the job quickly in order to be able to meet the time we set for the next election; that the guiding principle behind the speed with which the Motion was introduced, there was not any ulterior motive on the part of government.  

Lastly, there was this question of whether these people meet the qualifications set in the law.  I repeat, Sir, that they do meet these requirements.  If we mentioned anybody as a banker, it was only in addition to his having satisfied all the requirements of the law.

With these few words, Sir, I beg to move that this House does its historical duty and gives its unqualified approval to the team we have presented to it so that they can get on with the job that is waiting.  I thank you, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, two years ago in the 1993/94 Budget, I first announced the government’s intention to move to the Value Added Tax system.  I did elaborate further on this in my budget speech for 1994/95 and 1995/96.  Today, I am happy to present our VAT Bill, which sets out in detail the VAT arrangements for the country.

The decision to switch to VAT system in Uganda was made only after very detailed and careful consideration.  You know very well that VAT has become well established throughout the world. It is therefore, a well-tried and tested system.  You also know that it has delivered good results in less developed countries.  Government here has taken the view that VAT will compliment our other economic reform efforts very well.  We are satisfied that it will serve the needs of business community much better; it is equally important that it will improve our revenue collection efforts.  As hon. Members of this House already will appreciate, government revenues in Uganda are very law in relation to the GDP, and this is sadly true even if you take developing countries as a basis for comparison.  

Although we have made dramatic progress in this regard over the past five years, we are still a long way from optimum revenue significantly to a better revenue performance.  But now, Sir, what is VAT?  The VAT is a multi-stage tax, which applied to the value added to buy an enterprise in the production of a commodity.  This is achieved by applying the tax to all basis or outputs and giving credit to the taxpayer for all the taxes paid on purchase or raw materials or inputs.  The difference represents the tax payable on the value added by the enterprise.  In this respect, VAT is very different from sales tax or the CTL which are single stage taxes.  In addition, the sales tax is levied at the factory gate for domestic production and at the border for imports; with result that value added after factory or after the border does not form part of the tax base.  Under VAT, it is essential to bring whole sale and large retail enterprises onto the tax net, provided they need specified criteria especially the registration requirement described in Section 8 of the VAT Bill.  In this way, VAT will apply to value added after the factory gate and after goods have been imported.  The need to improve revenue performance in Uganda is especially important for two major reasons.  First, we must reduce our present heavy dependency on donor assistance; this is particularly important for the recurrent obligations of government.  We must quickly reach a stage where recurrent revenues are sufficient to meet recurrent expenditure obligations of the state.  

Equally important we need to increase available resources to improve the quality and increase the quantity of our public services in areas like health, education and infrastructure are inadequate.  Many of you are constantly reminding us of this fact, and are pressing strongly for better and more services.  We simply cannot satisfy this reasonable demand unless there are available resources, and to generate resources, you cannot escape the reality that tax revenues must increase.  This highlight the critical role of revenue collection; the move from sales tax to CTL and CTL to VAT, therefore, is targeted to produce a much more effective revenue collection results.  I must emphasise here, Sir, that although VAT is a new tax, it is not an additions tax.  The VAT system in Uganda will replace sales tax and commercial transactions levy.  In this years budget, sales tax and CTL are expected to yield UShs 171 billion and UShs 23 billion respectively.  With VAT due to replace these two taxes in July 1996, VAT revenue will start to flow replacing sales tax and CTL as sources of revenue.

Now, let me, Sir, at this point briefly highlight the main advantages of adopting this system.  Firstly, to avoid the problem of cascading taxes, that is to say, paying taxes more than once on the same goods and services between the producer and final consumer.  Under the present sales tax and CTL, it frequently happens that taxes paid to various stages as goods move from the producer or importer to the final consumer.  The input credit, that is to say, the tax to manufacturers and businesses you have in the Bill which will allow system will always ensure that tax is paid only once on goods and services.  Secondly, the VAT system puts greater emphasis on better bookkeeping and accounts.  For business of every kind.

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Minister introducing the Bill that I am finding it difficult to understand what he is saying, I do not know whether the problem is biological or technological.  I am not understanding what he is saying.  

MR MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr Chairman, if the Mover is saying that I am not speaking loudly enough that I can try to shout, if he is talking about technology, I am sorry, I cannot help.

Secondly, the VAT system put great emphasis on better bookkeeping and accounts.  For business of every kind, small and better bookkeeping is an essential pre-requisite of better management.  The VAT process should; therefore, help to improve the quality of business accounting and this in turn must facilitate better business management and profitability.  Thirdly, from the revenue viewpoint, VAT provides a better internal verification system.  This happens because input credits or refunds claimed in one business should normally correspond with VAT charges or payments made in another business or enterprise.  This provides revenue authority with a basis for cross checking the VAT returns made by any registered enterprises.  Now turning to the Bill itself, the main features of the VAT itself as proposed in VAT Bill I am representing today are as follows:  Firstly, the emphasis is on keeping the system as simple as possible.  This is important for administration purposes, but is also vital to facilitate better and easier compliance by the business community who will be operationally responsible as collectors of the VAT tax.  We propose to have only two rates of VAT, a zero rate and a single positive rate.  The zero rated supplies are listed in Schedule 3 of the Bill.  These include exports, some essential foods, medical goods, educational supplies and important agricultural inputs such as seeds and fertilisers.  By have a zero rate for VAT purposes, the effect is that there should be no tax included in the final price of a supply or a commodity.  All other taxable supplies will be subject to one positive VAT rate.  Section 82 of the Bill deals with the issue of our single positive rate.  The important point to note here is that this is not yet decided; we cannot finalise this until we get into our detailed preparation of the 1996/97 budget.  However, I should say that we will decide and announce it well in advance of the VAT commencement date.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you will recognise that these statements I am now making are being called for by prudence on the part of any Finance Minister in advance of the specific budget, but it is not intended to impose any greater burden through VAT system than a systems of Sales Tax and CTL would call for in specific economic circumstances of July 1996 or thereafter.  Schedule 2 of the Bill proposes a long list of exempt supplies from the VAT mode of tax; the most important being livestock, unprocessed food stuffs, financial services, medical and educational services, passenger transport services, petroleum, fuel and land transactions.  

Well, I cannot go into the technical details here but I must emphasise hon. members that an exempt supply from VAT purposes has a distinct and precise meaning.  Unlike a zero rated supply, for example, an exempt supply is not necessarily totally free from VAT.  Persons making only exempt supplies will not be required to register for VAT purposes, which means they will not charge VAT on the supplies, but they will get no relief from VAT on their business inputs.  In this respect, the VAT system is very different from our previous arrangements under the Sales Tax and CTL; that is to say, there are the incidences on the tax will be different.  The Bill is also proposing registration - a VAT registration threshold of UShs 20 million per annum as turn over for a business.  This is an important issue of VAT administration purposes.  Once a person is making taxable supplies about the threshold of 20 million shillings, he must register from URA for VAT purposes, and here, Sir, ‘he’ includes ‘she’.  

In proposing this threshold, we have decided to exclude all small retailers who are mainly part of the informal sector, from scope of the VAT system.  A registered person must make regular or monthly returns for VAT purposes in which he will report the VAT collected on sales and so the VAT she or he has paid on his or her raw materials.  The difference will normally represent his monthly payments of the VAT to the Uganda Revenue Authority.  For the 1996/97 budget, my intention is that VAT will be introduced next July on revenue neutral basis, that is to say, I will aim for a revenue yield must the same as from Sales Tax and CTL making the allowance for normal buoyancy.  

On this assumption the change to VAT will not have overall adverse price effect; there may be small changes for certain goods and services, for example, some goods must reduce in price because our present 30 per cent Sales Tax rate will be a much lower VAT rate, rather we are going to reduce the sales tax from 30 percent, it is now to a VAT rate which is much lower than 30 per cent.  This is a clear dividend to the taxpayer.  Now, concerning information and publicity; hon. Members should already have observed that the publicity and information campaign for VAT has been underway for sometime.  This effort has been a little handicapped without having the legislation in place.  Obviously the information and education campaign has more meaning and substance if it is based on an existing legislation.  For this reason, consider enactment of this Bill quickly to be an essential ingredient for the success transition to VAT system.

Finally, Sir, I would like here to refer briefly to recent experience Ghana.  Ghana had to abandon the VAT soon after it was introduced there earlier this year.  A delegation from Uganda which was led by hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, Minister of State for Finance and Planning, included representatives of both, our private and public sectors; very recently visited Ghana and studied the experience of Ghana.  We are fully satisfied that the circumstances of Ghana, including the micro-economic environment are totally different from ours, and my of the key factors causing their VAT to collapse are not relevant for us.  

Besides our preparations are more thorough and intensive; our legislation is ready in good time, and we believe that our sensitisation of the public and consultations with private sector are much better.  Government is fully committed to the merits of the system, is making the necessary investment to ensure that it will work well from the start.  With regard to the VAT as an essential reform which compliments well our other very substantial reforms in recent years.  But, the Government that is the executive and this house, the legislature, the two together lead in any reform, while the public or the citizens of Uganda engage and participate in the reform.  All this for the public good of our country.  The motives behind this very important Bill are honest and transport, and ameliorative effects of its provisions on the equitable distribution on the tax burden of the current system of the sales tax and CTL are there contained manifest.  I, therefore, commend this VAT Bill to this House.  Thank you very much, Sir.

MR OKELLO LUWUM (Chua County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have risen up to second and support the Motion which has been brought on the Floor by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning.

Before I go on to VAT itself, I just want to mention two things in regard to taxation.  One, is that I have received many complaints from hon. Members and I am sure the Committee on Privileges has also received many complaints from Members for the way the Uganda Revenue Authority has gone on to access even the allowances which they get, which according to me, I think, are not taxable because these are just re-imbursements for either mileage hon. Members have traveled to their constituencies or re-imbursement for expenses they have incurred in hotels, accommodations during sessions. (Applause) 

I am suggesting to the Committee on Privileges to call a meeting, so that we have a meeting with the Uganda Revenue Authority as soon as possible to iron out this confusion. (Applause)  

The second thing I want to talk about in regard to taxation is that yesterday, I had a bad experience at the URA offices at Nakawa, when I went there to pay my personal taxes, I was told that I cannot enjoy their current threshold which this House passed recently, the current threshold on income tax is UShs 1.3 million per annum; I was told that the Minister of Finance has not yet communicated this to the Uganda Revenue Authority, so they are not yet applying this -(Interruption)

MR MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr Chairman, I am staggered by the information.  Time and again, some of our - should I call them civil servants?  We make statements of policy in this House and they become law in this House, and there is some administrative piece of paper has not come to me!  I find this incredible, but the commissioner general is here, but of course, he is not allowed to speak here; but I am going to inquire and afterwards let you know, Sir.

MR OKELLO LUWUM:  I told you this so that - I think this is the right forum to tell you.  Mr Chairman, I consider this VAT Bill to be one of the most important Bills, which I think this House will pass during its lifetime.  This is yet another aspect of the structure road adjustment which the government introduced some years back; and this aspect of it is in the tax reform.  The tax reform so far has involved the setting up of the machinery to collect the taxes itself; that is the Uganda Revenue Authority.  Now, we are trying to arm the Uganda Revenue Authority with a different type of tax, which I hope will help them to collect more taxes.  

VAT is a multi-staged tax which taxes good and services at so many stages.  At these stages, the net taxes are paid to the Revenue Authority by registered traders, and it is really the final consumer who bears this tax although the tax is paid by registered traders at every stage, it is the final consumer who bears the tax.  It is, therefore, a system which generates a lot of tax; because the more stages goods and services pass through, the more tax is generated; and I think with this tax, the Revenue Authority will collect much more revenue than they have been collecting under the current sales tax regime and CTL regimes.  Mr Chairman, that is one of the advantages of the introduction of VAT which I have just talked about.  

The second advantage which has made me support this tax is that currently under the sales tax and the CTL regimes, when a good has been smuggled into the country, definitely they will not pay the sales tax and they will not pay even the CTL, and there you will find that the good or service has escaped taxation altogether.  But under the VAT since it is a multistage tax, even if the good has been smuggled into the country, since it is going to go through a number of stages in the distribution system, at one stage or another of the distribution system it has to be tax under the VAT law.  So, that is one of the advantages of the VAT.  

Another advantage of VAT is that it is really supposed to involve as many tax payers as possible, and thereby, it will widen the number of people paying tax in Uganda which is now very narrow at the moment; it will therefore, widen the taxation base, and here anybody who is manufacturing, because currently the manufacturers, especially through the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association, are complaining that they are bearing most of the tax burden in this country.  But with this tax since there are so many people now coming into tax brackets through VAT we hope that as many people as possible will now share in the payment of taxes.  

So, this should relieve the Uganda Manufacturer’s Association a bit, and I hope that the Minister of Finance when he starts collecting more revenue, may be, he could reduce the current taxes on manufacturers so that may be the money manufacturers are now paying in the form of taxes, they could use for other investments which could generate more employment in this country.  Because as hon. Members are aware, employment is a very big problem in this country and it is simply because there are no investible funds or there is little investment now to generate employment.  The other thing which, I think will come out from the introduction of VAT is record keeping by traders.  Many traders at the moment they just trade without keeping proper records; but under the VAT system traders who have been registered to pay VAT to keep proper records of the input tax they have paid and the output tax they have collected so that when it comes to making returns to the Uganda Revenue Authority they can get tax credits. Without that the Uganda Revenue Authority is not going to give the registered traders any tax credits under the VAT system.  

So, it is really in the interest of all these traders that they keep proper records; and these proper records, I believe, will also encourage many of our traders now to keep books of accounts for taxation purposes; and such records that are kept by such businessmen who are deceiving and sometimes under declaring their taxable income.  This will be possible now, because I think, the Uganda Revenue Authority or anybody who is training in finance and accountancy should be able to trace the correct taxable income from such records if they are kept.  We hope also that the cry about living wages, which civil servants are now crying for - not only civil servants, I am sure even hon. Members of this House, everybody, every public servant is really crying about the pay they are given for their sweat.  With more money collected, I think the government should be able to pay more money.  The only disadvantages of the VAT tax, but some of the disadvantages which I can think of is that as it has happened in some other countries, if the Minister of Finance becomes too - and imposes a high rate of tax than is normal, then prices are going to shoot wild in the country, and with the consequences, I do not know whether Ugandans are fond of rioting, but in other countries people riot, they can even destroy a lot of things because of wild price hikes, and it has happened in many countries.  So, the implementation for VAT is very crucial, the rate of tax should be reasonable.

The second thing is that - disadvantage of VAT system which I think nothing can be done about is that it taxes everybody, whether you are rich or poor across the board, and therefore, in relative terms the rich will not feel the pinch of the VAT tax as the poor man since they are taxed at the same rate.  The other thing I wanted to share with hon. Members is the question of whether it is possible to implement the VAT system in Uganda; it is possible?  Yes, I think it is possible to implement VAT in Uganda at the moment if the Minister of Finance chooses, as I said, the right rate of tax to be imposed on Ugandans, otherwise, if he does not do that prices will run wide.  The reason why I am saying that this is now the time to introduce this tax is because currently Uganda is enjoying a very stable economic environment, and this kind of environment has made sure that our prices here have also remained stable.  

Therefore, if VAT is introduced in Uganda there will be no external factors to - you know, to spoil the implementation of the VAT system.  Some of countries where VAT has failed is because VAT is introduced when external factors were not conducive.  You would find that may be inflation is high, the rate of exchange is not stable, it is running wild, may be fuel prices are also running wild.  So, there are so many external factors at play and VAT cannot, therefore, be introduced in that kind of atmosphere.  Uganda at the moment is enjoying, I think, just an inflation rate of less than ten per cent; in some of the countries where it has failed the rate of inflation was maybe over 40 per cent.  Our rate of exchange has also remained stable; thanks may be to the Bank of Uganda and may be the policies of the Minister of Finance.  Our fuel prices have also remained quite stable; you will find a minimal increase may be for UShs 20 or UShs 50 which is not much.  In some of these countries fuel has increased may be by over 50 percent or sometimes 60 per cent.  So, that kind of increase is very wide.  

Now, what should be done in order to have a smooth and successful implementation of VAT?  Now, one thing which comes to my mind is that education of traders, of the whole population is so important and crucial.  Let me commend the URA for all the efforts they have done so far, in the way they have been trying to pass the VAT message, through the Radio, through TV, posters and whatever, but they have been doing so under a framework of their own.  I think this law which if we discuss it here and pass, will now enable them to even, I think pursue this education with more confidence because now they will be confident of what they are talking about.  So, after the law, I expect the URA to intensify their education, maybe, they will organise course, maybe, first of all to train trainers because we should train as many people as possible to go out in the field and train traders.  The traders need to be trained if possible even on a day-to-day basis, how to compute VAT, because if traders are not trained on how to compute VAT the immediate thing which may happen is that when immediately VAT s introduced when a trader is pricing his goods, he will include VAT in the computation of the piece of his goods which should not happen, and the only people who can do this are people who can sit down with these traders and train them properly how to compute VAT first of all, and also how to price their gods in such a way that VAT is not included in the pricing of the goods, so that we do not have wild increase the moment VAT is introduced.  Because this can happen very easily!

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in support of the statement made by hon. Luwum, Chairman of our Committee on Finance, I think what URA should be doing is also much the types of educational programmes they are conducting countrywide; I think they should concentrate on training trainers and these trainers should conduct courses of the traders, as the chairman says, and their accounting staff so that the traders do understand what is involved in computing VAT and the people that really keep the records for these traders they should be the target groups, the traders and the accounting staff of the traders.  But I think what has happened is that URA has been putting on the radio, everybody comes there and all they do is to have some - I think, this is okay, for purposes of sensitisation, but at the end of the day if VAT is to succeed, these people must know the way VAT is computed.  So, I thought I better give that information.

MR OKELLO LUWUM:  I thank the Member for the information he has given to reinforce what I am saying.  For this matter, therefore, I think my investigations have so far indicated that the budget allocated to Uganda Revenue Authority for this kind of thing, that is advertising VAT, teaching VAT or training trainers, the budget is small and yet this is a very important matter.  I appeal to the Minister of Finance to see to it that the budget for this kind of thing is adequately increased so that the URA can carry out education, not only now but I think even stop during this period before the implementation, it is a continuous exercise.

I also would like, lastly, to appeal to hon. Members of this house who also includes Cabinet Ministers and Minister of Finance; I think we as leaders during this period we should not use this period merely just to campaign for our political survival, not merely that.  I appeal to hon. Members that during this time - because VAT is a very important Bill which is going to affect everybody in this country.  Therefore, hon. Members should see to it that they understand the VAT law very well and how it works.  Everybody should not make an effort to learn, you have been given more courses during this time so that you also become trainers, so that when you go to your constituency, you can talk to your people about VAT.  With these few words, Mr Chairman, thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 3.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 December 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

