Tuesday, 16 December 2003 

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO HONOUR DR PETER MUGYENYI, DIRECTOR JOINT CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTRE FOR HIS EXEMPLARY WORK IN THE FIGHT AGAINST HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC IN UGANDA

10.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr Kamanda Bataliganya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to honour Dr Peter Mugyenyi, Director Joint Clinical Research Centre, for the exemplary work in the fight against HIV/Aids Pandemic in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

DR BATALINGAYA: Madam Speaker, the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Uganda, which has been in existence for over 22 years, has done a lot of disaster to our nation. It is high time that this Seventh Parliament recognizes distinguished Ugandans who have endeavoured to work hard to fight the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Uganda.  

It is on this note, Madam Speaker, that I beg to move the motion for resolution of Parliament to honour Dr Peter Mugyenyi, the Director of Joint Clinical Research Centre, for his exemplary work in the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, Dr Peter Mugyenyi, to me, is a colleague. I have worked under him and I have known he has passed ranks and files of the medical profession. 

Dr Peter Mugyenyi has served as an Executive Director of the Joint Clinical Research Centre institution since 1992. This centre has provided excellent leadership in AIDS care, treatment research and prevention thus making a major contribution to a successful Uganda AIDS Control Programme.  

Madam Speaker, Dr Peter Mugyenyi is a consultant. He has held so many positions and has done a lot of work and research on HIV/AIDS. Our Research Centre, which he heads, is a unique centre in the region. It is on that basis that we have been able to fight HIV/AIDS, reducing it from 30 percent to about 6.7 percent as we talk now.  

Dr Mugyenyi has been able to fight and bring prevention, as I said, and care and treatment of HIV. He has managed to establish and successfully have Uganda be in partnership with other countries in Africa, other organizations and institutions in the world - in the US, Europe, Japan - in the fight against HIV/AIDS.  

Besides that, Dr Mugyenyi has been involved in the planning, review and execution of policies and projects on HIV/AIDS treatment and research, and also on HIV vaccine trials, access to drugs, poverty alleviation, policy formulation and communication. 

He has also been the principal investigator on a number of important projects funded by World Health Organization, NIH, Family Health International, European Community, Foundations and charitable organizations, among others.  

Dr Peter Mugyenyi has provided technical management expertise to the Minister of Health. He serves as Chairman of Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, a body that is charged with collection and distribution of safe blood throughout the country.  

Dr Mugyenyi is not only a chairman but he is also a board member of the Uganda Sciences and Technology Authority and chairs the Health Science Committee.  

Dr Mugyenyi as I earlier said, has done a lot of consultancy work, and as I told you he is a colleague of mine, a highly trained paediatrician. 

He has passed through all the rank and file, from a medical officer, senior medical officer, medical officer special group, and a consultant. He moves with a lot of demeanour as a clinician and as a researcher. In the medical profession to move through those ranks and go to the level of a researcher is not a simple thing. 

Madam Speaker, as I told you, Dr Peter Mugyenyi has done a lot of consultancy on HIV/AIDS. He carried out one on exploration in Africa, a project that covered the area of East and Central Africa. It was an in-depth study including describing factors that influence the epidemic, the scope, the problem and responses, programmes and gaps, and recommendations as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned. 

Another consultancy he has done on the HIV/AIDS is on care and treatment of AIDS. He has provided training in the management of HIV/AIDS including the treatment with this Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART), drug purchase logistics and scaling up to the districts, and organization of national programmes. That is not a simple achievement.  

He has also done consultancy on AIDS orphans. Under this he has been able to describe the problems of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS - their plight, how it impacts on the extended family and the community, the need for intervention and the gap therein, as well as making recommendations.  

He has not only stopped there, he has also done consultancy on AIDS. He has been able to even advise the Kenya AIDS Control Programme on the use of antiretroviral drugs and scaling up in their districts in Kenya.  

Dr Peter Mugyenyi has also carried out consultancy in Family Health International, Tuberculosis Research Project in collaboration with Case Western Reserve University (USA) and Makerere University on the clinical care in the area of HIV/AIDS.  

Dr Peter Mugyenyi has also done consultancy on African dialogue on AIDS and AIDS care research. Therefore, he has been able to point out how to promote quality and appropriate research, give out HIV/AIDS research grants to young promising Africans and coordinate HIV/AIDS related activities. Also, to identify and assimilate a culture of good practices and the way forward for prevention, AIDS care and treatment of HIV.  

My colleague, Dr Peter Mugyenyi, has also done consultancy on the HIV/AIDS Control Programme. This is in regard to management sciences for health.  

On the side of the research, Dr Peter Mugyenyi has been able to carry out clinical research care as principal investigator for over 30 studies, including clinical trials, epidemiology, prevention of opportunist infections, and intervention studies including HIV vaccine trials. That is in the field of the research.

With that in mind, Madam Speaker, I beg this Seventh Parliament to recognise distinguished Ugandans of this nature when they are still alive.  I very well recall in the Sixth Parliament, we were good at recognising people when they have passed away. I remember Prof. Kyalwazi, who had done a lot of work for this Uganda, but he was only just recognised after his death.  

But now, Madam Speaker, I will move this motion recognizing my colleague, Dr Peter Mugyenyi, when he is still alive so that he knows that the people of Uganda, the Government of Uganda under the leadership of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, highly recognise people of that calibre who have worked for the nation. In this regard, of course, the Seventh Parliament entirely recognises all Ugandans of that nature.  

I, therefore, beg to move that all colleagues of Seventh Parliament support this motion to recognise Dr Peter Mugyenyi, the Director of Joint Clinical Research Centre, for his exemplary work in the fight against HIV/AIDS pandemic in Uganda. I beg to move.

11.03
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank Dr Batalingaya for moving the motion. 

For the person we are describing, a person we want to honour, as my honourable colleague hon. Batalingaya has said, this Parliament should continue with a tradition of honouring people when they are still around, and maybe also give them more encouragement so that they can do more.

Madam Speaker, with the enumeration and description of what Dr Mugyenyi has undertaken, various personalities and institutions have also honoured him. Dr Mugyenyi was awarded a lifetime achievement award, and it was awarded to him at the International Conference on AIDS by the officials of World Health Organization in the Indian Association on AIDS.  

This is a good achievement when people from far recognise one of our own, that he has put a lot of effort in the research against this deadly disease and seeking possible solutions on how to combat it.  

Madam Speaker, Dr Mugyenyi also got another award, which is regarded as the 2003 hero in medicine.  This was awarded by the International Association of Physicians in USA. This, yet again, is recognition by people far of our own. So, Madam Speaker, it is timely that we also add our voice and effort in recognising the achievements of our own person.  

Another achievement he has got was an award of Doctor of Science Degree (Honaris Causa) and this time round by our own university, Mbarara University of Science and Technology.  

He also got the Philly Lutaaya award. The late Philly Lutaaya was one of the victims of this deadly disease and before he died, he made his mark by trying to publicise the dangers of this disease.  This Philly Lutaaya award, Madam Speaker, was given to Peter Mugyenyi by the Association of Ugandans in North America, in Boston.  

One time, Madam Speaker, we passed the Honours and Awards Act. It is high time - since the Prime Minister is here - we begin putting seriously implementing it.      

Madam Speaker, Dr Peter Mugyenyi is also a Fellow of the College of Physicians of Ireland. Ireland is one of our friendly countries. It has also recognised him and made him a Fellow of their association. 

Madam Speaker, there are two rotary clubs in Uganda, which have also honoured him and given him Rotary International Vocational Awards for his achievement and dedication in the fight against this disease.  

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Government of United States of America has also pledged to support funding to Africa, to the developing world. Dr Peter Mugyenyi was our delegate to the United States Senate to put a case for this type of funding, and he did it successfully. That is why you hear that monies have been pledged and monies are coming. So, he went to the United States Senate and put up a case. He is not a politician, I do not know which language he used, but he did it and here we are.

Madam Speaker, next year the International Conference on AIDS will take place in Bangkok. Dr Mugyenyi was made the chairman of the organizing committee for international scientists for next year. 

He is also a member of the National Institute of Medicine in USA. So, you can see, Madam Speaker, that from Ireland to USA, to India, people have recognized him and people want him to associate with them. 

It is really very imperative and rightly fitting that this Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, which represents him, recognises his efforts and also associates itself with the honours and awards he has got. I thank you.

11.09
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion. I support a motion to recognise a member of our society for the great achievement he has brought to us as a country.  

Dr Mugyenyi is a gallant son, a Ugandan from Rukungiri District and he has been a pride to all of us. He has contributed to this country, more especially in the fight against AIDS.  

I would like to recognise his contribution also in the blood transfusion services. We are all aware that in the past many people feared blood transfusion. Anybody who got an accident was scared so much that many people even feared to get blood as first aid treatment.  

However, you will agree with me that since he started chairing these blood transfusion services, the services have been so improved. This has demystified the issue of transfusion of blood. Therefore, I think he really deserves to be appreciated and to be recognised by this Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, Dr Mugyenyi as they have already said, has got several awards. But one interesting thing that comes out in all these international researches that he has been doing is that, he has usually become a principal investigator. 

I am sure as Ugandans we know that in these important researches at an international level, the practice has been that principal investigators sometimes are from foreign countries. Dr Mugyenyi is one of the few Ugandans that have been a principal investigator in very important researches that have been carried out on this earth. This is a very big achievement. This shows that he is a man of high calibre, a man whom you can rely on. 

You are also all aware that most of his findings have been very useful to us as a country in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Therefore, I strongly support his recognition as an important person. Of course, I feel this is the beginning of us, as a Parliament, encouraging many more people to come up if we recognise the work they do, as the mover of the motion had already said.

Madam Speaker, Dr Mugyenyi is an advocate of sustainable treatment of HIV/AIDS. When you talk to him, he will always tell you, “We need to get the anti-retroviral drugs that would last. People should access them”. That is always his move and his vision - accessibility of these anti-retroviral drugs should be sustainable.  

In many cases, he was against the support at a massive level. He has been advocating for gradual increase of accessibility to anti-retroviral drugs, which are sustainable and affordable by most of the people in our community. I have found his ideas quite interesting. I think they are practical, especially regarding the situation that we are at as a country. 

I have visited the Joint Clinical Research Centre many times with many people from my constituency. If some of you have visited that area, you will agree with me that the voluntary counselling and testing services that are offered there are superb. He has been directing that centre positively and many people have benefited and used his example in other testing centres.  

I think really it is high time we recognised him and we even encouraged many more Ugandans to emulate him. 

You are also aware about this programme where they are monitoring, the anti-retroviral therapy. If most of you have gone to that centre, you realize that he is at the forefront of monitoring the people that are taking these anti-retroviral drugs. He has a special interest and it is hands-on. 

If you go to that clinic, if you have ever taken a patient there, you realize that all the time he is visiting the patients and following them up closely. I think that is a good example of a medical practitioner whom we need as a country and whom we should encourage to keep on.

Dr Mugyenyi has been a man of an exemplary character, very simple and very intelligent. In all his publications - most of you have read them - he is always looking for the practical solution for the third world countries. Even in this programme he is chairing under the Rockefeller Foundation, he is encouraging African countries to give informed positions.  

He is somebody who will take and give informed positions. He has carried out several researches and I think he really deserves to be appreciated and to be recognized by this Parliament. I support the motion and I beg that the House supports the motion as well. I thank you. (Applause).

11.16
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by Dr Kamanda and supported by a number colleagues.  

Madam Speaker, before I say anything, some of our colleagues might not know Dr Mugyenyi, the person we are talking about. I have seen him in the gallery and through you, I would request that he stands up for recognition. There was a colleague asking me, “Who is this Dr Mugyenyi we are talking about?” This is with your permission, Madam Speaker. 

(The Members recognised Dr Mugyenyi’s presence in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, as the chairperson of the Social Services Committee, I have had an opportunity together with the members, right from the Sixth Parliament, to visit the Joint Clinical Research Centre. Its services fall under Ministry of Health.  

I have also had an opportunity, Madam Speaker, to accompany quite a number of visitors from out to visit this research centre, particularly Members of Parliament who come to visit us to see how much Uganda has done to fight against HIV/AIDS. 

I have also had an opportunity, Madam Speaker, to listen to the papers presented by Dr Mugyenyi in different fora, but particularly during the sector review meetings of the Ministry of Health.  

Madam Speaker, given this background, I have no doubt, and I strongly recommend that this Seventh Parliament should honour Dr Mugyenyi for his exemplary work. (Applause)

Indeed as I have indicated, quite a number of visitors who have gone to this unique centre, if you just listen to their comments, have appreciated it within the short time of their visit. 

Some of us have visited and internalised what Dr Mugyenyi is doing in the Joint Clinical Research Centre for quite sometime, but these visitors from outside have greatly appreciated what we are doing at the Joint Clinical Research Centre. This is a centre, which is headed by a director in the names of Dr Peter Mugyenyi.

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that Uganda is taking the multi-sectoral approach to fight HIV/AIDS. Quite a number of sectors, both government sectors and civil society, are undertaking the lead to fight against HIV/AIDS.  Under the Ministry of Health we have always passed funds and policies to fight sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS. We continue to support the clinical care, counselling and homecare programmes.  

Madam Speaker, I feel proud to see that the Seventh Parliament is honouring one of the great sons, who is championing these programmes of fighting HIV/AIDS, particularly under clinical care and research.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, under Ministry of Health we are also supporting quite a number of research centres. It is not only the Joint Clinical Research Centre, but there are other research institutes like Uganda Virus Research Institute; it is also doing some work. We also have the Uganda Natural Chemotherapeutic Research Laboratory doing some research on traditional medicines and herbal medicines.  

Madam Speaker, as we honour Dr Mugyenyi, I am only calling upon Government that it is high time they bring the Uganda National Health Research Organization Bill so that these research organizations can be coordinated. Then we can also pass enough funds to have more research done by various institutes. 

I feel proud to see the Leader of Government Business here and I hope this bill will come soon so that we can coordinate the various researches. I am sure we would be recognising quite a good number of daughters and sons of Uganda who are doing some good work.  

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about Dr Mugyenyi. But as chairperson of the Social Services Committee, I want to emphasize where Dr Mugyenyi is actually delivering services to Ugandans. We are given the mandate to monitor government compliance to votes, to recommend to this House, to analyse policies and so forth. 

I strongly recommend that we should honour Dr Mugyenyi, Director of the Joint Clinical Research Centre, for his exemplary work in the fight against HIV/AIDS pandemic in Uganda. I feel proud and we should honour him. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.54
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of a resolution of this Parliament to honour Dr Peter Mugyenyi. 

When I saw on this Order Paper this morning, “Recognition of Dr Peter Mugyenyi”, I got shocked because initially we have always been recognising people who have died.  So, I said, “Now my friend has passed away.” I had to study the motion clearly before I stabilized. I even had to ask my colleagues, “What has happened?” Since last week I have not been available, so I had really got shocked. 

However, when I realized that we are going to recognise Dr Mugyenyi when he is still alive, I was very happy. This takes us away from the past where in this House we have recognised very many people who have contributed to our development when they are not hearing what we are saying. Sometimes it looks like we are just talking to appease the relatives. But this one is very clear; we are recognising one of our sons even as he hears that recognition.

I know Dr Peter Mugyenyi as a friend, as a colleague, as a constituent and as my senior. I worked under Dr Peter Mugyenyi for sometime when he was instructing me in paediatrics. I came to understand him, though he was my senior that time, as a very close personality. 

He did not have this boss attitude, and he was so committed to resolving the problems of the deprived, especially children who used to come when they were very sick in ward. He used to motivate us to do everything possible to assist the children then. He was so committed to affectivity and equity. He did not want to see children who came malnourished go back to their home before we found a solution permanently so that they do not again need to come back.

I have participated in various researches where he has been the chief researcher. I have noted him as a good leader, motivating those under him to come out with results that are not cooked up, but results that are going to be useful for the development of our nation.  

Since the institution he leads falls within my constituency as General Secretary of the Uganda Medical Workers Union, I have interacted with the various people under him. You do not find any negativity surrounding him. So, I really have no doubt that his being recognised here is something good, which is supported by the people under him and the medical fraternity.

The recognition of Dr Peter Mugyenyi as a scientist shows that in this nation we are trying to recognise scientists, and science is very important for our development. You may be aware of the effects HIV/AIDS has taken on development, disorganising demographic factors and economic progress. 

Life expectancy, infant mortality rate and others have been negatively impacted on by HIV/AIDS. This impact has led to a negative outcome in some indicators of development both in Uganda and other countries. Therefore, any person who has participated in the fight that tries to reduce the impact of HIV/AIDS is very useful in our nation for development.  

The medical fraternity under our association, the Uganda Medical Association, is proud of this honour, which has been accorded to Dr Mugyenyi. We know it is not only to him but it is to him as a forerunner in our profession. 

We know that by recognising Dr Mugyenyi, we have definitely recognised all the other professionals that have participated in the fight against HIV/AIDS. (Applause). We know very well that he has done this, he has been very successful, but he has been backed up by professionals at various levels. So, for us in the medical fraternity, we definitely take his recognition in that way. 

We want to thank Parliament and also thank the movers of this motion for having thought about medical professionals. We thank you for having picked up Dr Mugyenyi for his calibre and credibility within the profession, and for having recognised him. I, therefore, want to call upon my colleagues to support the motion. Thank you very much.

11.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I know quite a bit about the scientific methods. I have also visited that centre a number of times and read a number of publications of Dr Mugyenyi. I am not a viralist myself, but my wife is. So, when I get problems in interpreting his results, I always consult my wife. (Laughter and Applause).  

Madam Speaker, with that acquaintance both of the person and of the work that he has done, I unreservedly support this motion. 

Honourable members of Parliament, soon we shall be going through the budget process. May I appeal to everybody here that you do ensure that persons of this character in our society are well remunerated. (Applause) I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.31
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to add on a few remarks about the personality of Dr Ndibirwe Peter Mugyenyi, whom I met in 1964 at Kings College Buddo. We were in the same class, and the missionaries who were teaching us at that time were very anxious to move the revolution and tell the world that Africans can perform. 

At that time, a lot of those people who were teaching us in Buddo had actually been chased out of South Africa. They were very committed teachers and they selected students from all over Uganda. I think Ndibirwe came from Rukungiri, I came from some stupid primary school deep in Bulamogi, and we met and competed in class.  It was not competition, it was a brotherhood and I am very glad – (Interruption)

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully to the honourable member holding the Floor, and I have clearly heard him saying that he came from a stupid primary school to join Buddo. 

He is here, and he went to Buddo because of that very primary school in Bulamogi. He is an engineer as well due to the background he got from that humble primary school. In regard to all that, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to regard his foundation, his basic school, as stupid?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think I also take exception to you describing that school as a stupid school, because it has made you what you are. Can you please withdraw that part? (Applause)  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, of course, I will oblige and withdraw but I would like to punctuate that issue. I did not say it out of nothing. There is a problem right now of producing people of the calibre of Ndibirwe Peter Mugyenyi from a rural village to come and compete with people from the schools in Kampala. It is a big challenge and it is a challenge to this House. 

We must be very proud that this country can produce people like Dr Peter Ndibirwe Mugyenyi to be able to compete in the whole world on the same footing as people who are coming from first class primary schools in the world. (Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Gagawala for having withdrawn. But I would like to inform my dear Engineer that most of us, including the frontbenchers like Prof. Kagonyera, came from rural schools. It is their sons and daughters who are from urban schools because we are here. Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you for the information. It is clear we all came from rural schools but the challenge, which is being thrust at us as we recognise Dr Peter Ndibirwe Mugyenyi, is that right now selecting children from very deep rural schools is almost becoming near to impossible. It is becoming near to impossible! 

I am only punctuating that to say, I am very proud to stand today in this Parliament to recognise a colleague whom I shared with bananas at school, whom I shared with groundnuts at school. But then I am also challenged, how shall we duplicate these types of people tomorrow? This is the challenge. 

We should really stop and recognise Dr Peter Ndibirwe Mugyenyi, his colleague, I think there is another one called Peter or Martin Kalema. These are guys who could actually compete with anybody in the world in the field of academics. I shared a classroom with them. 

The challenge we have as a House is not only to recognise Peter Mugyenyi but also to facilitate and duplicate him. If he has excelled in this field of AIDS, then we should take steps and actually start an institute so that we remain an example in the world. We can then produce these types of people, and the world should help us. 

We, as Parliament, should actually encourage that we put forward foundations to make sure that we duplicate these types of people and we actually conquer our poverty. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion and I want to thank the mover of this motion very much. 

I believe this is a very good beginning for us in fulfilling the wish we have had for a long time, to recognise Ugandans while they are still alive. For that matter, I want to congratulate Dr Peter Mugyenyi for the award he has received and to encourage him to work even harder so that we can get more awards. From that, we may get more Ugandans encouraged to do and offer services that we need in an exemplary manner.  

Madam Speaker, I know Dr Mugyenyi as an inspirer of those people he works with. For those of you who have not visited the Joint Clinical Research Centre, I would encourage you to do so that you may get the feel of what colleagues are talking about this morning. I think Dr Mugyenyi has built the capacity of the Joint Clinical Research Centre to a level of making it a centre of excellence, and we need to thank him for that.  

Madam Speaker, people normally do not work alone, researchers do not work alone. So, I want to take this opportunity to thank all the distinguished people who have worked with Dr Mugyenyi in offering the services he has rendered, but also in the different research pieces that he has carried out.  It is very good that as a key investigator, he gets to be recognised so that he can also model other Ugandans to emulate him.  

I would like, Madam Speaker, to use this opportunity to call upon professional bodies to embrace the culture of recognition of distinguished Ugandans in the various professions. This can enable Parliament to pick them along the way and we move such motions of recognition. It is very important -(Interruption)

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, since we have an opportunity to hear from the front bench, there are some clarifications that I want so that they can touch on them. One, we passed an Act to recognise national heroes or something like that. Is it possible for these national heroes to be included in that, and what are the mechanisms for that?  

Secondly, I understand the funding for HIV/AIDS is substantial in this country. But if you look at related institutes like Uganda Virus Research Institute, actually it is very grossly under funded. Now, is it possible for a holistic approach so that you fund some of those related institutes that do basic research, which then feeds into applied research?  

Finally, there was a report in the newspapers that Ministry of Finance was saying that the money coming to support HIV/AIDS is going to destabilise the usual micro-economic stability. Could somebody comment on that? Or are we going to get a lot of money, which will then return because we say we do not have capacity to absorb it, it will disturb our micro-economic stability? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think let us not mix up government business with parliamentary business. This motion is by Parliament to honour Dr Mugyenyi. Those matters of micro-economy and so on can be dealt with later. Let us finish with the honours and then we can ask questions on the economy.

DR WABUDEYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Definitely, I was not going to attend to that clarification. I was winding up by saying that, honourable colleagues, I think it is very befitting that we support this motion for a resolution of Parliament to honour Dr Peter Mugyenyi for his exemplary contribution. I want to thank you.

11.41
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the culture has started, the culture of recognising and honouring people when they are still alive, and I hope it will continue. 

I knew about Dr Mugyenyi and his work at Joint Clinical Research Centre when I was in Ministry of Defence in 1996. But it is a great pleasure that we are honouring Dr Mugyenyi because he has moved from scratch and put JCRC where it is.

However, as we recognise Dr Mugyenyi, let us ask, “where is Dr Mugyenyi operating from?” Dr Mugyenyi is operating from Butikkiro and the owners want Butikkiro. When you visit his office, Dr Mugyenyi has got a structure of a modern hospital, which he wants to make into a research centre. 

They have land at Kabowa. Maybe Dr Nkuuhe’s question will come in here; this is a challenge to Government when they are saying they are blocking funds to support HIV/AIDS. If we are to honour Dr Mugyenyi, why don’t we honour him by building a hospital as a monument? He has the structures in his office, in a drawing. 

Why don’t we support that institute and allow funds. Because if we build that hospital and it becomes a research centre, I think it would be more of a monument to Dr Mugyenyi than coming here to praise him when they will evict him from Butikkiro tomorrow and he will have nowhere to work from. So, I think that one is a challenge to Government. As we honour Dr Mugyenyi, let us see how we can clear funds. 

Madam Speaker, I challenge whoever has visited Dr Mugyenyi’s office; he has a drawing of a modern hospital in his office but it has remained as a drawing. They have the land at Kabowa and for years they have no funds. If Government could support a grant and we build that hospital as a monument to support Dr Mugyenyi, he would even raise more researchers. He would train more researchers. 

He has the will, he has the capacity, but he is incapacitated. Let us build a monument in form of that Kabowa hospital then we shall have recognised him more. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.43
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion.  Dr Mugyenyi enjoys academic legitimacy. Legitimacy is concerned with the right to lead. Because of his professional qualifications, because of his conduct, he has been recognised internationally and, therefore, he enjoys academic legitimacy to lead the institution he is leading. His challenge is to recruit many more disciples in this area.  

His second challenge is that, when you are recognised when you are alive, you may deteriorate.  That is why we have been hesitant to recognise people when they are still alive. You may deteriorate ethically and professionally. So, you have a challenge of not disappointing us, and the profession. 

Of course, it would be unfair to recognise him without recognising his dear spouse, because they are sometimes either facilitators or inhibitors, but she is a facilitator in this area.

This area of HIV/AIDS is very dear to me inter-alia because a very close relative died of AIDS, and he was trying to hide that fact from us. But when we had it, we went to him and we said, “You are suffering from AIDS, have you made your will?” We looked at his will and the will was poorly made.  Then we asked him, “Why were you hiding this issue?” He said, “I was fighting off stigma.”  

That is why it is important that people who handle this profession should not suffer from what I call, “leakology”. This is a phenomenon where you reveal or leak secrets. I want to assure you that the person we are recognising does not suffer from the phenomenon of “leakology”. He keeps secrets, is ethical and people trust him. 

May I also say that he is very approachable, and this is another necessary ingredient of handling people suffering from this deadly disease. He is approachable. I am delighted to support this motion.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this motion has been overwhelmingly supported, so let me ask the movers to read the text of what they would like us to approve.

11.47
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank honourable members who have contributed passionately to this motion. 

As I read the text for the resolution, it is my prayer that this resolution gives Dr Peter Mugyenyi more energy to look for a cure for AIDS and then we come back and give him more recognition. It reads:

Whereas Dr Peter Mugyenyi Ndibirwe has since 1992 served as Executive Director of Joint Clinical Research Centre that has provided leadership in AIDS care, treatment, research and prevention; and

Whereas Dr Peter Mugenyi has continued to offer leadership at various levels namely, Chair of Africa Dialogue on AIDS (ADAC) and AIDS Care Research in Africa, Chair of Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, board member of Uganda Sciences and Technology Authority, and as a Chair of the Health Sciences Committee;  

Noting that his leadership in the various areas has immensely contributed towards the fight against HIV/AIDS; and

Noting that Dr Mugyenyi is one of the few Ugandans who have placed Uganda on the international scene because of his good work; and

Whereas for his excellent work he has received honours and awards including Lifetime Achievement Award, a Doctor of Science Degree (Honoris Causa), 2003 hero in medicine award, and Philly Lutaaya Award, among others, in recognition of his good work; 

Noting that it is during his stewardship at the Joint Clinical Research Centre that achievements in the area of quality research on HIV/AIDS has been registered;

Noting further, that as Director of Joint Clinical Research Centre Dr Mugyenyi has handled several difficult assignments, including convincing the US Senate to allocate funds to fight HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa;

Now therefore, this Parliament do hereby resolve to honour Dr Peter Mugyenyi for his fight against HIV/AIDS in the world.  

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the motion. I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as moved by honourable Dr Kamanda and seconded by Dr Kasirivu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE PROTECTION OF MINORS FROM INTERNET PORNOGRAPHY IN UGANDA

11.51
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA MBABAZI (Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for the protection of minors from Internet pornography in Uganda:

Aware that pornography has the world over been associated closely with behaviour that is harmful and degrading such as paedophilia, which is child sex, serial killing, early sexual activity, rape and many more, especially in minors;

Cognizant that the electronic media in our now globalised world has advanced faster than the pace at which an appropriate ethic can be developed and enforced, especially in poor countries;

Concerned that the gains made by our country in the control of HIV/AIDS and other STDs could be significantly undermined by the highly addictive and suggestive force of pornography;

Mindful that the Internet has immense educational value that leaves us obliged to make it accessible to youth with adequate control of harmful content;
 
Determined to develop and sustain a suitable environment for the healthy mental and social development of millions of youth who account for over 60 percent of this country’s population;

Now therefore, let it be resolved by this august House that prior to the issuing of licences to the operators of Internet cafes the following will be observed:

(1) That the operators will install software that makes Internet pornography inaccessible on all computers that minors can use.

(2) That it will be the responsibility of the operators of these facilities to deny minors access to the places where Internet pornography is accessible.

(3) That the licensing and monitoring authorities in Government will ensure compliance, and if necessary, withdraw licences from operators that violate this arrangement.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MRS UDONGO PACUTO: Seconded.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the motion and the spirit with which it is brought before us. However, a motion of Parliament here may not stop these people from publishing pornography, or even stop those who have Internet cafes from allowing minors to access this kind of material. 

Therefore, would it have not been better if the member brought a private member’s bill so that we make it law? Because we are now wasting time to make a resolution and at the end of the day it is not enforceable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, obviously it would be better if he brought a law, but this could be a build up. We could get ideas from you and then go and draft the bill.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, honourable member, for the insight. Because of the usual tricky situation of the Consolidated Fund, a private member’s bill needs more preparation, and I agree that this should lead to what you request.

My justification for this resolution, Madam Speaker, is that while a lot of gains are made and many people like Dr Mugyenyi whom we have just honoured aggressively try to reduce HIV infection and to bring hope, there is an underground commercial enterprise that could easily reverse that effort. 

First of all, we know that HIV/AIDS is very closely related with sexual activity. So, anything that has impact on sexual activity will negatively or positively enhance or undermine the effort that is being made. 

I want to bring it to the attention of this House that pornography is a multi-billion dollar scheme, which preys upon unsuspecting people, especially young ones, in various ways that I am going to refer to.

The first one is educational. Although we speak a lot about sex education in the schools, which I hail and encourage, young people will learn more from what they see than from what they hear. The message of abstinence, faithfulness and safe sex is totally rendered ineffective when we have a generation of young people who, day and night, are feeding on pornography. This portrays the exact opposite of the message. 

What we learn, Madam Speaker and honourable members, has got a direct impact on our behaviour. In some countries the digital and electronic media have been with them for some time. We take it lightly because we have not seen the effect. 

In countries where people have had the Internet and videos for many years, they have already noted a lot of developments. Children, for example, who are exposed early to pornography, are also likely to be involved early in sexual activity. It has gone to a level of addiction.

One research that I am referring to, a book written by Kastleman, The Drug of the New Millennium, points to pornography as having the same addictive capacity as cocaine, especially in the 12 to 17 year olds. Cocaine as well as other drugs, which are addictive, will make the individual dependent upon the consumption of such material. So, our challenge is to protect the younger people especially in the ages, which have been pointed at, of 12 to 17 years. 

Today in Uganda our Internet cafes may be doing a good job by making the Internet accessible. For people who are doing research or looking for books in a poor country where our libraries are badly stocked, the Internet has become one of the solutions. 

However, in many instances minors, who use cafes as early as the age of 10,11,12, pop up pornography without even intending to look for it, because there is no safeguard about it. And they find that they are captured in that way.  

Madam Speaker, there is the gender perspective.  Pornography has been seen to portray a certain view of men and women, which makes women look like the objects of male aggression. Many people have got this mistaken view of pornography because many people think that pornography has to do with watching sex. Pornography is worse than that. It has to do with violence. 

Countries, which have had it for a long time, say that the levels of pornography are such that when a person who is addicted to it stops being excited by it, they add violence to it. This can introduce, in our young generations, absurd views of the genders, the male and female. Therefore, it is our responsibility to care for these growing-up people and make sure that they come up with the right perspective of male and female. 

We also need to be aware of the cultural perspective. In my own culture, and I think it is the same all over Uganda, the worst insult a woman can put upon another human being is to show them her nakedness. To show you that you are absolutely a non-entity and they despise you, they show you their nakedness. I think this is true. 

But we have a generation of young people who are paying to see the nakedness of foreign prostitutes, which is an abomination to our own culture! We need to think about this and put in place measures that will give cultural respect to our young people and get them to grow up appreciating what God has –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for taking your seat. I would like to know when nakedness became offensive in our society, at what period? 1900, 1985, 1820; when did it become offensive?

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you, honourable member. My culture is unfortunately an oral tradition, not much was written about the background. But one thing I remember, my grandmother told me when I was young that naturally, according to human behavior, it is the most insulting thing for a person to show you their nakedness -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Mbabazi, for giving way. The information I would like to give to this House and hon. Awori seated here, is that nakedness became offensive immediately human beings sinned and lost God’s glory –(Applause)- because originally humankind was dressed in God’s glory after creation. 

When human beings ate the fruit and sinned, they lost God’s glory and they become naked. Remember, when the man ate the fruit, the eyes became open and they saw the nakedness and it became offensive to both man and God. 

That is why God made clothes for humankind so that he may cover the body, which was originally made in his own image. Therefore, it is not only offensive to humankind here, it is also offensive to God and it should not take place.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much for your information. I will continue and complete the justification. There is a criminal relationship between various types of anti-social behaviour - that research has discovered – in which pornography is involved. 

The first one is serial sex killing. Here in our communities we have heard in the news about people who have been raped and then murdered. Others are murdered and then their sexual organs are taken away. This is a glimpse of things that countries, which are more developed economically and which have had this technology, have lived with and even conducted research about. 

Indeed one research conducted by a PhD scholar, Prof. Longegin of the University of Toronto, has observed serial killers who have been arrested and interviewed and their background has been traced. It has been discovered that while they were teenagers, one of their hobbies was collecting pornography. So, in having unrestrained pornography we are training serial killers, as some cultures have found. 

The other one is rape. Rape convicts have confessed that they have been stimulated physically by using pornographic material and failing to find consenting sexual partners, have resorted to rape. 

The other criminal offence that has been related to pornography is paedophilia. Paedophilia is the use of children in sexual activities. This has got a commercial industry that invests money in taking pictures of children involved in sex. That too has been associated with the consumption of pornography. 

So, it is our work to ensure that while our children are yet growing up, we should protect them as much as technology permits us to do it. 

Another important issue is that this technology has brought the entertainment world into our homes in a generation where parental presence in the home is diminishing. The economics of our country today demands that both spouses go out to work in order to make ends meet. Many who have got children in the home need to be educated about how their children who have got access to the Internet can be protected. But this must start in the commercial world where children can sneak quietly and surf whatever they like.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the other one is the conflict of interest that we have in the operators of Internet cafes. Whereas they know that it is possible to control this, for them every person that pays to surf the Internet is extra money. We are the ones that can watch because they cannot watch themselves because they have a commercial interest. 

We know that there is technology for that. I have done a little research and I know that there are programmes for this. If you visit the website called Content Watch, there is a programme called Content Protect, which can be used very effectively. It would keep all nude pictures out of the computer and it is installed for as little as US $39, which I believe is about Shs 80,000. 

It is important that this House starts a process of regulating and even amending the necessary laws to make sure that in the same way that we put restrictions on cigarette advertising, we warn them. Many countries make it an offence for minors to purchase alcohol or cigarettes. In the same way, we need to start thinking about offering our young generation the protection that they need and deserve from us.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.09
MRS BETTY UDONGO (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my brother, Rev. Hamlet Kabushenga, for this motion and I stand to support him. 

As an educationalist, I know children learn by imitation. We cannot tell now the adverse effects that pornography can have on our children, our families and on the future generation. The Internet has shown us so much! 

Personally I was shocked one time when accidentally the mouse clicked on a website; when it came onto the screen I actually panicked. It was accidental, I panicked and I did not know how to switch it off! I actually had to boot the computer. But I want to tell you that with just that glimpse, I have never forgotten what I saw. How about these children that spend hours and hours linking one site to the other?  

Madam Speaker, there are children now in school that are struggling with masturbation and it is having serious effects on their academics. There are children who cannot concentrate in class unless they go and masturbate. Why do they have to do that? It is because of what they are being exposed to. 

These children are taking in so much rubbish that they do not know how to contain themselves. As leaders in this nation, it is time we started to do something to reduce access of our children to pornographic material. 

Today we are talking about Internet pornography, but you have known and you have heard of the arguments about other pornographic materials like the Red Pepper that is on our streets. 

Madam Speaker, I was watching an advert on television, it was a mouse, an innocent mouse, dancing and singing. My children were dancing to the tune of that music and I was wondering what the advert was all about. To my surprise, it was the Red Pepper. I believe my children when they see the Red Pepper on the street they may want to open it and see that mouse which dances very nicely. And what are they going to be exposed to? 

As leaders of this nation we have the responsibility and we are in position to put in place measures and make laws to stop our young children from accessing pornographic material. While it may be okay with you as –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, I was just wondering if my colleague, as a Ugandan legislator, has taken the trouble to find out the ownership of the Red Pepper.

MRS UDONGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is no secret that some of us here have shares in that paper. I am not here to tell who you are; you know yourselves. 

I was saying that, much as adults may not be harmed, excessive use of and access to this pornography might also harm you as an adult. Not only that, you may forget and go with these materials to your homes and your children access them. 

I want to remind you of what Jesus said - if Jesus were here today! He said in Matthew 18, “But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a large millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.” Thank you.

12.14
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Kabushenga Hamlet for having brought this motion to the Floor. I have always believed that this is a very strong Parliament spiritually. We have over three Reverends in this Parliament and one Imam, so this Parliament is very strong spiritually and very powerful politically. 

It would be a real shame for us to let things going on in our society continue the way they are, especially when our children are harassed morally and sexually not just in the Internet cafes but even in the newspapers. 

The other day I was taking my child to Church and somebody brought a paper to the side the car. He wanted me to buy it and it was exposing my children to this pornography. There is no law to stop this person from doing so, and I feel this is a real shame. That is why I support this motion on the Floor. 

But I wish that it be extended to other media other than the Internet, because our children need to be protected for their survival so that they are brought up in a sane environment.

Madam Speaker, we have a big problem because these materials are coming from the so-called first world, from complex cultures to a simple culture. Everything from the first world is taken as if it is very holy. These are the same areas where homosexuals are being ordained with impunity! This is –(Interruption)

MRS RAINER: Thank you for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I was surprised to hear from my colleague that everything comes from the first world. Is Gaetano from the first world? Is the Red Pepper from the first world?

REV. SSEMPANGI: He may not be from the first world but the culture I am talking about is from there. I do not know who financed these issues in –(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much my brother for giving way. I would like to inform the House that Gaetano was captured using the technology we are saying is exposing obscene pictures to our children. 

REV. SSEMPANGI: Thank you for that information. I think that as Ugandans the onus is on us; whether we want to support morality in public places or not, whether we want an environment so hostile to our children or not, the choice is with us. It is for us here to decide whether that is the way we want to go. 

I was saying that we need to tell and educate our children to be selective with materials they see, because children need to be protected. In the year, I think it was 1974, when I went to America they used to show at the movies a Pepsi Cola or Coca-Cola advert so fast that you would not actually see the word. But during intervals adults would run to line up and get Coca-Cola or Pepsi Cola. 

Pornography is like that. It so circulates the minds of the young, and there is no way as parents that we are going to protect this child when he is exposed to this kind of malice.  

Madam Speaker, I think we should support this motion so that caution is taken for us as parents, to be allowed to have an environment where we can bring up our children. Thank you.

12.19
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all I would like to thank hon. Kabushenga for coming up with this motion and for his very elaborate justification. 

However, I think the problem is much bigger than just protecting minors from pornography on the Internet. The law relating to pornography in this country was made many years ago, and as Parliament it is important that we look at it. 

Pornography, as defined within our law, is at times very difficult to determine even in courts of law. One of the ingredients is that the material should be intended to raise sexual arousal. The Red Pepper, for example, will say, “We just wanted people to see what was happening at the beach and our intention is not to raise sexual arousal. So if people get sexually aroused, that is their business”. 

But as someone who sees these things on the streets, there is no doubt that they arouse sexual feelings in people. So, we must come out. The starting point should be for us to review the law relating to pornography such that we make it more comprehensive and very clear.  

Secondly, there is need to address other media like the newspapers and the radios. I am a bit disappointed, Madam Speaker, with the Minister of Information. He is in charge of administering the Press and Journalists Statute, and also the Electronic Media and Broadcasting Statute, both of 1996, which talk about public morality and stop media practitioners from publishing material that is immoral and pornographic. But if you go to our video halls, the biwempe halls, all that is being watched there most of the time is pornography. 

We have a Minister of Information and there is the Broadcasting Council, one wonders why they are in these offices. It is my worry, therefore, that we may come up with -(Interruption)

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to give this information. The laws that he has cited, the Journalists Statute and the Press Act, as they are called now, and the media and electronic law, are so weak that the Minister of Information does not have any power to take any disciplinary action against either individuals or the media houses. 

Secondly, the powers that are given to the councils, which are supposed to discipline errant journalists or media houses, are equally helpless. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I think that is just good information for the House to take action.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, hon. Attorney General, for your information. But other than the Attorney General waiting to bring this information here, as a legal adviser to government you should have brought this to the Government before and advised the relevant minister to amend the laws that we are talking about. 

I would also like to add that I took a course, at graduate level, in media law. The law is not as weak as the Minister says. This is why the other day the Broadcasting Council went and closed Super FM. If a law is that weak, the council would not have had powers to do that. But I would not like to engage in an argument with the learned Attorney General, I am not a learned man. 

I would like to say that, yes, we need the law but the law should be implemented. And the people who are supposed to implement the law are the people at the Front Bench who are apparently letting us down.

Madam Speaker, quite often I move with my father in the car but whenever he is in my car, I switch off the radio because one is never sure of what the presenter is going to say. Yet the broadcasting law says that adult-oriented programmes should be appropriately scheduled. But they say it is music hour then they bring in sounds of people having sex at a time when kids are awake, like 10.00 O’clock in the morning. 

So, I support this motion but I advise my colleague that we should consider amending this motion to make it broader and subsequently come up with a private members’ bill to address this matter. I thank you.

12.26
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I would like to support the motion.

First of all, I would like to give some information that there is a task force in the Ministry of Justice, under the Law Reform Commission, called the Electronic Transactions Task Force. I am a member of that task force. This task force has been working. For instance, they have drafted the Electronic Transaction Bill, the Electronic Signature Bill and the Computer Misuse Bill; the relevant one here, which will help us and which is the one we need to work with. The Computer Misuse Bill is a hybrid of the UK, Singapore and South Africa bills. 

There are two mischiefs, mainly the hacking of computer systems, which is irrelevant here, and child pornography, which is transmitted via the Internet, unfortunately. I think as a legislature, we have a concern. Personally, I am always concerned that Uganda as a country that professes to be 90% or whatever, Christian, where so many people go to church every Sunday, you find a flourishing of casinos, you see Gaetano as a hero and people are not shocked! I am really amazed; in fact we are really reaping what we sow. 

To go back to the motion, is there a technical solution to these problems of child pornography? The answer is partly yes and partly no because the people who design these programs are also smart. But as the hon. Rev. Kabushenga has pointed out, you can use filters. And by the way, the first place we should start is this Parliament, because there are so many pornographic sites. When you visit a computer site, you leave evidence because every time you visit a site, it is recorded; and every time you check the last eight sites visited you will be amazed; sex.com, big boobs and all those things! These are some of the sites, which are so naughty that they bring their pictures to you automatically, like with this reverend lady, and you try to get rid of it. 

One time I had a problem; we had to go and call the technical guys to remove it. They have tried to install filters - these are programs, which can look at certain sites with certain keywords like sex and block them. So, that is one way. But the better way is the sociological solution; something that I do with my children. 

Among my children, there are teenagers and younger ones, and I noticed that every time I let them work on my computer, when I go back, I find those sites - teenagers are curious and visit those sites. So what we do is to say, “Let us see what you visited. Tell us what has attracted you to this site,” then we discuss and show them the effects of pornography so that technology works with sociology. Otherwise technology itself will not solve the problem alone.

What does the Child Pornography Law say? It says a person commits an offence if he or she produces child pornography for purposes of distribution through a computer system, offers or makes available child pornography through a computer system; distributes, procures, possesses. It says a person who commits an offence under Section (1) is liable to conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both. For the benefit of Members, 120 currency points is about Shs 2.4 million. So that is quite hefty and I think it will be quite effective when it comes. 

But I think we also need to lobby our society to practice what we preach. I get amazed if you go to Kampala Casino, you will see the “whos” of Uganda – Mind you a casino is not a holy place, no matter what you call it. It is not an investment. You can do without that investment, because who goes to a casino, what happens in the casino? It is money that is illegally earned; it is a laundering mechanism. So we should not be proud that when our people came here they went to Kampala Casino. The “Who is whos” of Uganda went to the casino; that is a shame! Shame on you, if you are seen in Kampala Casino! 

I would like to support Rev. Kabushenga for this and let us come together and try to remove pornography from our society. We cannot get rid of it, but at least you can minimize it and protect those young children who are subject to pornography.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.31
MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take the chance to thank the hon. Reverend Kabushenga for bringing this Motion. Hon. Reverend, you deserve to be recognized. (Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Chair I would like to say that I do not know why whenever Members of Parliament stand in this House they condemn Gaetano. I believe when the act took place, this country should have acted like Malawi and Zambia by banning the channel so that we would not see, because it was the technology, which made people to see. The man thought the thing was private but behind the curtains it was not private, that is why the motion is now brought to ban some of these things.  

Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. You are wondering why this august House did nothing about Gaetano. I would like to remind you that this august House passed a motion objecting to the heroism of Gaetano, a man who became prominent as a result of having sex in the open. We objected and the government defied us.

MRS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I am saying the channel. The condemning of Gaetano was a post mortem; it was after the Big Brother effect. 

Madam Speaker, you remember very well that when the issue of the Red Pepper was brought before this House we got embarrassed; we had no support. All the members of Parliament did not support this motion; it flopped. Today, hon. Reverend, you have brought a motion and I believe it is going to control some of these pornographic photos we have by the streets.

Hon. Awori, I am really perturbed that you were trying to condemn Gaetano after the events. I am saying that I wish this country banned the channel so that the children do not see the acts thereafter. Madam Speaker, I strongly support this motion and I am standing before this House to lobby my colleagues to support this motion. I thought immediately after the substantive explanation of the motion, we were just going to put the question, we do not need to debate more on this Motion.  All that we have to do is to support it and it moves ahead to give way for more laws, which will control pornographic exposures – (Interjection) 

Madam Speaker, I believe I have just started my speech; I do not know why the bell went when I am just on the preamble.  

Madam Speaker, pornographic exposures have deeply destroyed our cultures. Today when you move on the streets of this country at around 7 p.m. our young girls are moving naked. As if that is not enough, the children are being abused.  Some two months ago, I read in a paper where a man decided to defile a boy child. A boy of three years was defiled by a man in the toilet in Ntinda! I believe those are some of those funny motives of pictures on the Internet. If you retrieve those pictures you will be induced into those acts. I am not deceiving, honourable members; you can feel it yourselves. Imagine if it can induce you, what about the youth, what about the younger generations? Haven’t we killed this generation?  What are we going to do for the generation to be corrected? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in order to control all this, and in order to reduce the embarrassment the women of this country have been facing, we need to put a specific law. To me these resolutions are still not enough. We need to completely ban the photos, which we see in the papers, which expose the body of the woman. Sometimes, when we move on the streets of this country, particularly Kampala - in Arua they are not there, my people are very cultural. It is only in the City –(Interruption)  

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Madam Speaker, the motion is very good and I support it, but it tends to protect only the children of those who have. When you talk about pornography on computers, pornography on television and video shows, you are talking about the children of those who can afford those gadgets. 

Madam Speaker, when you visit some of these slum areas in Kampala, children of the poor people are being exposed to live shows. If you go to internally displaced people’s camps, because of so many problems, children are being exposed to live shows.  Madam Speaker, can we improve on this motion so that we include children of the poor in slum areas, in internally displaced people’s camps, our children on the streets of Kampala.  I thank you.

MS ANGUPALE:  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I believe my colleague will get time and he proposes so that we have it in the law.  

Madam Speaker, before I conclude, I was about to propose that the videos, even at the sub-county level should also be controlled. I believe the districts will borrow this example and put mechanisms on the ground where the video shows will be controlled. So, when we are talking of withdrawing the license at the top level, something should be done so that the people who operate video shows to our children in the rural place should also be controlled with this law. 

I say this because the video producers have got a warning line. When you are going to see a video, it cautions that those below 18 years are not supposed to see the pictures. But the operators go ahead and put those funny pictures for our children to see.  

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you the generation is spoilt up to the deepest sub-county and parish, even in Arua. I call upon all Members of Parliament; we should not waste a lot of time diluting the motion, we just put the question so that the thing becomes operational. I thank you very much for giving me room for contributing on this motion.

12.38
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe County South, Kampala): I thank you very, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion before this august House. But then there are certain pertinent issues, which we should also address like my colleagues have already pointed out. The callousness of the problem at hand should cut across so many other areas apart from the Internet cafes. Why am I saying this? We have got the issue of globalisation; we are also creating other entities like the East African Community and the rest. If we ban it here, what will be its impact on the neighbouring countries? Are they also going to follow suit? These are some of the questions we should ask.  

Then there is something I was hearing about - maybe the Minister of Education will clear this since she is around - about sex education. They were talking about introducing sex education in Primary Schools.  Who is going to write this curriculum, and who are going to train or who are those going to be trained in sex education to train our pupils to curb the HIV/AIDS scourge? These are some of the things -because culturally it was being handled by our Sengas, but since they are now almost disappearing into oblivion, I do not know who is going to handle that. If not handled properly also, it is going to create another problem by exposing our children to literature, which is so abstract at an early stage. 

Then I have been hearing about some elites in this country, mostly academicians supporting prostitution, lesbianism –(Laughter)- and gays.  These are also areas, which are going to create disharmony in our society. Much as we find these Internet cafes and other people who are enlightened are supporting other evil diabolic things, we are having a very colossal problem before us and like my colleague pointed out –(Interruption)- this bell is unfair, I have noticed. They start us very fast and when some people – maybe, Madam Speaker, I should address this one some other time –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member on the Floor for allowing me to come one second after he had left that point of Sex Education in schools. He has been asking, who will teach sex education? What will be taught? 

I take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to inform the House that what we refer to as sex education actually is what we traditionally used to call Biology, because we believe that people should know the parts of their bodies and how they function.  There is no point talking about the biology of a cow, a goat, a frog and a cockroach –(Laughter)- when people will leave the system without knowing how their own bodies function. So, that is actually Biology.  

But then the attachment, which comes with the term ‘sex,’ is in response to the HIV/AIDS scourge.  This morning we have been honouring our Researcher, who has done a lot of work on AIDS, but then if people do not use their body parts correctly, in some cases we get STDs and AIDS. So, the idea is to go a little bit further and say, if you use this part this way or if you misuse it or abuse it this way, this is what you get.  

I would like to clarify that in schools we are not going to teach kids how to do it, when to do it, who does it - those are for other people.  But it is high time we tell our youth, in the fight against AIDS and STDs, that there is a danger in abuse and misuse of some of the parts of your bodies.  

So, I would like to conclude by saying that Members of Parliament should not be worried about this, and in fact we have what we call “age appropriate phases”. We do not go to a P.1 kid and say, you know – we are grading this information mainly to save our youth and children from AIDS, and I think this House knows they are very vulnerable.  

Has any of you taken some trouble to see who the most vulnerable groups of people in our country are? It is now going to 10, 13 year olds. So if we do not fight AIDS right from the beginning by telling people what happens, by telling them what can lead them into trouble - Telling adults like ourselves might be too late. So, that is where we are.

 Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that the President who has been in the lead in the fight against AIDS not only in Uganda, not only in Africa, but also globally, has directed that let the kids know three things:  
1. AIDS kills. 
2. There is no medicine yet, though we are now trying to see what can be done, and 
3. It is preventable. 
So, after giving those messages, people should know that when you use this part or that part of the body, you can get AIDS. I thought I would clarify that.

MR MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that sex education is not a new thing in African tradition. But we had an age limit. A girl at the age of around 12 years about to get married traditionally, she used to be taught by the aunties. Then boys were given this traditional sex education at circumcision time, in my tribe. So, why don’t we put an age limit so that at least, this education can begin at the age of 18 years?  

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, what I would perhaps suggest here is that when the Minister is developing the curriculum, may be he can organize a workshop for Members of Parliament such that they can have an input on such a delicate issue, because it would depend on which teacher is handling it. We have heard that even teachers are flouting the laws in primary schools, they are raping and defiling their pupils. So I would wish that when there is a workshop we can also come in and –(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank very much and the hon. Member for giving way. But Madam Speaker, what is important is what hon. Kibanzanga has mentioned about the peasants. These peasants knew how to teach their children about sex. Now, the important thing is to see to it that these peasants are taught the modern approach to sex, the best teachers are the parents, not necessarily the teachers in the classroom. The teachers in the classroom are mechanical, but the parents teach their children how to approach sex. But there is also a fear that some of these things taught in the classroom are considered as obscene.  

In our culture, we could not mention, for example, the private parts to the parents. So, now the schools are teaching that. So, Madam Speaker, the most important thing now is to teach the parents to teach their children to approach this issue of sex in a better manner. Thank you, very much.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would call upon the Minister of Information also to look at the government’s owned dailies; it is not only the Red Pepper. I have seen even some Members reading Red Pepper though hiding it amongst other papers. But newspapers like Bukedde, Orumuri and whatever, they have also got somewhere they cross the border and it becomes terrible. They should also try to surpress the crudeness in which they are reporting and photographing and producing these pictures.

Lastly, also the poverty levels should be addressed. For instance we were told in a PEAP workshop that it is one of the contributing factors of such aspects we are experiencing in society. These blue movies, which are being shown at night, these Internet Cafes are all looking for money because of poverty. So, all these issues should be addressed. Otherwise, I stand to support the motion before the House.  

12.48
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my hon. colleague for moving this motion, but at the same time, to say it is superfluous and probably misplaced. Why am I saying so?  Number one; there are laws controlling pornography. This particular motion is centred on one particular aspect; that is, pornography. There is no other problem about the Internet except that his concern is that it should not be a purveyor of pornography. That is why I am saying that there are general laws covering pornography regardless of the medium. 

Speaking as a libertarian, I do not believe in interfering with freedom of information. It is no use trying to kill the messenger because you do not like the message. What you should do is to go after the source of the information, not the media that is conveying the message and in this case since we do not have the immediate control over the conveyance or the communication. We should go after WTO as my hon. colleague put it. In the age of globalisation, we should not just be talking about the rules and regulations of trade but also the rules and regulations of culture. 

My colleagues here have been talking about the problem of nakedness. I was not being frivolous when I said when did nakedness become offensive?  Really nakedness at the moment, the way we look at it, we should look at nakedness from two perspectives - as an economic condition and also as a cultural condition.  

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you my colleague for accepting my information. In fact we still have communities in Uganda and in Africa who are just naked and they are not offended. For instance, Karamoja and the Batwa in Bundibugyo are simply naked and life goes on. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Absolutely true and thank you for the information. So I am saying nakedness is an economic or a cultural condition. It is has only become offensive -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Awori for giving way. I would like to correct the impression that the Karimojong are naked. The Karimojong have the sheets to cover themselves and the ladies have the skirts and blouses. Even traditionally they used to get the skins; the women were properly covered with their aprons to tie to the back and then the sheets around and the beads. So there was no complete nakedness. May be if somebody had realized that maybe when they are bathing then you find them naked but they are not walking naked. If you want to go and prove right now, you can go; there is a transformation in their culture.

MR AWORI: Once again, I thank my hon. colleague for making it abundantly clear that nakedness is not necessarily offensive to everybody; it is a condition, it is cultural, and then we are defining nakedness here in a wrong format.  

The nakedness that we are worried about is exposure of the private parts of the person, which is about 10 per cent of the total body. That is our main worry. When you look at it, when you take the front part and the back part, it is about 10 per cent of the total body. So, Madam Speaker, my concern is that we should not confuse the private parts of a person and the total body exposure. 

If you go to the Southern part of Africa, especially Zulu, up to now for them all they do culturally is to cover the private parts, which is a limited area, and then the rest including the breasts are open.  It is part of the dancing and yet in our society here it could be regarded as offensive.  So, that is why I am saying it could be a matter of economic condition or cultural condition.  But for us to condemn it wholesale, it will not be fair.  There are people in my society who cannot afford it.  

I recall in 1980/1981 elections in Tororo District, there had been so much poverty that women could not register for elections until one with a gomesi would go and register then come back and give the other one to go and register.  When it came to voting day also, it was the same. So, you can imagine one dress for four people in a home for the purpose of meeting certain people’s cultural conditions.  

Madam Speaker - again my time has been taken up - on this question of moral vacuum. There is a moral vacuum in our society, and we as a Government are failing to live up to that challenge.  Why am I saying so?  Why would a social deviant become a hero to our children?  We have failed to tell our children what the morals of our society are.  Some people are saying ban Channel 5, which is showing Big Brother and people having sex all over the place.  As I said, Madam Speaker, this young man, I do not want to mention his name, otherwise it has become monotonous. We moved a motion to restrain his exposure, whatever it was, during the Worlds AIDS Day.  Madam Speaker, that young man became a hero to our young people in this society because he did have sex in the open notwithstanding the fact that we have so called ‘Straight Talk’ subsidized almost by the State.  So, Madam Speaker, the challenge is with us.  It is not so much laws per se, but how do we fill that moral vacuum?  We try to use political ideologies, but political ideologies will never fill that moral vacuum.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR AWORI: The last point again is the question of the media; that let us kill the media, let us kill the messenger.  We are the people responsible; we are the consumers; we are the producers of this pornography.  Red pepper has been mentioned, I challenge my honourable colleague to tell us the owners.  Who are the owners?  Very prominent people and I am sure some of my colleagues here have that information and I wish they could give it to us.  Two, Bukedde is 99 per cent Red Pepper in terms of presentation.  On front page, you see a lot of so-called social deviants -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you very much, hon. Awori.  Actually, I think in this country so many of us take rumours and take them to be true because this issue of Red Pepper being owned by great people is not true.  People talk like that because on the launching of that paper, I think the owners called Gen. Salim Saleh as the guest of honour like they call you people to go and officiate at functions.  But in there the poor man did not have any shares.  In fact, the person who had shares in Red Pepper is a gentleman from – there used to be a Radio in Mbarara called Great African Radio owned by Kaihura Nkuba.  Kaihura Nkuba made Red Pepper because people in other papers were attacking him.  So, he said, “Let me go and make a Newspaper.  When they attack me I will also use it to attack them.”  Now, unfortunately he joined some other quacks, the man who was publishing Shwenkazi in Orumuri and when this man came with his sexual perversion, he completely perverted the views and intentions of the poor man who owns the paper to the extent that they threw him out and they publish what they want, without even the control of the other man because he did not have more than 51 shares.  So, the problem with Red Pepper and its being banned is related to the laws and not related at all to big people.  That is the information I wanted to give on this Red Pepper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Awori.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable Colleague, for that information, but I would like to give more vivid examples.  Bukedde, as I said is almost 99 per cent Government paper.  What have we done about Bukedde with all those funny photographs of social deviants?  Orumuri, what have we done about it?  We are even afraid to come up with the message, leave alone restraining them.

Madam Speaker, if we are going to restrain the messenger, what are we going to do about ladies perfume?  There is what we call - the perfume you apply on to your body to smell different from the natural.  I am not being frivolous, but I know the people who manufacture perfume are saying, “This is perfume for a business meeting.”   When you are going to public for a business meeting this is the right type, and then if you are going for a social evening, this is the right type, and then if you are alone with your spouse, you want to arouse him –(Interjections)- him always.  Madam Speaker, I have read and I have heard that if you want to please your husband or your wife -(Interruption)

MRS CHELANGAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from hon. Awori.  What are the functions for the perfume, which men use?  If it is always him, what about the perfumes, which men use?  

MR AWORI: Thank you.  As I said, we have different types of perfume.  For us men, perfumes are generally manufactured for business and general purpose; it is true.  I would like to inform my honourable Colleague that a man who wears very powerful perfume in some circles is regarded as a social deviant or homosexual, but a man who wears a general perfume like the one for aftershave, that one is regarded as a gentleman.  At the same time for a lady, I know in certain societies, especially in Sudan, the traditional societies, the ladies did not have these manufactured things you have.  But they have certain grass you go and burn and then the smoke they blow it towards the lady in preparation for the husband’s entertainment on that particular evening.  


Now, my point here, Madam speaker- I do not want to deviate too much- My main concern here is, are we going to impose also the same restrictions to perfume manufacturers that you cannot make perfume for certain type of occasion; no.  

Last but not least, talking about morals.  As a government, once again we have a problem in the Police barracks whereby marriages are breaking up due to immorality.  Why have they become immoral suddenly?  You lump two or three families in the same little cubical or whatever you call it.  As a result the man who has gone on duty leaves his wife behind with a colleague who is off that particular evening –(Interjection)- other duties, not the other one you are referring to.  

I am glad the Minister of Internal Affairs is here; we have a problem of break up of marriages in the Police and AIDS as a result of lumping people together in environment which is very conducive to a break down of law and order.  So, Madam Speaker, to wind up, I am simply saying, the Government is responsible partly for not providing something in this moral vacuum that has come about.  So, for the Government to start combating the messengers such as the media at Internet we are wasting our time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Members, I had indicated that hon. Matembe will speak next, but I have just received information that we are receiving a delegation of Speakers and Deputy Speakers and Members of Parliament and senators attending the NEPAD and PR Review process conference here and they will be here at exactly 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon.  So, I would want us to break for lunch so that at exactly 2.00 p.m., we are back and hon. Matembe can take the Floor and we proceed; because if we stay much longer, you will not have enough time for lunch. So, the House suspended until 2.00 p.m.  Honourable Members, please, inform Colleagues to come back in time. I also have another important announcement, which I will only make at 2.00 o’clock; it is very important.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 1.03 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.27 p.m._)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we broke off for lunch, I did inform you that we are privileged to have in Uganda this week a group of Parliamentarians attending a Conference on the NEPAD and the PR Review process which are key features of the African Union and they have come at a time when we are preparing to hold our own elections for our representatives.  So, I would like you to join me in welcoming all our guests who are in the distinguished visitors gallery, and I would like to introduce the team to you.  We have: 

Hon. Dr Mulatu Teshome, Speaker, House of Federation, Ethiopia 
Hon. Ato Dawit Yohannes, Speaker, House of Peoples’ Representative, Ethiopia
Hon. Ms Baleka Mbete, Deputy Speaker, South African Parliament
Hon. Kellil Tahar, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament, Algeria 
Hon. Usman Bugaje, Chairman of a committee, Parliament of Nigeria 
Hon. Wale Okediran, a Member of Parliament from Nigeria
Hon. Irem Oka Ibom, Chairman of a committee, Parliament of Nigeria
Hon. Daniel Omara-Atubo, Member of Parliament, Otuke county, Uganda– (Laughter) 
Hon. Betty Udongo, Deputy Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, Parliament of Uganda
Hon. Priscilla Mishairabwi, Member of Parliament, Zimbabwe
Hon. Ibra Niokhobaye Diouf, Member of Parliament from Senegal
Hon. Mohammed Benyamina Aichouba, Chair of a committee, Parliament of Algeria.

We also have bilateral multilateral/Diplomatic partners: 
Mr Smuuda Mokoena- NEPAD, South Africa
Mr Peter Odenge- NEPAD, Kenya
Mr Nombuyiselo Mokoena- NEPAD, South Africa 
Mr Abdoulie Janneh- UNDP, USA
Mr T. Mushinga Bandora- UNDP, USA
Mr Zemenay Lakew- UNDP
Mr D. Omoweh- UNDP, Nigeria
Mr B. Toure- UNDP, Uganda, that is our own actually; he is our representative here.
Ms Aileen Marshall- GCA, USA
Mr Alexander Aboagye- UNDP, Uganda 
Mr Maasoum Marzouk, Ambassador of Egypt
Mr J K Shinkaiye, Ambassador of Nigeria
Mr Tokubo Ige- OHCHR, Swaziland 
Mr Ibrahim Wani- OHCHR, Ethiopia
Mr Akoute Akakpo Vidah- Rights of Democracy Montreal, Canada
Ms Lillie Chitauro, Parliamentary Centre of Canada

You are all welcome to the Parliament!  We also have several civil society participants from Uganda, from South Africa, from Senegal, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Nigeria.  All of you are welcome –(Applause)

Now, honourable members, I also have another announcement concerning the election of Pan-African Parliament. I did appoint Monday and Tuesday this week as nomination days for the candidates for those who would like to be elected.  So, the nominations will end at 5.00 p.m. today.  Immediately after the close of nominations, the list of Members who will have been successfully nominated will be compiled and circulated to Members of Parliament, which is the electoral college.  Tomorrow, Wednesday, 17 December 2003 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. has been allocated for the campaigning period before Parliament and each member will be given a period not exceeding 10 minutes to campaign for the elections.  

The voting will take place on Thursday, 18 December 2003 commencing at 10.00 a.m. and ending at 1.00 p.m. to facilitate counting, tallying of votes and the results will be announced before the close of business on Thursday.

Now, the rules permit potential candidates to campaign before nomination day, and may continue to do so after nomination and campaign days. I, therefore, encourage those who have been nominated to intensify campaigns between now and Thursday morning. So, good luck all of you!

2.33
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I must say that I am extremely happy that this Parliament has found it important to dedicate both morning and afternoon of today, to discuss this motion on pornography and its related evils.

Honourable members, as you may know, I personally have been associated with this fight against pornography for quite some time now, even long before I became the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. I remember when the Orumuri newspaper had an article on “Shwenkazi”, the people of Mbarara together with me, rose up in arms to fight that paper. It was preventing young people from studying, and to a certain extent we did succeed.  But recently, in fact yesterday, I saw “Shwenkazi” again! You should have looked at it; it is so nauseating and abominable. You know about Bukedde, you know about the Red pepper, you know about my bid to even run to these bars to close them. The Sax bar, the Nateete bar and you know people were saying: “She has failed to do her job, she is only running from place to place doing nothing.” So, I am so glad that Parliament now has seen the whole logic of discussing this evil with a view of finding what to do with it. 

In fact, if you remember, just in April before I left the job, the religious and Christians both led by the Archbishop of this country, the Cardinal and the Mufti, led a whole match up to this Parliament where they submitted their petition to the Speaker in my presence and were asking to do away with pornography, and in fact close the Red Pepper. I went armed with this petition thinking that now I am no longer a lonely voice, but I have the whole community of the Christians, the Moslems and everybody. And when I reached Ministry of Information I said, “Come on! We close Red Pepper right now.” You should have been there! (Laughter).  They called me and said, “Please Madam, relax, cool down. First of all, the media council is not there.  Secondly, if you touch it” –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, we have a procedure for dealing with petitions. Why has this petition not come to this House so that you can actually assign a committee to look at it, and then give a report back to this House so that we can pronounce ourselves on this terrible evil, which the honourable Member is talking about? I would like to suggest that if that petition exists, it is not too late. The petition should be brought to the House so that it follows the normal procedure of the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to retrieve that petition and advise me by 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  So, I am glad this motion is here really because things are going to now move more faster. Anyway, I was warned very seriously that if I go to Red Pepper and close it, the Government would be sued and lose a lot in damages. And that was the second time I was being warned to stop involving in things or acts that may cause Government to lose in damages. That is when I had gone to Nateete and closed that nakedness there. So, the battle against pornography and obscenity has been going on, and I left that ministry without succeeding a lot. 

But at least, some of those bars and premises had closed down. And you remember, when I was removed from the office, if you read the Red Pepper, they said that they gathered together and bottles of champagne rolled because God himself had fought that person who was fighting them. That is what they said in the Red Pepper. So, against this background, I am so glad that Parliament has clearly, through this motion, identified itself with the fight against pornography.  

I want to tell you that in this fight, we have been associating with a number of other organisations.  For instance, Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is an organisation known as the Family Life Network. Today we were recognising Dr Peter Mugenyi, but out there, there are some individuals committed to really work for this nation. There is a man called Steven Langa; he has been moving from school to school teaching the young people against pornography. I did not know that this motion would come today, but if you read Langa’s file and see the letters the children write to Steven to tell him how pornography has destroyed their lives, you can really cry. I did not know the impact of pornography on people, because for me I never watch these blue movies they talk about. But you need to read the letters of those young people in senior secondary schools where Steven Langa and family life education have been moving, and get what they are saying. 

Some of them have been forced to rape their sisters! They say it. They watch these things, then when they are sick, the sister brings a drink or something, he dives on the sister. Pornography is evil! And I remember one day Steven Langa and his association organised a seminar for the Members of Parliament, but only about five people went to that conference. It was telling the people the evils of pornography. They are very terrible and we must do something serious about this evil.  

Originally, whenever I talked about pornography, those times when I was the minister addressing the audiences, they were challenging me saying, ”But you are talking of these publications, the Monitor, Bukedde, Orumuri, what about Internet?” And you know I am not very well knowledgeable about this computer thing. So, I would be defeated; I did not have an answer.  Now I am so glad that hon. Mbabazi is coming out with something to help me that there is something, which you can put on the Internet to block off that pornography. So, I am very glad to hear that, that means there is hope in what we are doing.

Now, I must allude to what hon. Awori said that there is a moral gap in this nation. I am telling you and I had the opportunity to be your Minister of Ethics and Integrity, and what I was seeing - let me tell you, even with corruption, the biggest question is the personal will on the part of individuals to do away with these evils. 

I want to tell you that there are high levels of moral degeneration in this country, that when I was fighting “Shwenkazi” I sat in Orumuri office in Mbarara and they told me, “Madam, why do you not fight your people first before you fight our paper?” Because these people read this paper like mad people that before they put “Shwenkazi” in Orumuri, they were selling 300 copies and when they put “Shwenkazi” they sold 3000 copies. 

Therefore, the question is, we are standing here talking against pornography and immorality, but in our hearts of hearts, where do we stand? Because it is one thing putting the law and another, enforcing it. There is a law on pornography, it even attracts a sentence of two years of imprisonment. In my struggles together with the CID, we managed to arrest the Red Pepper publishers, took them to court, we went through the case, they were fined Shs 1,000! And you know Kutesa the CID chief rang me and said, “Matembe do not involve me in wasting my time anymore, how can I struggle like this and in the end they fine Shs 1,000!” Why they did not imprison them for the two years that they are supposed to do, I do not understand. Where are our morals?  Do we really condemn these things or we are interested and enjoy them?

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Matembe, for giving way. You have made a very vital point in respect of which I want to give this information. That it is possible that the magistrate who meted out the sentence did so the way he/she did because his/her hands were tied by the manner in which the penal code provision was expressed. If it, for example, expressed a prison term or maximum of two years or a fine, at the time of passing the sentence, that figure may have been the one that was available to the magistrate. But I agree with you that that aspect of the penal provision now can be looked at in order to provide for a meaningful penalty, for the type of offence you have just referred to. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe, let me just disrupt you a bit. I am sorry, honourable members, there was an omission on the list of our guests. I would like you to join me in welcoming as part of the NEPAD delegation, the hon. Mike Rugema from Rwanda; he is there in the gallery. The hon. P.C. Appia-Ofori from Ghana, and the hon. Andreas Nel from South Africa. (Applause). You are all most welcome; I am sorry about the omission.
  
MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Attorney General for the information he has given me. But, if we are to take these evils serious in our hearts and to institute deterrent sentences, since the law says liable to two years imprisonment or a fine, why do you not put some bit of that imprisonment to at least six months or one year, so that people can see that you are serious about enforcing morality and discipline in this country? So, I want to tell this honourable House that there are so many roadblocks towards enforcement of ethics and morality in this country. Our commitment to these issues as a Government, and our commitment at individual level, is heavily lacking. That is why you find debate of this Gaetano man, that is why you find when you passed a motion, people there were shouting on Ebimeeza that “Ennugu ebakutte” (you are so jealous) all that kind of nonsense. All this is reflective of our levels of ethical standards in this country, and we have a lot to do to really do away with these things. 

Therefore, as a way forward, I wish to suggest - because the law is already difficult to put there, it even takes a long time to come, we are not even sure as to how we should amend it, because you never know how it can catch a problem. If we pass this resolution, what is its effective impact? Since this matter has come and the Parliament has really expressed itself and it is so concerned, I want to suggest that if it is agreeable to this House, that we put a select committee which should go and study the details of these matters, look at the current law, look at its effect, look at its weaknesses, look at the Internet - because me I do not know how to block Internet - look at the global laws, look at what other countries have done. Because you know, these countries where evils come from, they have gadgets, they have mechanisms, they have machinery to prevent these evils from affecting their people. But for us we just swallow everything in the name of globalisation and development when in fact we are destroying ourselves. 

Therefore, I suggest that a select committee be put in place and it studies the extent, depth and the length of this problem so that it comes here and reports to us, having recommended on the way forward on these evils of pornography for children, pornography also for big people, because it breaks marriages. There are some men who have talked that because of pornography, their minds go meandering and the marriage fails because they cannot do what they are supposed to do - (Laughter)- even women also. So, I suggest that a select committee be put in place and it studies the details of this situation, and then they will bring a report here with recommendations on how to proceed. I am so thankful that I have been able to pour out my heart here and tell you the frustrations that I have been facing out there. At least I think this one will result into a step forward. I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank honourable members.

2.50
MS MARY MAGDALENE AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion on pornography.  But to me pornography is just a reflection of a sick society. (Applause).  And I think this society of Uganda is really sick. Therefore, in supporting the motion, I would like to address broader issues like the hon. Maria Matembe has done. But I would like to also focus on the environment, which does not have access to the Internet. What is their pornography? 

Their kind of pornography could even be more dangerous because it is live. When people sleep in uniports in police barracks; when the whole families sleep in the camps under one small hut, you can imagine what kind of live pornography they watch. Therefore, the issue of pornography, which is a symptom, one of the ways to address it is really to stop the war.  End the war, end the insurgency so that people begin to live and grow in normal families where the distribution of sleeping places and all the other activities are well catered for.  

In this country, we are having more than one generation of children who are not being brought up, but they are just growing up. They are growing up wildly in environments, which are not normal environments. It is, therefore, not surprising that you find the kind of misbehaviour that you find now in our societies. Even where sexual activities were condemned in the past like in most of our tribes, now they have become so loose. Even the people who are supposed to impose law and order are beginning to be the perpetuators of immoral behaviour in the camps. When you go to the camps in the North, you watch what happens in the evenings, it is a story of actually adding more injury to the people who are already injured by enslaving them into sexual activities.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, war, poverty are also contributing to the moral decadence of this society and I insist that pornography is just a symptom; we have to address the root cause. We have to find out why the laws in place are not effective. We have to stop this war. I understand wars usually are not won; they are stopped. Why does Uganda not stop the war? Are we prepared to have more than five generations of people who do not know what a normal family life is about? Are we prepared to have that in Uganda? We are just addressing a very small symptom. How many people have access to the Internet? The bigger problem is now and in the future.

Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank you for deciding to retrieve the petition, which was submitted to Parliament on pornography and having a deeper look at it. I also would like to support hon. Miria Matembe on the issue of the select committee. But I would like to suggest that let this committee not look at pornography alone, let it look at what we are going to do about the children who are coming out of the war situations, the child soldiers, the ones who really need a lot of rehabilitation. Are we addressing the rehabilitation  - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Sergeant please ask the Members who are in the lobby to either come back into the House or stop the campaigns, which are going on there.

MS AMAJO: Madam Speaker, I would like this select committee to look at broader issues. Otherwise, we are living on a time bomb and we do not know what country we shall be having in the near future.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Edward Babu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members.  First of all, as somebody who comes from a ministry that is concerned with communication, I am grateful that this motion has been brought, except I am sorry I do not think it is all-inclusive. This is a motion that is only limited to the Internet; this is a symptom.   Pornography is something a little bit wider than what you see here. In this country, we have television programmes that come from different sources. We even have now a cable television, we also have DSTV, although DSTV does give you an access to limiting children on certain programmes but a lot of our parents do not know how to use it.  Therefore, when they leave home and go to work, the children have access to programmes that are extremely dangerous and which are extremely bad for children who are below a certain age.

There are also other areas you have not talked about; that is violence on television. In the United States, they have come out with a law - with violence on television some children actually have shot their parents, have gone to school and shot their classmates. These are areas that you must look at. Therefore, this motion, as much as I appreciate it, it should go a little bit deeper. 

But first and foremost, Madam Speaker, I think the dailies that are circulated, that are read by everybody including those who do not have television; right now, they should be censored. I think our Minister of Information should censor these dailies that they do not produce certain photographs and we have the law that can do that right now. So, we start with the newspapers that go out and everybody has got access to them. The people in my constituency have asked me that certain newspapers that even belong to Government right now should stop producing certain photographs. Even those that are in the private sector, we have got the power as Government to stop them from producing certain photographs – (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. You have talked of a law that can be used. Maybe it would be better for Members of Parliament to know what that law is, because some of us have been confused as to whether that law exists or not. If there is a law, could you please cite that law?

MR MWANDHA: I am sure that the Minister of Information is well aware about this law and he has looked on while people have been downloading pornography from the Internet and putting them in dailies, which you are talking about. But I gather that the difficulty in this problem is that some of these papers have very important people in this country, and probably the Minister of Information may be helpless in bringing order with regard to the pornography, which is appearing now twice weekly in the dailies. Probably the minister will advice us. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my honourable colleague, for giving way. My honourable colleague enumerated a number of media that can be perverse of pornography. But I would like to inform you that the latest on the market is the mobile phone. There is a channel for pictures and a majority of those pictures are pornographic. I can actually send you a message of a naked woman to show a man how you love a, b, c, d on Mobile phone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I know you have the numbers for the Members of this House, but please do not send the messages. (Laughter).  

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable members for all the information but what this shows is that actually there has been a weakness, which we must now try and find solutions to. And before I go into – I did not bring the law with me, but I can work with other people in Government so that when we set up this Select Committee, all this information - the Attorney General will talk about it. But as we go on, I think when we set up the Select Committee, which I support very strongly, a lot of this information will come to us.  

But what is more, and I will ask the Attorney General later on to give us the information, is that since I was a kid cinemas in this country had censorship and there was a complete committee of government that set an age limit for certain types of cinemas. But as I talk now, we have video kiosks where young children go to watch video movies and these have got no law limiting them, and you find them in all areas in this town, especially in the congested areas like slums. These video places, which charge money, show movies but they do not have a censorship and a lot of our children end up in these little kiosks watching these videos. But more than anything else, when I heard about the moral decadence that some people are describing, there is even more to it.

Madam Speaker, in this country, smoking of weed or drug has become commonplace. A lot of our people are smoking marijuana or what a lot of people refer to as “Njaga” in our local languages. It is a common thing that most of our children have started doing, and this does contribute to a lot of problems that you are talking about right now.  

There is drinking. A lot of our children are drinking alcohol before they are of the right age. In most of the advanced countries, they have an age limit for drinking. You cannot buy a drink unless you are above a certain age, usually 18 or 21 in some states.

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, even bars have got a limited time of operation. All these things, we need to sit down as a Parliament before, you pass this resolution to include all of them in this resolution and give them the terms of references that they can look at all these things and find solutions to them.  

In fact, Madam Speaker, I am not only saying that only the Members of this House should do that, but we should also get experts from other countries which have found solutions to these problems.

For the Internet that is even more complex, you need experts to help our people, including all these little Cyber Cafes that have opened up in this town where our young people go and pay some little amount of money to surf the Internet without limit. These Cyber Cafes have allowed a lot of children to go there because they cannot access information in homes where they are limited. They can still go round and get this information from somewhere else. 

So, we need censorship on a lot of things. We need censorship on cable television, cinemas, video libraries - who gets the Video Library and who watches them? We need to look at the drinking age and eventually we need to look at the drugs and the way it has expanded and filtered even into schools.  

Madam Speaker, I support a select committee on this one and I think we should all support it, and if possible, we should get all the information and give it to them. Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Information is in position to say anything about this matter before we proceed.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I want to apologise that I was not available this morning. I was taken unaware by this motion. I also regret that my hon. Colleague, the Mover of this motion, who is a friend and we are in frequent contact, had not brought this matter to my attention. 

Otherwise I would have been here this morning and I would have also participated actively given that I am now Acting Minister for Ethics and Integrity, and I would have been able to provide a broader picture of what the problem is that we are faced with. But I do welcome my colleague’s motion because it is timely. It is one upon which the future of this country is premised, and it is about time that Parliament does address the subject.  

Having said that Madam Speaker, I just want to restrict my contribution, at this stage, to remarks made by hon. Mwandha and also to say broadly that I share concerns of the honourable members here.  

On the issue of government papers or those papers that associate with government, I have written recently a very strong letter to New Vision, to Bukedde and I actually had meetings as well, observing that it is absolutely unacceptable that government papers should be the ones promoting pornography. I expressed my view that this was intolerable, unacceptable and I am prepared to do more if they do not change the track. My appeal to hon. Members – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago, my hon. colleague, hon. Jack Sabiiti raised a matter of a specific law. I note with concern that my hon. colleague in charge of information among other things, including ethics, is saying that he wrote a letter to the government media warning them about this issue. I would like to know from the hon. Minister; are you aware of any specific law that you could apply, a law that we could quote to the relevant editors of these papers that are offending our morals? Quote them and give them notice that if they do not do 1, 2, 3; the law according to Section, a, b, c, d of the Penal Code will be applicable.

MRS MATEMBE: I have listened to the hon. Minister telling the House that he has written a letter to Bukedde and Monitor. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that in our inter-agency forum, we had even caused arrest of the Editor and Assistant Editor of Bukedde. We prosecuted them. The case was in court; I do not know even what has happened to it! Mr William Pike himself had to write and say, “I assure you we are not going to do this thing any more”, and that was about eight months ago or even a year ago. Now, if you are just writing a lette,r hon. Minister, I think you better do much more than writing that letter.

MR MUTULUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, some two months ago, I raised the issue of pornography and nudity in society, and the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, who happens not to be here, assured us that things were going to be solved. But to my dismay, it is even worse now. If you read last week’s Red Pepper, you would agree with me. I got a enough support here but we were assured that within a few weeks this problem would have been solved. But up to now actually it is growing worse.  I do not know what we shall do. Should we trust the Minister really? Is there no law as hon. Awori is saying, which can pin these people down? We should be serious; if there is no law, then let them bring it, we pass and we discipline these people.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A little while ago I gave information regarding the status of the law on this matter. Unfortunately, my colleague was not around.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to repeat, for benefit of my colleague before he makes his contribution, that there are two laws, which were referred to here, namely, the Electronic Media Law and the Journalism and Press Law. I did say that in those laws there are no provisions, which specifically cover the situation that we are dealing with. I have heard on the Floor of this House that we used to have what is Censorship Board. Indeed, in the early and late 1960s because there was a law setting up that board. We do not now have that law, neither do we have that board. The hon. Awori may be very helpful here because he was a high profile person in the Ministry of Information and I think he was a member of that board. 

But let me inform my colleague that as far as those two laws are concerned, including the Penal Code, the law is very weak. If you go and look at the provisions of the Penal Code, especially, the provisions regarding indecency or indecent assault and all manner of exposure, which are forbidden, the penal provisions are very weak. Therefore, it is indeed a welcome development if the state of the relevant laws can be reviewed with a view to dealing with this problem. That is the information, which I had given earlier on, before my colleague came in. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the Minister has written to the New Vision and Bukedde, which are less violators of people’s morals. Can he explain why, for a reason we cannot understand, he is sparing the Red Pepper?  

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want the Minister to clarify to me. Really the issue of corrupting the morals of our childrens is very serious! When The Monitor trod on dangerous grounds in Northern Uganda, an administrative action was taken immediately and it was disciplined there and then. Why don’t you - in spite of lacunas within the law, why do you not take an administrative action against these immoral, corrupt officials of these days? Why don’t you, for God’s sake? I thank you.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the Members’ concerns and I certainly share with them the view that we have got to get a little bit harder and tougher. But I draw the attention of the honourable members to a point raised by my hon. colleague, the Attorney General, that the laws we have in place at the moment are not sufficiently able to deal with this new situation that we are facing. That is why I have drawn this matter to the attention of the Attorney General so that the laws that are existing are updated to deal with this new situation. So I beg the indulgence of honourable members that, much as they are expressing great anger, we should wait a little bit and see how, once we have tightened our laws, we can actually deal with this situation.  

Let me, Madam Speaker, assure honourable members that not only is their concern my concern, as I did say, I happened to meet the proprietors concerned and their editors and referred to them the provisions of the existing law, much as it is not adequate in a sufficient way, and that was not to suggest –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for accepting this issue on which I seek his clarification. He is giving us all the positive hope that something will be done. But a few months back when he was still the Chairman of a sessional committee responsible for Presidential Affairs, which also happens to be the same committee, which is responsible for information; he was given a petition by people who demonstrated against the indecent pictures produced by the Red Pepper and he never took any action.  How sure are we that now that he is a minister and he is making all these promises that he will act? How sure are we that he will be able to act if the other day he did not act? But he is the arm of Government, let him commit himself to us so that we know hon. Nsaba Buturo, who the other time failed to act on a motion or a resolution, will be able to act this time. We need that assurance.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my hon. colleague in charge of information, ethics and now in charge of other things also, mentioned that it is the Broadcasting Council, which is a regulatory body in charge of the electronic media. I wonder whether in their powers they have inserted a clause giving them the capacity to censure or determine the kind of messages they would transmit to the general public.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, again I acknowledge the concerns of Members, and just to pick on the point raised by my colleague there, when the hon. Speaker gave me the assignment to take up the matter concerning the Red Pepper, at that point I was appointed minister and the matter should now be with the Chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee.  

But having said that, Madam Speaker, it is also true that my colleague, hon. Tim Lwanga, and myself have met several times to try and work out the best way of dealing once and for all with this matter that is before the House. I just want once again to seek the indulgence of honourable members because the concern they are expressing is the same concern we have. 

I want to assure members that with a little bit of time, and having referred to the matters of the laws that we have in existence not being sufficiently able to address this new insurgency of immorality in our land, if I may call it that, we will come up with something. I am sure they will appreciate. 

Can I inform the House, Madam Speaker, that this week I have a major meeting with all the media houses. Let me say this is not a weak approach. Yes, it is true we have laws that we may apply even when they are not adequate, but we thought that it may be better to give them one more chance so that if they do not change, we are able to come up and say, “Look, we told you and you did not co-operate”. 

I have confidence in my colleague, hon. Tim Lwanga, and in myself to deal with this matter that is causing grief to honourable members.

Can I also, Madam Speaker, refer to the point raised by my colleague that some big people, I do not know which ones he has in mind, have got a hand in some of the print media. I am not going to be intimidated at all, assuming that what the honourable member is saying is true. The law must apply. 

I passionately hold the view that if we do not bring about a moral situation whose values are the foundation of our society, this country is going to be in deeper trouble indeed. Madam Speaker, if I may stop here and also assure members that we are determined to see the situation changing in the new year. We want to make reference to the concerns members have at this stage –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: I raised matters relating to the Red Pepper. I do not know whether the Minister does not have an answer. If he does not, why does he not say so?  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I may have missed the point the honourable member is referring to. Perhaps with your permission  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I do not know whether you raised it today or some time back.  When did you raise the matter? Can you repeat what you wanted him to respond to?

MR MWANDHA: You see, the way the Minister is beating about the bush creates suspicion about this paper. I told him that there are allegations that the reason he cannot act is because some very important people own this paper and the Minister would not dare to do anything about it. 

He said he has written to New Vision, the less offending paper. I asked, “But what have you done to the Red Pepper?” The Minister gave all sorts of other issues and quietly said he is closing. He raised nothing about this particular matter. So, does he have an answer or doesn’t he, or does he want hon. Kagonyera to answer for him? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but hon. Mwandha, you know that early this afternoon hon. Matembe, who was in that hot seat battling all these publications, gave detailed information. She said that Red Pepper is not owned by big people. She said that this afternoon.  

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, I do not know when the onus shifted, I thought that he who alleges ought to prove. The onus is on him to prove it. Can hon. Mwandha tell this House who these important people are? Because to challenge the Minister when he has got information, I think he is being unfair to this House. 

He is the one who is alleging there are big people behind this Red Pepper. I think the onus is on him to tell this House, who these big people are, or withdraw.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I would like to know is, what difference does it make whether it is owned by big people or small people.  I think the issue here is pornography, and that is what we want to address. So, what difference does it make this afternoon? 

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate hon. Kutesa’s point and I am not sure whether our colleague will respond to that one.  

But I just wanted to make this one final point, Madam Speaker. We are determined to deal with this matter and I seek the indulgence of members. Next time round we will be reporting to this House measures we have taken to deal with this pandemic that is encroaching on our moral conscious. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps hon. Matembe could be preparing the motion when the Minister finishes we – it is hon. Kagonyera.

3.27
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add a few comments on what my colleague has said, and some of them are of historical context. 

The Attorney General has informed this House that the relevant laws concerning this subject are weak. Since he is the Government’s advisor on legal matters, we take his counsel 100 percent. 

However, I would like this House to know the reasons why these laws may be weak. When the then Minister of Information brought a bill here - one or both of them, I cannot remember the details - this House literally threw the proposed bill out as being a draconian law and giving the Minister too much power. It is this House which watered down that law.  

At that time we felt it was right. I know this because I was a member of this House and a member of the committee, which was appointed by this House to re-write the law. We thought at that time the ministers were giving themselves too much power and restricting the media, and doing all sorts of things. 

Now, Madam Speaker, we are reaping where we sowed. I am advised that the die has been cast. So, that is part of the problem.

Secondly, when we were writing the law, we studied the media laws of very many countries with regard to pornography especially, and we got all sorts of definitions. For example, in the Scandinavian countries, pornography is only pornography when young children are exposed. Otherwise, if you are an adult in those countries, there is no pornography; everything is normal. That is what the law told us there and then. 

I wish hon. Kalule Ssengo were in the House, I would say he is a little bit on the conservative side of the spectrum. The man fought tooth and nail about the issue of censorship. But people laughed it off. They said, “You man, how are you going to the various homes and to cinema houses, censoring what is being shown? People are going to carry mini-films in their pockets, they will go and hold conferences.” 

So, we found it extremely difficult to put in that law sufficient means for us to be able to control pornography and at the same time allow the media to grow. One of the victims of mismanagement of society has always been the media. The Government is always too hard on the media and I think that is why hon. Aggrey Awori was a little bit unwilling to identify himself with being on the censorship –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that I am proud of my performance on that board and I have no intention of regretting it at all. I performed well and society was morally clean at that time.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I do not doubt hon. Awori’s enthusiasm for doing what he was supposed to do then. What I was telling this House is that we had an extremely difficult time. 

The third point I want to make is legislating for morality. We are going to have serious problems dictating to this country what is moral and what is immoral. At my age, my spectrum of acceptance is very narrow, but my children it is different. I remember talking to my son about the Red Pepper. He said, “But daddy, if the Red Pepper did not publish these things, you would not know that they are happening in this country so that you deal with them.” So - (Honourable members rose_)- Which one do I take? I will take the doctor’s information.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the respectable minister has brought up the point of legislating for morality. What we are trying to do here is not to legislate for morality but to keep up the moral standards, which are acceptable in this country. 

We are saying films of nude people, or nude girls dancing in nightclubs, are not acceptable in this country. We are saying publishing pictures of nude women or men in magazines is not acceptable. 

This nation is founded on morals, either the Christians or Moslems. When you survey the rural areas, or the majority of the people in this country, there is what is acceptable and what is not acceptable. 

You mentioned censorship and what we were concerned about when we were talking about censorship is preventing the media from publishing what is true, whether it hurts some people or not. We were not really addressing pornography. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much. I thank the Minister for giving way. The Minister is portraying the Red Pepper as a messenger. Some of these pictures in the Red Pepper are stage-managed, manipulating the youth, and they are being paid money to stage such shows. I challenge the Minister to ask the Red Pepper to produce those people in court. Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I be allowed to complete what I have to say, hon. Mwandha, please? I do not want my colleagues to misunderstand me. 

While this thing in Southern Africa was taking place, it was not watched in my home. I totally embargoed the damn thing. But we have many people who were watching this thing all the time - the Gaetano thing. In my home it was not allowed. So, I do not want anybody to misunderstand me that I support these things, I do not. 

What I am bringing to this House is that we must not raise false hope. We will put the laws in place. The Anglican Church is now splitting in the middle; there are people who want to marry men, which is an abomination as far as I am concerned. So, we are splitting. These are the morals I am talking about. If you listen to radio stations, Madam Speaker, it is amazing the amount of things that go over them. We have to make a choice now. 

We agreed that the market forces would apply. This media is business, they carry out their polls and they find out what people want to listen to. Even people who advertise want to find out how many people listen to your radio, how many people read your paper, and that is how you get business. 

So, market forces are applying. In fact I was surprised, I think I have said it in this House before, if you listen to Radio West in Mbarara and Radio for Development in Rukungiri, the programmes on those two radio stations are so different from the programmes of those in Kampala. You try and listen to them. 

Why? Because the kind of things people enjoy in Kampala cannot sell over there. Those are rural people who want development programmes and so forth. But here, the sort of things that the market and people like to listen to! 

Every so often I tell my driver, “Switch off that damn radio, I do not want it.” -(Interjection)- Yes, I do dictate inside my car. So, I would like my colleagues in this House to know that we are dealing with a very serious problem and it is terrible. 

How do we move our people away from adopting obnoxious traits of behaviour from foreign countries and we refuse to adopt those that are useful for our development, our good health and so forth? We have a challenge. I do not think it is enough for the Minister of Information to bring bills here with the Churches, and everybody will have a hell of a job to do, to totally orient our people from being perversion-oriented. 

Someone was telling me, Madam Speaker, that if you have something that will help you look into peoples’ lives in the evening or far away from the premises of Parliament and so forth, you would be surprised by the kind of things you would see. So -(Laughter)- I am treating this subject as academically as I possibly can to prepare my colleagues –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: The information I would like to give to Prof. Kagonyera is that he has lived in California in the USA where there is a lot of liberalism. But for those people who like those obscene materials, there is a special place, which is licensed and you go there. And nobody under 18 years is allowed. 

We know we cannot ban immorality and pornography and all that, but for those people who want it, let there be legislation so that those who do not want it are protected. 

I do not want my children to read ordinary mail and they find it so -(Interjection)- yes, that is it exactly. Those people who want it, sure they can go there and pay the licence fees, but those of us who do not want it, and our children who do not want it, let it not be in the domain. We want to follow the normal society so that the good people are protected. Those who want it, that is their business. But we do not want the normal people to be contaminated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister please, wind up.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Nkuuhe. Actually, if you want my view, I would even go further. If you say, “Let only those who want it have it”, it is dangerous because our children are going to be curious. They will ask, “Why are they stopping us from going there?” So, you are causing a problem. 

You might as well say, “All of you, for the common good of everybody, are not allowed.” And indeed there are so many things we are not allowed to do even if we like them, because it is in the interests of the majority of the people that we do not do these things.  

During break time I consulted Dr Nkuuhe and asked whether it is technically possible for us to do what is in the proposed resolution. The answer was in the affirmative. Therefore, I have absolutely no problem with it. 

All I was doing is to let my colleagues know that the situation is not as easy as is being portrayed and, therefore, we should be prepared for a lot of work in improving the morals of our people and directing them to be positive rather than negative in their behaviour. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.42
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, in view of the complex nature of the subject being discussed, I beg to move that this House appoints a select committee, which will do the following:

1. Study the extent of the problem of pornography in this country and its negative consequences on our people

2. Study the existing law(s) on the subject

3. Study the technology available for communicating and controlling it. And I am saying that the committee so appointed should be able to co-opt experts that can help it to do its work

4. It should also study the petition by the religious people and the civil society submitted to this House earlier.

I am tempted to put in something, which has not been discussed here, but goes with it - the publication of the naked bodies. I do not know how to put it, is it violence? Because we see victims of road accidents and you find dead bodies, naked on the road, we try to fight publication of such pictures and people continue to do that. Is that not violence on bodies? I do not know. I have not discussed that anyway, but in discussing my motion I thought it could be addressed. 

Having done all these, the committee should recommend to this House the best way forward on how we can deal with this problem. The recommendation should also cover the appropriate laws that could be put in place to sort out the problem. That is the motion. I beg to move.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I thought we had a motion on the Floor already. Is this one amending the one on the Floor or does it supersede it? Is the honourable mover of the original motion now withdrawing it in favour of this one of hon. Matembe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have joined hands. The mover and hon. Matembe have joined hands and are now moving this. Honourable members, you listened to the debate this morning and this afternoon. The matters are much bigger than first appeared in the motion. I put the question that the motion, as moved by hon. Matembe, be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the committee will be appointed before we go on recess.


CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE ON THE CAUSES OF STUDENTS STRIKE AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AND MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recollect this report was presented and debated. We were in the process of adopting it when certain issues were raised on some of the recommendations, and the Government had requested for an opportunity to go and consult and come back to this house with proposals. So, it is the Government, which has something to say on some of the recommendations.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for summarising the history of this matter. We requested for some time to make consultations on the recommendations and I am glad to report that we have carried out the consultations. This is the Government’s position:

Recommendation No. 1 is fully acceptable. Recommendation No. 2 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, let us move like this. Let us first propose to adopt the report and then we start with particular recommendations, and then you can move yours.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the specific recommendations. I hope you have your copies.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I thought the chairperson of the committee would read the recommendations and the Minister would come in where he agrees or he wants amendments, so that we could move forward correctly.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you, Madam and honourable members. 

The Committee on Social Services recommends that this august House approves that the Ministry of Education and Sports ensures that the management of institutions improve on the method of payment of the students’ allowances, to avoid delays. They should improve their internal systems of processing funds. I do recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation No. 1 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 1, agreed to.

Recommendation 2:

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the system of communication between the central administration of the institutions and students should be improved. I do recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that recommendation No. 2 be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 2, agreed to.

Recommendation 3:

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, according to Makerere University officials, the increased strikes and insecurity at the University are sometimes instigated by sections of outsiders. 

The committee recommends that those outsiders should stop.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we debated this matter, let us hear what the Government has to say.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, the Government accepts the first part of the recommendation but we propose the following amendment to the second part. That we delete the words “that those outsiders should stop.” 

Those words should be replaced with, “That universities and other tertiary institutions should make appropriate arrangements to facilitate interactions between the community and the universities and tertiary institutions.” I beg to move.

MRS HYUHA: The committee approves and supports it.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, I want to be clarified. Sometimes these so-called outsiders are invited by student bodies on the campus. In such a situation, what does this outsider do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The new addition from the Minister is calling upon the universities to facilitate those meetings, the interaction between outsiders and the students. That is the amendment they have added.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation No. 3 as amended be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 3, agreed to.

Recommendation 4:

MRS HYUHA: The committee recommends that education institutions that generate internal revenue should set their priority lists and not wait for government releases to pay the students. They should be encouraged to use locally generated revenue to settle urgent needs as they wait for government releases. I do recommend.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, this recommendation relates to internal management of the institutions and we do not think that it is appropriate. We should leave this matter to the institution itself to see which vote it is going to charge temporarily while waiting for other monies. Therefore, we propose that this recommendation should be deleted.

MRS HYUHA: Well, the Minister means that it is applied, and I know in practice this is what happens. So, I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that recommendation No. 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the use of live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations must stop. I do recommend.

DR MAKUBUYA: We as Government have considered this recommendation and we think that it should be deleted. It should be replaced by the following recommendation: “The Police must use maximum restraint in handling students’ demonstrations.”

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally disagree with the Minister. I was one of those people who were almost shot at in Makerere during the strike. The window screens of my car were totally damaged and I survived only by God’s grace. We cannot play about with human life. What you are proposing is very vague. You are saying the Police must use maximum restraint in handling students’ demonstrations, no! 

The committee said the Police must not use bullets. I think it should remain so and I appeal to honourable members of this House to oppose the Minister, and very strongly.

PROF. MWAKA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to oppose the Minister’s position. Whenever anything bad happens, they say these people did it as individuals not as the Police as a whole. So, we want to know. All the individuals in the Police should not use live bullets. 

When we say “maximum restraint”, those individuals will remove that restraint and do the same. The first one is good; life is life. We are passing it now, the next day it will be our own children who are just passing by and they will be victims of circumstances. 

Why don’t we use tear gas, why don’t we use rubber bullets? One time a girl in Africa Hall was hit by a rubber bullet and she had to be in hospital for about a month, so they are bad enough. A rubber bullet is bad enough, really, if it gets a good target. Why do we use live bullets? What is there in a live bullet other than ultimate killing? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On this matter of the Police, in the official technical or security language they normally say you use approved methods for crowd control. That is what they normally use, “approved methods of crowd control”. 

In Police language once you say, “approved methods of crowd control” you are actually excluding gunpowder – (Mr Ayume rose­_)- I am giving way to the Attorney General in the light of my definition of approved methods of crowd control excluding live bullets.

MR AYUME: I was a little bit tickled by what my honourable good friend meant by these approved methods of controlling assembly. I think the laws talk about use of force, which is commensurate to “deal with the circumstances”. In the real jargon they would say, “force which is necessary in the circumstances.” 

When you talked of “approved”, which law is going to give you a list of approved ways? It is just one force under our laws that can be used to contain a situation including dispersing a riotous assembly or unlawful assembly. But that, such a force as is necessary may be used - that is how the law describes it. The law does not say this method is approved or the other. 

MR AWORI: I would like to acknowledge the information of my honourable friend but with some doubts. Yes, you are telling me the law, but when you are training the police force they know approved methods. Any policeman will tell you. 

Some of the colleagues here have been in the police force, when you say approved methods there is a procedure. Number 1 is to read what they call the Riot Act to the crowd saying, “please disperse or else I use force”. That is the first stage. 

Number 2 is to use tear gas. That is the crude method. Number 3 is to use live bullets as the last resort. When the lives of the police officers are threatened, then you can use live ammunition. That is what I call approved methods. 

So, there is procedure 1, 2, 3, 4, and you do not jump from item No. 1 to item No. 6. That is approved procedure. Check with any policeman they will tell you that this is what they are trying to do.  

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to seek clarification – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From who?

MR KAKOOZA: From the Prime Minister. As much as they say that the police must use maximum restraint, there is a problem. Sometimes some soldiers go to the university and a strike can happen, for example recently when the Vice President was there and the Army had the guns, how do they handle such a situation?

MR AWORI: I can inform my honourable colleague, Madam Speaker, that the way the situation was handled by the security forces on that specific occasion was wrong. 

One, as I have said in this august House before the security exposed the life of the Vice President, of the Prime Minister and Chancellor, of the Speaker, unnecessarily. When the ceremony started, they knew that the students were restless. I was there.  

When you come out of a building the normal procedure of escorting a VIP is to clear his passage, a minimum of half a kilometre. They came out and exposed the life of the Vice President. They knew the passage had been blocked by some rowdy students. Instead of withdrawing the Prime Minister, the Vice President – (Interjection) - I had passed. I had no problem passing the roadblock. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the procedure of the – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think with that contribution you are now endangering the lives of the VIPs. If people hear that certain things were not done well, they can be taken advantage of. I think do not discuss the failures.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you are absolutely right. In security terms you do not point out the failures. But at the same time, when you point out the failures, you are also warning the enemy that, “we are aware of our shortcomings last time and we are going to plug that loophole”. So, nobody should assume that they can repeat the same method and do harm to the person. 

Otherwise, I do accept your advice and ruling that it is not proper to discuss the security of a VIP especially a Vice President, a Prime Minister and our Speaker, who is number three in the country.

Madam Speaker, to come back to the main substance of this debate, my main concern is communication as we put in these recommendations. Crowd control is so important. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to inform the office of the Vice President through his minister here, that as much as I appreciate that the escort of the Vice President is the same as that of the President, the number of times the Vice President exposes himself to a crowd is a lot more than the President. In which case, the method of crowd control cannot be the same as the presidential escort. 

Presidential escorts only carry live ammunition. But in this case, as a first step they should also be equipped with tear gas. Two, it is now standard procedure that trained dogs must accompany a VIP for the following reasons: One, these sniffer dogs determine – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my friend for giving way. I just want to seek some clarification. If we have failed to feed the few dogs we have now, how shall we feed the extra dogs you are talking about?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to acknowledge receipt of my honourable colleague’s concern. At the same time I want to inform him that these dogs are for a specific purpose. If we cannot afford to feed one dog it means we are underestimating the value of VIPs, especially the ones we have named already. 

So, those who are responsible for the security of our VIPs must make sure that our dogs are properly fed. To ignore the role of a sniffer dog especially when you see regularly on CNN what is happening in Baghdad, you are failing in your duty to protect a head of state, his number two, number three and so forth.  

Madam Speaker, I can see other people would like to contribute. I would have liked to go into more details on the matter of security of the VIPs so that we do not expose our students, our children to unnecessary problems of fatality in the event we use live ammunitions. I was hurt when I was invited officially at Makerere – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I do not think that the Vice President or the Chancellor will be involved in a riotous assembly each time they go there. Let us concentrate on how to manage demonstrations of students generally, without going to the Vice President and the Chancellor. They are not there all the time.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last point really is a matter of information. In this august House, my honourable colleague, hon. Bigirwa, informed this House and Government specifically that there was trouble brewing at MUBS. The Government ignored that warning. I repeated the same warning because I was aware of what was happening on the ground; again Government ignored it. So, my advice to the Government is that they should do a lot more intelligence and that intelligence is not a matter of security per se, but also to know the feelings and the welfare of the students to pre-empt unnecessary problems.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
4.06
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is not true that management of these various systems is uniform all over the world. If you go to any campus in the United States and there is a function by students going on, the police are armed to the teeth with live bullets and I studied in America, therefore, I know it. On the other hand, in Britain, almost every policeman is carrying no firearm. It is going to change because of the level of violence. Therefore, it is not correct to say that there are uniform methods of managing these situations.

Hon. Aggrey Awori told us that we knew that there was heightened tension. I think he failed to add that probably we knew as he knew –(Mr Kagimu rose_)- no, I am not accepting that information, read the rules.  Madam Speaker, I listen patiently, I do not want to be interrupted. So - (Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, professor, you are very wise. I was surprised that a teacher could not be so patient like that. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable professor that why the police in America must be armed to the teeth is because people are free to have guns. Students can have guns; anybody can have guns, which is not the case in London. So, on that America issue, you should be informed, professor. With all your wisdom and your age, you should know all this. (Laughter)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I totally do not accept the insinuation of the honourable Member because I am a wise man –(Laughter)– yes I am.  That is why precisely, if he had listened carefully, I said that the methods are not uniform.  He is saying in America it is because people are free to carry arms. That is why precisely they are different.  

Now, hon. Ndeezi said that he was saved by God’s mercy from these marauding students. So, I thought he should have added that maybe the Police did not do enough to protect him; they did not. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I totally disagree with hon. Aggrey Awori. If we knew that there was heightened tension - and especially the committee dug behind and knew that there were probably people from outside who were heating up the situation at Makerere, that is why that recommendation was there. Although we discouraged, we know only too well that there were people involved in these things. That is neither here nor there. So, hon. Aggrey Awori, I want to disabuse you of the information that you knew that there were heightened –(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, the Member holding the Floor used my name and misquoted me to satisfy his interests. I am rising to give him proper information but he is refusing. Is he in order?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know it is up to a Member to yield the Floor. All I do is to indicate that there is some information, and the Member decides whether to yield the Floor or to continue. So, it cannot really be a point of order. But maybe if you stand again he will yield the Floor.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually I must definitely apologise to the hon. Ndeezi, I had not seen him. He is a man I respect very highly. Had I seen him, I would have had no problem in giving way –(Interruption)- yes that is a hard fact of life. Can you pretend that you respect everybody in the same manner? You would be deceiving yourself and the rest of the world. You would – (Laughter)- we are not the same, we are different. Half of us must recognise that.   

Madam Speaker, now the incident at Makerere was a very unfortunate incident on both, I think I can accept, the part of us but also on the part of the students. Normally, a Vice President of a country, a new Chancellor of a university, a Speaker of a Parliament of a country, are people who should be reasonably respected by everybody including those students who were demanding for taxpayers’ money. It is not theirs! It is my money, it is his, it is yours and I pay for my son by the way. They are our children. This is the House, which appropriates the money they want and they wanted to extinguish the person who presides over the House. It is not proper! Now, when you start throwing stones, which are really lethal weapons, at the Vice President’s entourage, obviously you are creating a situation that is a little bit unusual. 

Madam Speaker, had we known, like probably some of our colleagues knew, that there was this heightened tension, actually the university should have invited the riot police to man the situation. The problem we had is that the riot police had not been invited because we assumed that we had a great day of having the first non-president Chancellor of the university and everybody was in celebrant mood. We did not realise that there were people who never wanted it to be good and they were behind this thing. In fact, what you should have recommended is a thorough investigation as to whether there was the possibility and the culprits ought to be brought to book. 

Hon. Awori again said that the escort of the Vice President should not be armed with bullets. Surely, that is not really advisable! Or if he did not say it, I apologise. But they are armed with live bullets because if the life of the Vice President is seriously threatened, maximum force - this time not maximum restraint, but maximum force - will be used. So, we had a situation where maximum force could have been used and the reason why Government thought we should use this term “use of maximum restraint” it seems to me and I am subject to advice that this is a terminology that is used all over the world. In other words, exercise maximum restraint. You are given a latitude, you are supposed to restrain yourself, but just in case the situation demands, then you go beyond. 

So, we had put this one maximum restraint to really tell the Police not to go beyond certain measures unless the situation demands it. That is why we advised that we amend the proposal by putting this statement that the police must “use maximum restraint” in handling students. In other words, they are dissuaded from using force it is not necessary, and that is all we wanted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose the amendment proposed by the minister on recommendation number five, for the following reasons. During the course of this debate on the cause of strikes in MUBS and Makerere, I did observe that strikes and demonstrations are really not limited to students. I appreciate the fact that this subject matter is dealing with the students’ demonstrations. But what would happen in a situation of workers’ demonstrations in a school or in an institution? We should maintain the recommendation that the committee came up with, but with an amendment of deleting the word “students.” 

Use of live bullets to quell demonstrations must stop because this would spread across the board.  Madam Speaker, I am speaking with a lot of pains.  I am one of the victims of one of the demonstrations we had in Makerere University. On the 10 December 1990, I happened to be standing side by side with my befallen comrade Onyango, when we had actually assembled to call off a peaceful strike that had ran for almost one week. So, when we had assembled to call off that strike live bullets came around. The biggest scar I have on my body I sustained it from Makerere University on that day. God forbid! I was beaten by five armed policemen who actually pulled me from the dead body of Oloka, my right leg was in the pool of blood. They pulled me and tortured me and threw me onto a barbed wire fence with bullets spraying every corner.  

Madam Speaker, I still support the recommendation that the committee came up with but we should delete “students” and let is read, “Use of live bullets to quell demonstrations must stop.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mwandha.

MR MWANDHA: On the wording the minister has used, I think the minister wanted to use the word “exercise” as opposed to “use” because when you use the word “use” you are in effect saying that they were not exercising maximum restraint. But I think what the minister meant was, they should “exercise maximum restraint” and if he used the word “exercise” as opposed to “use” I am supporting.

4.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker, I want to thank honourable members, for their contributions. But I would have loved the honourable Minister to respond to hon. Mwandha’s clarification because I have similar difficulty. When we are talking of use of live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations, we wanted our scope to go beyond Makerere and look at the entire student population in this country. It is very common and in most of our reports we have brought on this Floor, we have always mentioned the concerns of the committee on the rampant strikes in secondary schools. We have had incidences in secondary schools. 

Madam Speaker, when we were still in the 6th Parliament not long ago, a student of school of journalism called Higenyi, was shot around Uganda House here. He was on his business, he was from my constituency, actually from my parish and we went to bury. So, how many students have we lost in Makerere? So, what we had in mind as a committee is that students’ demonstrations are a constitutional right, they can make peaceful demonstrations, and police should guard them. 

But under certain circumstances like what happened in Makerere, whereby we had dignitaries and outsiders joining students and sharp instruments or sticks or whatever being involved - so in the discussion, Madam Speaker, I wanted the honourable members to help us shape this amendment for the benefit of our students so that we do not lose lives during the time of quelling the students’ demonstrations. Therefore, I would want the minister, given the proposal by hon. Mwandha - does that mean that when we have the situation going out of hand, tear gas could be applied, rubber bullets could be applied otherwise it could happen. I wanted the honourable Minister to comment and then we conclude on this matter.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I want the honourable Chairperson also to help the House. “Use of live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations.”  Must demonstrations be quelled?  Demonstrations are legal, they are allowed, they need not to be quelled. So, in other words, her committee was talking about a peculiar situation, which should come out clearly. But otherwise, to say you must not use live bullets to quell students’ demonstrations - first of all, students’ demonstrations do not have to be quelled. They have to get out of hand, they have to break the law before you interfere. Therefore, you have to tell us exactly when it becomes necessary to quell students’ demonstrations and later on the use of live bullets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Chairperson, I do not know whether they were talking of a riotous assembly or a demonstration.  But also I would like the Minister of Education to tell us whether he has any problem with enumerating the steps, which can be taken in order to put down a strike. Hon. Chairperson, is it a demonstration or a riotous assembly because in demonstrations, they walk, they sing. But are we talking of riotous assembly?

MRS HYUHA: Actually, we were meaning a riotous situation. And when you look at how this report is giving the history of what happened in Makerere, it started as a peaceful demonstration and it ended up the way it was. So, it can start as a peaceful demonstration and eventually it becomes riotous if it is not controlled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Attorney General help us to reformulate this, because what they are talking about is a riotous assembly not a demonstration per se. I do not know whether you can help us to reformulate while the Minister is responding.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson and the honourable members, for their contribution on this item -(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, is he winding up that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are trying to define what kind of crowd we want to control and how. That is what we have asked him to tell us. Do you have a problem?

MR KAGIMU: Yes, I have a problem. Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Attorney General. Does the Police Act allow Policemen to use live bullets? I ask this because if the Act allows them, they will disregard our resolutions, according to the statement of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, that some of these resolutions are just advisory. So now, I want clarification from the Attorney General whether the Police Act allows them to use live bullets then I can move something. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, on occasions like this one, the Police Act does not say whether the Police should use or not use live ammunition to contain riots. But what I do remember is that the Police are allowed, say if a lawful assembly later on becomes an unlawful assembly by its being riotous, then the Police should say so, and in fact tell the people who are gathered that the assembly, which was initially lawful is now unlawful because it has turned into a riotous assembly, and order them to disperse. It is only when they refuse to disperse that the Police are required under the law to use such a force as is necessary. Those are the words, “as is reasonably necessary to disperse the crowd.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should try to evolve the stages the Police should go through before they use live bullets.  Does the Minister have a problem in responding that to such and such an assembly, the Police should do; 

    (1) Read the riot Act
    (2) Order dispersal
    (3) Use tear gas
    (4) Use rubber bullets if all else fails. 

Is there a problem with that?

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, if this is the case, according to the Minister’s explanation that the Police is allowed to do what is necessary, I think I am going to move a Private Members Bill to amend the Police Act in quelling demonstrations.  Thank you very much.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you once again, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Let me preface my reaction to these proposals like this. The students have a constitutional right of peaceful assembly and demonstration. In my view, it is not realistic to proceed on the assumption that the Police should never be called to quell violent students’ demonstrations, especially when these demonstrations become violent and they threaten life and property. I think what is realistic is to insist that maximum force should only be used as a last resort and in extreme circumstances.

Madam Speaker, earlier on when we were discussing pornography, Government explained that when the media laws came here, the powers of the Minister to do this and that were removed and so the Minister’s hands are somewhat tied on how to control this media. Now we are looking at the Police as if we are always going to be on the receiving end. One of these days you will be caught up in these demonstrations and you will need the protection of the Police.  You yourself, who is passing this policy here, one of these days you will be caught up in these violent demonstrations and you will want the Police to respond appropriately to protect you.  

Therefore, whatever we do here should not completely weaken the Police that they can do nothing in the face of a violent demonstration. I propose, Madam Speaker, that this recommendation should read as follows, “The Police must exercise maximum restraint in handling students’ violent demonstrations.”

MRS HYUHA: I support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that recommendation number (5) be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 5, as amended, agreed to.

Recommendation 6:

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member here moved a motion to amend the phrase that the word ‘students’ be removed and you did not rule on it.  The hon. Member proposed to remove the word ‘students’ so that all demonstrations –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, guidance. This is a report with specific terms, which were given to the committee. We are dealing with students. So, Madam Speaker, whereas I appreciate the spirit, but this was a specific assignment with specific terms for the Committee on Social Services to investigate.  I would suggest we comply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation 6.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, recommendation 6, the committee recommends that on the matter of the unit costs at public institutions, this is a policy matter in which the Minister of Education and Sports should come up with unit costs for courses per students, per faculty in all public universities and other tertiary institutions.  At the same time, the institutions should also do their study on the matter to enable them have better planning and budget estimates.  I do recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation number (6) do stand part of the recommendations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 6, agreed to.

Recommendation 7:

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, on recommendation (7), the committee recommends to this Parliament that the Minister of Education and Sports be given three months, from December 2003 to February 2004, to sort out the matter of the legal status of Makerere University Business School and report back to Parliament.  I do recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question that recommendation 7 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Recommendation 7, as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He did not hear you talk about the months, and I am telling him you amended by adding the months.

MRS HYUHA: No, Madam Speaker, I inserted in the months. I said the committee recommends to this Parliament that the Minister of Education and Sports be given three months from December 2003 to February 2004 to sort out the matter on the legal status of Makerere University Business School and report back to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay, that is the recommendation we have passed.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I think that recommendation is bit unfair and a bit vague. I am assuming we are starting now so why do you not assume we give them three working months starting from January until the end of March, then that is reasonable –(Interjection)- yes, because nobody is going to work between now and Christmas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, before we do that, I think originally the Minister was given two months, so, I think the proposal by the chairperson is appropriate in the circumstances taking into account the debate, which took place on the Floor of this House.

Recommendation 8:

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, we had –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I do re-collect that this specific recommendation had been amended on the Floor of this House?

MRS HYUHA: Yes please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I think that is the one you are presenting?

MRS HYUHA: You want me to present what we amended last time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that a comprehensive special audit by the Auditor General be carried out in the four public universities from the year 2001 to 2003 and report to Parliament in one month. I think we shall have to adjust this one month to verify the following: The number of students on private and Government sponsorship in these four public universities; the exact releases from Government and their expenditure to these four public universities; the internally generated revenue in these four public universities since 2001 and the arrears claimed by Makerere University Business School. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, when we talk of a special audit and from 2001 and you talk of one month, I feel that is an unfair exercise because, first of all, we should put into consideration that the Auditor General’s office has a limited number of staff and they have particular work they are doing. So, if we are ordering a special audit, let us at least put there four months minimum, otherwise, they will do a shoddy work in one month and we shall not have achieved what we intend to achieve. So, Madam Speaker, I propose that we amend it to four months, but it would even be better if it was six.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate hon. Capt. Byaruhanga’s concern because when we gave one moth originally we had in mind one public university but I would love this report to come at a time when the Minister is also reporting. So, it would be fair if we gave three months so that when the Minister is reporting on the legal status of Makerere Business School we also get the Auditor General’s report about the moneys so that we come out with a comprehensive picture. So, I suggest that we also give the Auditor General’s office three months the way we have given the Minister so that he begins the work from December to February and in March we should be in position to have the picture. So, I submit that the committee recommends that comprehensive special audit by the Auditor General’s office be carried out at the four public universities and report to Parliament within three months. 

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, I need a clarification from the chairperson on the years she has suggesting are we taking academic years which would be 2000/2002 to academic year 2003/2004 because she said 2001/2003.

MRS HYUHA: I am talking about financial years, and why I am giving 2001, Madam Speaker, is because when this idea of 2,000 additional students was introduced in the year 2000, Government passed moneys to support another 2,000 students additional to the other 2,000. So we want to know where these students are, how much money has been released to them. The confusion, which has arisen from Makerere University Business School, is claiming that Government has never released money for the additional students. So, we want to trace the history of these additional students, which started in the financial year 2001. So, I am talking of financial year 2001 to-date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation number 8 as amended by the chairperson be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, a bit of clarification. I am sorry, I want the message to be clear because when we talk of four public universities we are having in mind Makerere university, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Gulu University and Kyambogo. But I would also add that Makerere University Business School because it receives funds, it has a separate vote. 

So, when we talk of four public universities if we are not specific, the Business School might be left out and yet it receives a separate vote. Therefore, I am talking of four public universities plus Makerere University Business School and, therefore, five institutions should be audited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Minister of Finance has noted that information; it is now in the Hansard. We expect a special audit on all the institutions named by the Chairperson.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we adjourned last time I had indicated that hon. Musisi would be the first to make a submission followed by hon. Kibanzanga. So, those are the two –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: I am seeking guidance, Madam Speaker. When we are here on the Floor of this House, we make efforts to make honest submissions for the country.  However, Madam speaker, I feel bad that some things that we speak here in good faith are being taken personal.

A case in point is Wednesday, 10 December last week. I made here a submission in reference to the Electoral Commission and I put it that the Secretary did not possess certain qualifications. Now, I have been so hurt this afternoon as I was seeing off my visitor, Mr Sam Rwakoojo confronted me with such foul words that could ever come out of person’s mouth. I kept pleading with him that “can you sober up please?” I pleaded with him to sober up because these were not really personal in that respect.  But if I cannot be safe here in the precincts of Parliament - maybe when I am outside, Madam Speaker, I can take care of myself - But while I am still in the precincts of Parliament, to be confronted in a fighting mood, I took exceptional note of that.  

Madam Speaker, maybe to the clarification of Members, the person and position of the Secretary of Electoral Commission is not like an RDC, Sembabule. This is a central and focal position that hinges on the democratisation of this country. Those Local Council elections, parliamentary, presidential and even how it reflects to the international community, is what is at stake, Madam Speaker. But I have been surprised that such things could be taken personal with no due recourse to the normal procedures.  I learnt of it in the papers that the Rules and Privileges Committee has been petitioned.  I was looking forward to that.  

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you have raised your complaint, let us deal with it and proceed with the –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO:  I needed also to lay something on the Table.  Madam Speaker, while I put it forward, Mr Rwakoojo, who was nominated on 21st of May 2001 for Lwemiyaga County with registration 06356122 and among his qualifications, he put Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education, Uganda Certificate of Education, Bachelor of Arts, Accounting, I do not know how –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, we have asked the Attorney General to examine all those matters because they were raised partly by you, partly by hon. Nandala –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Then can I lay this on the Table, Madam Speaker?

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for people who just stood against each other and one defeated the other, to come here and bore this House with their personal fights in elections? It is true that hon. Ssekikubo stood with Rwakoojo, hon. Ssekikubo was elected, Rwakoojo was defeated, he applied for a job and got it. But hon. Sekikubo has persistently come to this House to attack, belittle, and to undermine hon. Rwakoojo. I think honourable members know that when we stand against each other, one has to win or lose. Is it in order really to bring these personal disputes and waste the time of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when this matter came up last week, we passed it on to the Attorney General with instructions to investigate and report back to this House.  So, if there are matters you want to hand over to the Attorney General, do so, because hon. Rwakoojo has no opportunity now to come and say anything in his defence.  So, let us not have any more because the other person cannot come here.  Give them to the Attorney General and he will be sitting here.

MR MUSISI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think for the purpose of putting Members on board, since we received this report a year ago, it is inevitable that a few facts are put for purposes of enabling an informed debate. I took this from page 241 of the report and I realised that from page 241 all that went on was showing a number of people.  For instance, people were killed in Kireka, others were killed in Kanungu, and certain atrocities were committed by one Mulongo in Kapchorwa where one Michael Zombi was killed. All these cases unfortunately have not been followed to-date. 

The committee further witnessed a number of people who were shot at in Rukungiri during the presidential campaigns by the UPDF and PPU. The report cites Maj. Kakooza Mutale, Capt. Nduuhura, Col. Oketta and one Maj. Oula, who killed people by reversing a car in Kireka. Unfortunately, I do not know if this was the basis of promotion, because he was promoted to Lt. Colonel.  

Furthermore, there is one Hajji Muwonge who was picked at a market in Owino, dumped on the back of a car and was badly beaten, only to be produced by then Maj. Mayombo. I do not know if Maj. Mayombo did albeit that time or he was an aider, but facts must be put on table to show what actually transpired and how our people can be protected from this massive violence. 

One other thing –(Interruption) 

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard hon. Musisi talk about people who died in Kanungu. As far as I am concerned I do not know of any people who died in Kanungu during the elections. Can I be clarified? Thank you.

MR MUSISI: One thing is certain, I am quoting people who were tortured and who suffered, and I am reading. You get your report, page 240, peruse through. We have been with these things for more than a year. Why don’t you do that?  One other thing – but this runs for a number of pages.  

Furthermore, I was saying that our people need some bit of civic education in cases like this so that they can know that in case they have been injured, they can get some remedies, they can come up and be helped by the law, because it is an established principle of law that the employers can be vicariously liable of the actions of their agents. In this respect, our people should be protected and they should know how the law could benefit them in case they have been hurt to this extent. 

Furthermore, I have a feeling that today if we could afford to finance an action group, a para-military group like that of Kakooza Mutale, I think it is very prudent to have Special Police Constables as provided for by the law. The budget of financing such can be brought before Parliament so that we get something clear before the law, instead of getting people who cane the wanainchi around. 

The report mentions public officers like RDCs and the Army as having been actively involved. I think we have had enough of this. We know why we had the scenario of 1980; we know why some colleagues went to the bush. Today we cannot afford to have public officers like RDCs and army men coming up to say, “If so and so comes to power, we shall serve under him.” That is not permissible! (Interruption)

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much hon. Patrick Musisi for giving way. While you lament about the misconduct of public officers who interfere with the smooth electioneering in this country, I would like to inform you that time and again, Government says we should not put blame on institutions but on the individuals serving those institutions. 

These individuals serving those institutions have been very clearly reflected in this report. You will remember even one of us, hon. Sebaggala, suffered in the hands of Sgt. Segane. Segane abducted him and tried to dump him in the Kabaka’s lake. The matter was reported to Wandegeya Police Station but as I talk now, no action has been taken against this individual.  

If, therefore, Government fails to take action against these individuals, we find it very difficult to believe whether it is not state-managed individuals misbehaving themselves using their offices. That is the information I wanted to share with you.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide some other information.  While in the committee, we got a witness who told the committee what exactly happened down there in the western region. While some people came to shoot in the air to scare away voters, Mrs Susan Muhwezi had this to say, “Why do you shoot in the air when the problem is down”. (Applause). So, this is what happened down there.  Thank you.

MR MUSISI:  Sorry, I have had -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Kikungwe stood up in this House, Madam Speaker, and quoted an authority regarding a person who is not here to defend themselves on very serious charges. He alleged that this person ordered people to be shot and killed.  The honourable member has not told us the authority he was quoting. Is the honourable member in order to quote an authority on a serious matter and he does not let this House know the authority he is quoting? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if it came to your committee, can you tell us your source? Also if it is contained in the report, what page is it?

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, this information is available and it was laid on Table in form of tapes and minutes of our meetings. It is only that members have not bothered to look at them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is already part of our records?

MR KIKUNGWE: It is part of the report, Madam Speaker. I would like to add this; if everything that we collected were put in that report, it would be as huge as this building. (Laughter).

MR MUSISI: I think I should proceed now. I think I am holding the Floor -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am aware that people can impersonate others and speak like them -(Interjections)- Yes, people can speak like President Museveni, they can speak like Mandela, and the lawyers will tell you that some of these things are not even admissible in court. People can technically interfere with these documents.  

Therefore, I find it difficult, Madam Speaker, to agree that a mere presentation of a recorded message on a tape of a certain lady, or even a man speaking like a woman, can be accepted as evidence that a citizen of this country committed such a serious offence. I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My difficulty is that I did not participate in the committee hearings and I did not even listen to the tapes that have this matter.  Hon. Mwandha, can you help us, what are the contents of your report? Let me ask the chairperson about the source of this matter.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, many people appeared before our committee and testified under oath and every testimony was recorded. We had recording machines to record testimonies of witnesses. 

I think what the member is doing is to quote only one of the people who spoke.  The only evidence we have is the recording of that particular person who testified under oath. Unfortunately, I did not go to Rukungiri where the recording took place, but when colleagues who went to Rukungiri came back to the committee this is what they reported.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember tapes that were laid here from the committee when they brought their report. They introduced the report, they had annextures, they had diskettes and they laid them on this Table.  So, I think they are talking about the tapes, which their committee recorded.

MR MUSISI:  May I take the Floor, hon. Kagonyera? Please do not bother us with -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, this is serious business. If such a serious allegation is made against a person, don’t you think it would be prudent for this person to be called and they answer these charges? In fact I thought they were saying that it is Mrs Muhwezi whose voice was recorded. But you record hearsay, you bring it here as evidence without seriously inviting the person against whom this serious allegation is being made to answer the charges!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you invite the lady to come and respond to those allegations?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, when I was giving my report I informed this House that the amount of information that we got was so enormous that it was just not possible for us to follow up every single testimony that occurred before us. But if the members believe that in the case of Mrs Muhwezi we should have taken extra trouble, that is a different matter. 

There was no time for the committee to go into the details. As a matter of fact, in the report we are recommending that a number of these cases be investigated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are recommending that they be investigated, do not now become the witnesses. If you want the state to investigate, let that be your recommendation.  But do not now introduce this as a new matter and then become witnesses, because I was hoping that you had called her. 

So, if you have said they should be investigated, leave it at that and we shall make a recommendation here. But do not now introduce new matters, which will require you to sit again because I will not give you time to sit again as a committee.

MR KASSIANO: Madam Speaker, I am a bit at a loss. The time when we started debating election violence, a number of people had their names mentioned, both as victims and as people who perpetuated violence. I am seeking your clarification as to why the mere mention of Mrs Muhwezi has thrown this House into such a situation. How many people have had their names mentioned? Why are we taken up by one name amongst so many?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week there were members who objected to another person being mentioned.

LT KINOBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable member would have been right if it was just a mere mentioning of a name. But I think the concern here is the implication of the statement attributed to Madam Suzan Muhwezi. Because if you say, “Shoot down where the trouble is”, then you are indicating that someone was directing people to shoot at human beings. 

I think we are looking at the implications of the statement or the purported directive, and I am wondering why the committee never bothered to call her because that is a serious matter. If someone directed people to shoot, it would have been only fair to this House to call the lady and find out the substance and merits of their allegation.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report we are debating is a report of a select committee. This committee, unlike other committees, was an investigative committee. That is the distinction this committee has from other committees.  

Therefore, the discussion should really arise from the facts as they appear in the report. So, if a character is not mentioned in the report, we should not be discussing that character in the abstract.  

So, if Madam Muhwezi has not been mentioned in the report and the allegations that are being raised against her do not appear in this report, we should not discuss her character. 

We should not make allegations that were not investigated by the committee. It only makes sense, Madam Speaker, that if allegations were made against her, the body of this report should make mention of whether Mrs Muhwezi was summoned by the committee to answer these allegations. 

I think we are being unfair to people who are not in this House. But we are also being unfair to Parliament because we are being treated with new evidence, which does not appear in the report. I think that is really an abuse of the Parliamentary process. Madam Speaker, I think such a statement should be discouraged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me appeal to the members of the committee that unless you feel that there is a distortion of the report, do not volunteer any more information. Let us concentrate on the report as was published and as was presented here. If they are distorting then you jump up. But do not add salt and sugar.

MR MUSISI: Thank you very much. I have received all the information though I definitely do not agree with my brother, hon. Adolf Mwesige. We have got the legalistic approach in courts, him and me. The same strict laws of the court do not apply to us in Parliament. I know you are going to quote the Constitution, claiming that we have got powers of the High Court. I know that too well – (Interjection) – Please, let me go ahead. 

The dangers of personalizing public servants and the Army is part of our history, and the absurdity of it is what brought all the suffering in 1980.  Further more, it is very unfortunate that we have graduated from the Kabalega army, from the Mwanga army, from the Kings and the Chiefs armies’ to date. That is an absurdity that must be corrected – (Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform hon. Musisi that the Kabalega army was a professional army. It had many nationalities and it did a good job. It cannot be compared to the armies he is trying to compare them with, nothing!  (Laughter).

MR MUSISI: Dr Kasirivu, I think you are now treading in an area where you are not a professional. We have got our history, we know what personal armies were in the past in this country, and I know what I mean. I mean what I say.  

I would like to now tackle the problem in the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission has never been prepared to handle an election. I will substantiate this with evidence. 

They have suffered from late funding, causing untold embarrassments.  They have got incompetent staff. This was witnessed –(Interjection)– but my time was taken away with all this. This was witnessed by the committee when they were tying to peruse through the various documents.  

Today we have got a scenario of people who have produced degrees at universities with those offerings at those universities being non-existent.  I have got a problem because we have got data processors who are supposed to be people of some degree of training but were just imported in and put in the Electoral Commission. You can see what I mean.  

In Uganda, according to statistical information we have got 909,984,331 voters. Those would be our voters. Those of 17 and below are 14,864,646. But it is an absurdity that when they were reading results they went up to the range of 12 million!  Today they even claim that they had a register of 12 million Ugandans, which is impossible.  

I also want to talk about the voter turn up. It is only in Uganda, and unfortunately it has never been put in the Guinness book of records, where turn up is 120 percent. 

The place where turn up was so huge was in South Africa when Mandela was being voted into office. That is where you had 19 million South Africans turning up, but it was a fiasco. With all their finances, it was too much for them to manage.  There were days of queuing. And here our results, our turn up, has recorded more than that of South Africa –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member. I just wanted to inform hon. Musisi that the latest information we have got from the Electoral Commission, during the photographic voters exercise, is that in the current register we have only 8.2 million voters.  It does not go up to that.  

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, hon. Musisi is implying that lack of qualifications are responsible for the mess in the Electoral Commission – (Laughter)  - but I would like to inform him that it is not only with Electoral Commission, even in this House, Madam Speaker.  

It is very strange we have people who cut and paste official’s signatures from UNEB for clearance when they happen not to be the same. This is criminal, Madam Speaker. Let us not only look at the Electoral Commission alone but also in this House.  

I do not know what my honourable minister has to tell me this time. But, Madam Speaker, here there is evidence of hon. Kawoya Anifa Bangirana – (Laughter)- who cut the signature of the Acting Secretary, Dan Odongo, pasted it on a certain scrap of paper like this, with a forged reference No. CF/UNEB/5. It reads: 

“Please refer to yours - addressed to Anifa Kawooya - Ref.MBST/02/A/014/99 dated 19 May 2001 on the above refers. 

Clarification on the status of your institution has been sought and obtained from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports to the effect that the Ministry recognises your diplomas.  

Kawooya’s diploma is considered a higher qualification than ‘A’ Level and therefore qualifies for nominations according to the Parliamentary Act 2000.” 

This was disowned. Madam Speaker, Mr Odongo himself disowned it. He said that this piece was cut and pasted on a given paper. Paper, which did not have any logo, and this was presented as sufficient evidence for nominations.  

It did not end there, the same person you remember stood in 1996. There is an affidavit on record and in court whereby the headmaster of the then Kololo High School disowned the same. If I can read just one paragraph, which says:

“That after a thorough search of the records at the school including results sheets from Uganda National Examinations Board, there is no record of Ms Anifa Kawooya alias Anifa S. Bangirana ever having sat for the ‘A’ Level examinations of 1978 as she had earlier made me believe. 

That, in fact, the said Anifa Kawooya alias Anne S. Bangirana has never been a student of this school…” 

And this is an affidavit under oath. 

Madam Speaker, many other correspondences are here. If we are serious on pulling this country from the depth it has sunk, we need to be – (Interruption)

MS KAWOYA BANGIRANA: Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I want to appeal to this House –(Interjections) - yes I am giving my preamble first. Is it in order for the honourable member of Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District, a district where I come from and represent, to come here and first of all attack his long time opponent, hon. Sam Rwakoojo, then turn to me and attack me after taking a long time carrying out investigations with UNEB, CID, IGG? 

Is he in order to come and allege that, first of all, I presented false documents; I do not qualify to be in this House, when by the way I have a Bachelor of Arts degree in Public Administration? I challenge him to put the documents on the Floor, to take me to the disciplinary committee, to go to court and to continue with the investigations he is doing? 

I challenge him, and today I am doing that. Is he in order to insinuate ill motives when he knows even naturally that I am better and upright? Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, fortunately hon. Kawoya is a member of this House – (Interruption)

MS KAWOYA BANGIRANA:  Madam Speaker, I want to lay my originals first for the degree, which shows I am qualified, on the Table. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is really a pity that we have come to this. But I was just going to say that fortunately, you are a member of this House, you are in a position to speak for yourself. Now, since you have tabled your documents, let hon. Sekikubo also table his documents and then I will instruct the committee. 

Honourable members, there is a portion in that report which talks about qualifications of MPs.  So, that is how it is coming up. So, hon. Sekikubo, can you table these papers of yours here and I direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine them. Examine both of them and then report back to this House.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I am surprised that it is taken lightly with laughter and the honourable Professor who is privileged enough, is treating it like that. But I beg to lay these papers on the Table because this is even criminal, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sekikubo, I have made a ruling. I have said lay the papers on the Table and the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline must sit urgently to examine this matter. Okay, hon. Musisi you have caused us a lot of trouble but proceed.  

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to confirm to this House, since it seems that I am the only one left in Sembabule – (Laughter) - that I am a qualified lawyer with some postgraduate qualifications as well. So, I just wanted to assure this House that Sembabule is not on fire. (Laughter).

MR MUSISI: I thank the honourable minister for giving some bit of warmth to the House. I was trying to explain that the only huge elections on record were those of South Africa when Mandela was voted President of South Africa. With a South African population of 45 million, and when in South Africa they register at the age of 16, then you could have some explanation relevant to the proportionality of their voter turn-up. 

If you look at the Kenyan elections, the Kenyan population is 32 million and their last voter turn out was 5.9 million. You can see that this is also relevant and can be explained. But our voter turn out shows a lot of absurdity. You can find whole districts with a 100 percent turn up!

I got evidence in the election violence report where in Mbale voting stopped at 9.00 p.m. and everything, including counter folios of the votes, was dumped into the ballot box. This explains it. But it goes back to the fact that we have got a lot to clear with the Electoral Commission in terms of competence, in terms of statistical information, in terms of statistical officers and the data control section - because there is definitely fraud. 

In Uganda today nobody can come up authoritatively, using scientific methods, to show that our turn-up can in any way exceed five or six million voters. There is no way you can explain it scientifically or otherwise. So, what we have been presented with are results that are always questionable and we need to pull up our socks, clear up and clean the Electoral Commission.  

Furthermore, I need to give a similarity. In Africa there are other countries with exactly the same scenarios. Malawi has got the same absurd results like those of Uganda. In Malawi where you have got registered voters who are supposed to be five million, in their last elections only 250,000 people did not turn up for elections. You find that these are absurdities close to what we are doing in Uganda. I have got all this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR MUSISI: But a lot of my time was wasted; hon. Kagonyera, you have been wasting my time. 

It is on the basis of these facts that I realize that a lot needs to be done. We need to come out in this House with resolutions to check all these. Otherwise, we are destined for a blood bath. In violence every reaction can get a tougher and opposite reaction, contrary to the set and normal laws of measuring force. Thank you.

5.24
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this debate. I thank the committee; they did a good job. 

Madam Speaker, election violence and election rigging are an indication of political decay. That is why in this debate we have no choice and no sides but only to belong to the side of trying so hard to fight election violence. 

I am very worried that people are trying to cover up facts even when the case is obvious. I beg this House to at least find something that we have in common in this report. To me personalities do not matter; I do not intend to discuss personalities. However, I want us to look at the character of the entire political leadership from No. 1 to LC I in that hierarchy, including Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, can we ensure a democratic path? Definitely I have some doubts. Why? Because the entire political leadership in this country is born out of a revolution, the NRM revolution, and to assure you, people who call themselves revolutionaries have a very low opinion of democracy. 

That is why whenever we talk about democracy, the democratic path, a levelled field, de-militarising politics, so long as we are still led by revolutionary leaders, we have a very big problem. 

Madam Speaker, revolutionaries believe that the greatest weakness of democracy is that it places leadership in the hands of the mob leaders –(Interruption)

PROF. KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform him that the democracy, which we are enjoying today, which has expanded frontiers to bring here the youths, the disabled, the workers, has been a democracy formulated by the so-called revolutionary leadership. Therefore, the member should not mislead the House. I thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA: I thank the Professor for that very good information. But I did not say “so-called revolutionaries”, I said “revolutionaries”. Those are his words. 

Unfortunately when he was quoting the democracy he is talking about, he talked about the youth, the disabled and the women. This is sectarianism within the body politic of a country. You cannot promote these small interests and you think you are creating a democratic culture. Definitely, no, I am not convinced about it.  

I was saying, revolutionaries believe that the greatest weakness of democracy is that it places leadership in the hands of the mob leaders in the normal majority, compromising professionalism. And revolutionaries believe that the so-called majority leaders have no capacity to prevail over their over-zealous supporters, hence violence breaks loose. 

Taking these statements in mind, you can really understand why we have a lot of violence in the third world countries. It is not only Uganda.  

Having said that, I want to look at institution building in this country. These institutions are the pillars of democracy everywhere. As long as you do not have them, stop talking about democracy, stop talking about politics. 

Madam Speaker, some of these cases that we have seen in this report came about as a result of weak institutions. Even where the Police was supposed to act, it was not there, it was compromised or it was being used. And that is one of the pillars of democracy in any country. As long as you do not have that Police, please stop endangering the lives of citizens with the so-called elective politics.  

Another pillar of this elective politics is the vigilance of the civil society. How does it understand this democracy and the politics? How does society understand the electioneering period? 

Madam Speaker, it is a pity that in our circumstances the civil society is so weak that they are only moved by statements. It can easily be changed by a mere statement. It can easily be compromised by petty gifts, including salt, soap and sweets. Yes!  

Another pillar is the army. Madam Speaker, the moment you have a weak army that identifies or participates in partisan politics, do not endanger the lives of your people with these elective politics. The Army becomes part of a party functionary and causes a lot of trouble for people.  

Another pillar is the Judiciary. Madam Speaker, after losing an election if you take the case to court and it takes one year, three years, really you have got a very big problem.

The way forward: while we are trying to create a democratic culture in this country, we cannot create it hanging in the air. Let us look at how we can create the pillars of this democracy, how we can create pillars to defend and protect this democracy of ours. Here I am talking about the Police, the Army, the Judiciary and the general citizenry. 

Civic education should be really emphasized. Let our people understand what it means to have a choice if people put their manifestos to the public. If two people offer themselves to serve, let the population understand why. What are they looking for?

Another factor is, how do we remove the element of money from our politics? Madam Speaker, it is really a pity that people who ask to lead us buy their way to these seats of authority. Why do you pay your master in order to become a servant? This is something I do not understand. 

Some people lose a lot of money. I am lucky, but other people use a lot of money simply to become servants of people. Why? How do we remove this element of money from our politics? 

It is expected that every human being has got interests to defend and you defend them at any cost. (Prof. Kagonyera rose_)- I respect the professor.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is suggesting that we remove money from our election process. I have two clarifications. The first one, is he aware that the vast majority of us are of common blood, we are not princes, we do not belong to royal families, therefore, we have to fight hard to be elected?

Two, could the honourable member help us with an example anywhere in the world where money is not used in the election process? Could he tell us that he is merely stating a hypothetical situation and a far-fetched statement when he says that we should remove money from the electoral process?

MR MUSISI: Am I made to understand that the honourable Professor wants to imply that I, Patrick Musisi, a commoner, should be morally bankrupt because I am just a commoner? Does he imply that in this country –(Interruption)- can I finish what I am saying?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Order.

MR MUSISI: Are you the Speaker?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Is the hon. Musisi in order to put words in my mouth? Is he in order, particularly when my mouth is closed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you did not mention hon. Musisi at all.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Professor says that because they have got red blood, therefore, they have to bribe their way to positions of leadership. But my question is, why do you pay your master simply because you want to become a servant? - (Mr Loote rose_) - I am not taking any information.  

Madam Speaker, about using money everywhere, yes, the United States can use money, and in Britain they use a lot of money that is why I even doubt their democracy. But ours is a very young, tender democracy; even before people understand what democracy is or what elective politics is, we are pouring in money, bribing them, purchasing their votes, even sometimes –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking the information?

MR MUSISI: I have got to make a few things clear. In the Unites States it is true money is definitely used but there is a law that limits the use of money and any excessive use of it. 

In Uganda, what the President told us when Parliament was still young is that he used Shs 23 billion, because we do not have any law limiting the same. Such, according to normal standards, would be excessive.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from my colleague who wants to find a basis for removing money from politics. Would he be able to produce his posters and literature if the money element is removed from politics? 

I would also like to seek another clarification from him. Unless he suggests that we must put in place a law that gives a threshold of the expenditure that we are going to use for politics then he will have reached a midway. Otherwise, I need him to help us with how we can produce the literature and get fuel to travel and move around the constituency if we completely remove the element of money from our politics.  

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the issue of money, although some people are trying to justify it, is a very serious crime within the young democracies. Today you can refuse this but tomorrow you will say, “Kibanzanga said so”. 

About your posters and fuel to move you around, that is not a crime. What I am talking about is, when you bribe, you invest a lot of money so that it becomes so hard for you to lose. So you stand on the side of “I either win or they lose” because you are trying to defend your economic interests. Stop making politics an economic activity. 

Madam Speaker, my recommendation is that politics should not be seen as a source of income. Let us make it unattractive by adopting the mode of the Cubans. In Cuba when you are teacher and you become a Member of Parliament, you continue with your teaching job and you continue earning your salary from where you teach. Let us simply come here, participate in passing policies and then go back. But the moment we get this huge payment from these political leaders who are our servants, they start looking at politics as employment, as a business. So they can kill each other in the hope of protecting their economic interests.  

I kindly request the Executive that it is true, names have been mentioned. We may not like it but it happened and the Executive wanted to establish a commission of inquiry so that they can go down to earth to find out what is really going on. I told you we have no side, we have no choice but only to try to end this because for the last 17 years some of us had thought that political violence had become history anyway. So, we must work together. 

If people are named, let them be investigated. Do not jump up and try to protect them, you are protecting election violence by so doing. Madam Speaker, today we might be comfortably seated here but this political decay that we cannot fight right now will impact negatively on the near future. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to defer this debate to tomorrow afternoon. I had already indicated that tomorrow between 10.00 a.m. and 1.00 p.m., we shall have the campaigns for the elections for the Pan African Parliament. At 5.00 p.m. yesterday nominations were closed, and I would like to announce the Members who have been nominated, so that they prepare for the campaigns tomorrow morning.  

All gender nominees - Group A:

    1.   Hon. Omara Atubo
    2.   Hon. Aggrey Awori
    3.   Hon. Dr Bulamu
    4.   Hon. Dr Chebrot
    5.   Hon. Kabareebe Muzoora
    6.   Hon. Katuntu Abdu
    7.   Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi
    8.   Hon. Miria Matembe
    9.   Hon. James Mwandha
10. Hon. Ogenga Latigo
11. Hon. Elijah Okupa
12. Hon. Jachan Omach
13. Hon. Fred Ruhindi 
14. Hon. Mike Sebalu
15. Hon. Wagonda Muguli

Women Nominees - Group B:

    1.  Hon. Betty Amongi
    2.  Hon. Loyce Bwambale
    3.  Hon. Nvumenta Kavuma
    4.  Hon. Nusura Tiperu

Other than these, there will be no other candidates; nominations have been closed. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning for the campaigns. Please go and sharpen your words. Voting will be on Thursday - avoid commercialization.

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 December 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)




