Friday, 19 December 2003
 
Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to first of all thank you for turning up for today’s session. We have quite a number of items we need to dispose of. 

I will be altering the Order Paper to let items 4, 11 and 12 precede the motion under item 3. This is because I have received representation from the members and they said that a number of members who were mentioned in the report on election violence would wish to speak before we conclude the debate on election violence. I think it will not be fair if we concluded it without allowing them to speak. 

Taking into consideration the time we have today, I think we still require three days of sitting to conclude this report. So, I will defer that matter for now and we begin with item No. 4. We shall have short debates, hopefully, so that I can allow members to go for the weekend.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek guidance on a procedural issue. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs did receive the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill on 4th November, but this bill was not accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

Madam Speaker, I have since then written to the relevant minister asking for this but I have got no response from the minister. Therefore, the committee has not been able to proceed and work on this particular bill.  

Also, in relation to this matter, the Domestic Relations Bill was tabled in this House and you ruled that it would not be forwarded to any committee until a certificate of financial implications has been produced. Since then, we have not heard a word as to whether this certificate exists or not.
  
I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, because these two bills are very important. I would like to state categorically that I, as the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, has not been given any of these certificates, which are very important.

Madam Speaker, when you look at Section 10 of the Budget Act, it is very explicit. It states, “Every bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after coming into effect.”

I would like to seek more guidance as to whether this House should entertain any bill at all if its certificate of financial implications is not in place, because it defeats the whole purpose of the Budget Act. I thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members and especially members of the Executive, you know the Budget Act was introduced for the purpose of monitoring expenditure and fitting it into the planning. So, the question of a certificate of compliance is not voluntary, it is not a question of convenience. It is mandatory that any bill coming to this House must come with a certificate of compliance. 

I do recall that when the Domestic Relations Bill came, I wrote a small note to the Minister of Finance to find out from him whether he had issued a certificate. He had undertaken to do something. 

Maybe the Attorney General can tell us what is happening, because now the Referendum Bill and the Domestic Relations Bill are here without the certificates. Our law says, unless the bills are accompanied by a certificate of compliance the committee will not proceed on it.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am taken by surprise that this is the state of affairs with regards to the bills you have mentioned. 

What I do recall in respect of the Domestic Relations Bill is indeed the absence of the certificate. But I have since consulted, and I was informed by the legislative consultant that the request for the certificate had been made by the Ministry of Finance. 

This is the only one I know where there was no certificate from the Ministry of Finance. It is the one that I moved on the Floor on behalf of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. And I undertook to ensure that, like you ruled, the committee would not proceed with the discussion of the bill unless the certificate is produced. 

I am working on that one but I must confess with regards to others, I am not aware. However, I can also find out and make the certificate available to my colleague, the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there something else, hon. Byamukama?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Just one small note, Madam Speaker, and I thank you. I raised two issues. First, I categorically stated that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs does not have a certificate of financial implications for the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill nor do we have a certificate of financial implications for the Domestic Relations Bill.  

The other issue, Madam Speaker, was a procedural one. Should this House ever allow a first reading of a bill if there is no certificate of financial implications? I think we should not. If we did like the Attorney General is saying and trying to amend the situation, we would be in breach. 

Let me rephrase it. I have heard from the Attorney General that what he is trying to do now is to secure a certificate of financial implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am aware about this, and I was here when the Domestic Relations Bill was tabled. 

On a procedural issue, I would like to seek your guidance as to whether in future we should ever allow even the first reading of a bill if the certificate of financial implications is not in place. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not at all! In fact, on one or two occasions we have directed that the bills be brought again for the first reading because they have not complied with the Budget Act.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week this country covered a fundamental milestone, in that, the Constitutional Review Commission handed over its report to the minister. 

I am rising to seek your guidance because this exercise was so important, so touching, to the entire country. We expected something to come up in a formal way. We just read about it in the papers, we do not know the position of Government, we do not know exactly what transpired. 

As we are about to face our electorate, Madam Speaker, it would be important that we have answers to the questions of the people down there in as far as the constitutional review exercise is concerned. Can I take it from Government that the report was truly handed over them? 

There are also many other questions concerning the main report, the leaked report and the minority report. I think we need clarification before we meet our electorate, so that we are in position to tell them the position of Government. We should not just be hearing rumours or reading this in the papers.

Yesterday I saw the minister to whom the report is alleged to have been handed to. But these are Cabinet ministers and I think they are in position to answer my concerns and those of the country. I would really urge them to treat these matters of national importance with due respect. 

We as legislators and representatives of the people have the right to know what is transpiring. We are the mediums; we all participated in the collection of views from our areas and we submitted them. However, here we are kept in darkness. Can Government come out and tell us, and the entire world and the country its position on those important issues? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.03
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising up on a matter of urgent public importance, most especially touching the people of Kumi and more so the people of Ngora County, who I represent. 

You may recall that early last year we had a debate here regarding unexplained movement of livestock from Masindi. They went and settled in a wetland called Agu, Kodiki and other wetlands in Teso and also in forest reserves. 

It was in the wisdom of this House that the matter was committed to the rightful government institution, that is, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). They were to take the necessary steps to make sure that the wetlands and the forest reserves are rescued from such wanton occupancy by pastoralists.  

I recall that on 30th November last year, NEMA issued restoration orders to those pastoralists who had settled in the wetlands, to the effect that they were supposed to vacate the wetlands by 31 May this year. It is very sad, Madam Speaker, to report that to date, seven months down the road after the elapse of that deadline, the wetland settlers are still there, absolutely contrary to the law. 

On a further sad note, I wish to report that more of them even went into the wetlands following issuance of the eviction notices by NEMA. On the 15th of this month, 900 heads of cattle were again ferried from Masindi belonging to the same group leader of the wetland settlers, one Robert Kainamura. 

The animals are being ferried in Fusos at night. And I have just got reports from one of my colleagues who was on her way to the constituency this morning, that she saw yet more Fusos going to the same place this morning. 

Madam Speaker, our people are bewildered as to what is going on. It is from the same wetlands that the district local authorities earlier evicted people according to the law. The indigenous people were stopped from cultivating in the same wetlands in pursuit of fulfilment of our laws regarding preservation and conservation of wetlands. 

Now everybody is wondering why the law is being applied with a double-edged sword. While the indigenous people are being denied access, others are being treated with soft gloves when we all know that they have acted contrary to the law.  

Madam Speaker, the arrogance these wetland settlers have is scaring everybody. They say that they are there to stay, they know what they are doing and there is nobody who can tamper with them. Actually, they give the impression that they have a very strong backing from somebody somewhere. I am happy that one of the ministers –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much my honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I just want to confirm that these people actually seem to be having a backing of somebody very powerful. 

It is reported by the local people that this Kainamura man, the leader of the group that is now settled on the wetlands, did state that it would be only after the intervention of His Excellency the President that they would leave those wetlands. Otherwise, nobody was that powerful enough to get them out of these wetlands. 

So, that arrogance is certainly backed by some force somewhere, which we do not understand. I think it is really up to Government to explain to the people of Teso what is going on. Our own people who are displaced from the other parts of Teso have never settled on those wetlands although that could have been an option. We have continued to respect the law as it is written. So, we are surprised. 

When Kony showed his ugly face in Teso, just to demonstrate that these people really do not feel they are part of us, they began to leave the wetlands. They were afraid of Kony; they did not stand with us. I really would like Government to tell us whether Teso belongs to Uganda or we are not part of this country. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much my honourable colleague for elaborating. Madam Speaker, we are going for recess today, what do we tell the people? We have run out of answers to the common question about what is going on in the wetlands. 

Earlier we were told that Government is taking all the necessary steps, NEMA has issued eviction notices, blah, blah; all that has not been implemented. I really want to be helped. Otherwise, we might run into a situation where the people will see how to regain their wetlands using any other means. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you could respond to that. 

11.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Matiya Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At present I am the Minister responsible for Environment. I am also responsible for NEMA, the institution which issued eviction notices to Kainamura and his group a year ago to vacate those protected areas in the three districts of Teso - Kumi, Soroti and Kaberamaido.

Madam Speaker, there are personalities in our community at all levels village - LCI, town councils, mayors and others - who misuse the good name of our President to cover their bad acts.  Kainamura is not above the law. The notice given by NEMA is a lawful order. Had it not been for the insecurity problems in that region, the security organs of the Government would have got these people out by force. 

Now that I have received a report of more people coming in and also not responding to the local issues –(Interruption).

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Madam Speaker, although most of Teso is very unsafe at the moment, that swamp in Agu is fairly safe. I believe that if the fear is that of insecurity, it is unfounded. 

I would like to challenge you hon. Minister; if your security people are ready, we the Members of Parliament from that region could take a lead. We are prepared just to demonstrate to you that it is secure and it is possible to carry out the orders that have been given to these people by NEMA. So, we are prepared to come with you.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: The response of the Minister implies that there are people who are using the President’s name and getting away with it. I wish the Minister can inform the House as to what action has been taken against people who are using the President’s name. 

Furthermore, knowing that Kony has been with us all these many years, is the Minister saying that until Kony is defeated and the place is peaceful, these guys will continue grazing in wetlands in spite of the directive of NEMA?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, I am not giving a time frame within which to have a vacant state of the wetlands. My ministry has got to interface with the army operating in that region, and also the Office of the Prime Minister who are handling matters of resettlement and internally displaced people. They are displaced and wherever they will be put, they will cause another problem. We just saw what happened at Lugogo and other areas where they are.

I promise, Madam Speaker, after recess I will make a statement indicating where and how we have dealt with this problem of getting the wetlands of Teso vacant. At least we have taken action; a lawful order has been issued, it is only the enforcement that has not been done. 
Enforcement will mean using force to evict them. Of course, where cattle are involved, and children and so on, you can see secondary problems that will be created. But as Government, the inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Prime Minister will help us to solve this problem. Could you allow me to report back to this House in February? I thank you.

11.17
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I am defeated by the statement made by the hon. Minister. We have seen cases where people have been evicted from the land they have occupied for many years. A case in point is that one in Bunyoro where simply one single person came and said, “this is my land, get out”, and people were removed. They came and stayed here in Kampala for many months. 

But when a relevant department, an institution of government, has given a lawful order for these people to leave that place in a certain time and the entire machinery of government keeps quiet, surely, is it fair to the complainants? Is it fair to this country for the honourable minister to come here and ask for more time? This is just a delaying tactic. 

I would like the hon. Minister to tell me why nothing can be done to evict these people from these wetlands.

11.18
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think much as the Minister is trying his best, the problem is bigger than you think. Essentially what you are trying to deal with are symptoms of a bigger problem. This is a fight over access to resources. We are just seeing it in Teso, but we have seen it in Kibaale and we are going to see it in many places. 

However, in addition, we really lack rule of law.  Because if you do not obey the law that is in existence, then people tend to take the law in their own hands and the consequences are usually very nasty.  

I would like to inform you, hon. Minister, that I worked in Lango in the 70s. I was a district veterinary officer there, and pastoralists from as far as Ankole would actually move right across. I would be giving movement permits for people moving from Teso through Lango, through Kyawente, all the way to Bunyoro, to Nyabushozi and back and forth. 

That kind of movement has been going on for a long time. But what we are seeing now is that there is a bit of bad blood. We are looking at a wetland and all that, but in actual fact the wetland is a symptom of something wider. There is a bit of bad blood; we think some people are being treated well, given preferential treatment, and others are not. 

Otherwise, this case of Kainamura, I remember the hon. Kategaya when he was Minister of Internal Affairs giving a statement here. I wonder how long it takes for action to take place. By the way, it is not only in Teso where people are grabbing government land, even in Mbarara itself we spend a lot of time settling these kinds of disputes. 

So, hon. Minister, the sooner you come up with some sort of land policy answering those kinds of responses, the better. Otherwise, it is not only land people will be fighting over; it will be water, forests and all sorts of things. Unless we have fair laws that are applied evenly across the board, people will try to take the law in their own hands and then you regret why you never acted in time. Thank you.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, how much more can I add? I was only giving advice on how to handle the matter. Whenever a competent tribunal decrees on a matter, that decree is implemented using instruments of coercion if the order is not complied with in good time. No doubt we shall use the instruments of coercion but also mindful of secondary problems, for example, where will these people go. 

I requested for February aware of our holiday. February will also be an opportune moment because I will have taken definite steps. For sure, instruments of coercion will be used to evict these people from Agu and other gazetted protected areas. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, we will encourage the members to interact with you even before the recess so that the matter is handled. Attorney General, there was some small matter raised by an honourable member on the CRC.
MR FRANCIS AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My good friend and neighbour, the hon. Member for Lwemiyaga, raised two issues in connection with the Constitutional Review Commission report. He wondered about the manner in which it was handed to the minister and, secondly, sought information regarding what is going to happen to this report. 

I would like to inform him, the House and the general public at large that, indeed the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs did receive the report of the Constitutional Review Commission on the 10th December this year. That was the deadline after the last extension.

The report as presented to the Minister was in a typed form and the Commission had wanted to have it printed so as to make something, in terms of public relations, presentable. Unfortunately because of the deadline, that could not be done. 

I want to assure my colleague and this august House that there were no sinister motives in receiving the report the way it was received. In any case, on behalf of the Minister who had to travel out of the country on duty, I did issue a press release stating exactly what had happened and what is going to happen to the report. This is contrary to suggestions in the press, for example, that the report was received in a clandestine manner and that the Government had a hidden agenda.  

What is going to happen, or is happening now, is that monies have been availed to the Commission to get the report printed. As soon as that is done, the printed copies will be presented to the minister who will then present the report, as its first entry point, to the Cabinet. As I did say in the press release, Cabinet will then determine what to do with the report from that point. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming members of the Africa Gospel Church from Kenya. They are up in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE RECONSIDERATION OF CLAUSE 14 OF THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

11.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Edward Ndawula Kaweesi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003. 

The Committee on Natural Resources has considered the Land (Amendment) Bill 2003, returned by the President in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and under Rule 117 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was read for the first time on 16 July 2002 and referred to the Committee on Natural Resources in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, Article 91(3)(a), and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Rule 103(5). 

The committee presented its report in the House on 14 April 2003. The report introduced a family land rights clause, which led to a debate that could not readily be concluded. The House in its wisdom decided to constitute a select committee to handle the matter.

On 17 June 2003, the select committee presented its report to the House, which unanimously passed it.  As a result, the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was passed on 18 June 2003. 

On 25 August 2003, the Clerk to Parliament forwarded the assent copies to the President, in fulfilment of the requirements of Article 91(2) of the Constitution. 

On 9 September 2003, His Excellency the President, evoking provisions of Article 91(3) of the Constitution and Rule 117 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, returned the bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003”. The bill was returned requesting Parliament to reconsider clause 14(a) and (c) of the bill dealing with examination of the ground rent. Honourable members, you can see this attached as Appendix 1. It is the letter from the President. 
Madam Speaker, the President requested that:

1. Paragraph (a) of clause 14 be deleted so that subsection (5) of section 32 of the Land Act 1998, (Act No. 16 of 1998) setting the maximum nominal ground rent at Shs 1000 per annum, be retained as part of the Land Act. This is in order to protect the tenants by occupancy from exploitation by landowners.

2. That paragraph (c) be deleted and subsection (8) of section 32 of the Land Act, 1998 (Act No. 16 of 1998) remain part of the Act so that the minister’s powers to revise the maximum nominal ground rent every five years by regulations is retained. This is to ensure fairness to both parties and to provide uniformity in the maximum nominal ground rent that could be charged.

Methodology:
Madam Speaker, the committee scrutinized the clauses objected to by the President with the assistance of the Parliamentary Legislative Counsel.

Meetings were held with the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment and his technical team. The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs attended one of the meetings.

Observations:
As earlier presented in the committee’s report to the House on the bill (14 April 2003), the payment of Shs 1,000 as maximum nominal rent to the registered owner of land has been an area of contention and has remained impractical since the coming into force of the Land Act, 1998.  

Madam Speaker, the law provided a flat rate, which ignored the size and location of land or nature of activity undertaken by the tenants. This has been very unrealistic and it will be very unfair to allow this scenario to continue. 

It is the committee’s considered view that the boards are in a better position to determine ground rent since the variables surrounding the land are better known to them, that is, land size, activity undertaken and location.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Article 240 and 241 of the Constitution declare the land boards competent by giving them power to inter alia deal with all matters connected with land in districts in accordance to the laws made by Parliament. This House should promote decentralisation by devolving powers to the districts. It will definitely be an alternative way of building capacity at the districts.

Recommendations:
Madam Speaker, the committee has considered the President’s concerns and maintains that the district land boards determine nominal ground rent. This must, however, be approved by the minister. The committee is convinced that this will accommodate the President’s concerns and fears.  

Section 32 (4) of the Land Act provides for appeal to the tribunal in case one is aggrieved by the decision of the land board. The tribunal would provide redress in case of any unfairness in determination of nominal ground rent payable. 

In addition the Minister, under section 94(d) of the Act, should formulate guidelines to be followed by the district land boards in determining nominal ground rent. This would provide scientific criteria for determination of rent and, therefore, deter boards from arbitrary determination thereof.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be adopted with the attached amendments. I beg to move.

11.35
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): I thank the chairperson of the committee for that very concise and clear report. 

I just want some small clarification on the issue of the third recommendation, which reads: “In addition the minister under section 94(d) of the Act should formulate guidelines to be followed by the district land boards in determining nominal ground rent.” 

Are these land boards in existence? They are talking about formulation but what if the district land boards come into use? I was wondering about this because it seems that certain land boards do have some guidelines. 

So, I want some clarification on whether there are some in existence, which need to be looked at again, or whether they need to be harmonized with the current status? I just wanted some little more information on that.

11.36
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): I thank the chairperson for the report, Madam Speaker. I hope this time we shall reach some harmonious position. If you recall, this issue was here before my son went to Senior 1 and now he is finishing Senior 6 and the Land Act has not been implemented. 

What I have always failed to understand is why the President insists on Shs 1,000 as being the maximum to be charged regardless of size and location. Really, I think he should be prepared to bend on this. If I have land in Kampala and I have a squatter, the squatter gives me Shs 1000 no matter how small that land is. Even if it is just the rights to be on my property, it is worth more than Shs 1000. (Interruption)

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I thought that before we start debating the report of the committee, the Minister should first come and tell us whether he is in conformity with some amendments. Thereafter, we can start debating when we have heard the Minister’s statement.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members are supposed to react to the chairman’s report and then the Minister also responds.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honourable member for giving way, and I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

When we passed this bill it was the Minister who rejected this clause, and hon. Nkuuhe is asking why the President insists on Shs 1,000. I think His Excellency is advised by the Minister. I think I agree with hon. Sebaggala that the Minister first tells us whether he actually agrees with this and has harmonized it with His Excellency the President, so that we do not even waste more time on this clause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no harm in doing that, hon. Minister. What is your position now?
11.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I wish to record my thanks to the committee for having given a lot of time and deep consideration to this matter. I thank them for producing a very good report that has been signed by a record number of members of the committee. (Applause). I must say thank you.  

Madam Speaker, although the report is five pages, the deliberations took us a long time and we were quite soul searching. In the end, the committee and I, representing the ministry, agreed on the recommendations appearing on Page 5 and the attachment of the amendments to the report, which at an appropriate stage the chairperson will move.  

Subsequently, I reported to the Cabinet, which upheld this compromise amendment. Ultimately I had to go to report to His Excellency the President, who last Wednesday directed me to come to this House and communicate that he is in full agreement with the committee report and proposed arrangement. (Applause). I wish to report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then it means we are all together. Then there is –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, can I conclude, because I had the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, conclude.

DR NKUUHE: So, the question then is settled. But one thing that this Land Act really failed to address was to include the titling, giving titles to people as quickly as possible. 

I am really glad the ministry is now piloting in some districts. The whole point of having land is so that you can use it as collateral to access financing and then you develop. Part of the problem we have in this country is that the poor people in the villages cannot use the land. It is not encumbered, it is not respected and so on.  

In Thailand a thing like this was done. They just went and gave everybody a land title for free, and then the peasants were able to access financing from the banks. Here if you try to go with a land title, unless it is for a plot in a city, no bank will give you money if it is a rural plot title. So, Mr Minister, if you really want to fight poverty, then land has to be seen as an asset, which can be used to access financing. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the Executive and the Legislature have agreed on this matter, I think there is really no need for further debate. I want to put the question that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Land (Amendment) Bill 2003 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

11.42
Clause 14:
MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Madam Chairperson, section 32 of the Act is amended by substituting for subsection (3) the following:

“(a) The tenant by occupancy shall pay to the registered owner an annual nominal ground rent as shall, with the approval of the Minister, be determined by the Board.

(b) The Minister shall, within 60 days after receipt of a request for approval under this subsection, communicate his or her decision in writing to the Board.

(c) Where the Minister makes no communication of his or her decision under this subsection after the expiration of the period prescribed in paragraph (b) of this subsection, it shall be deemed that the approval referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection has been given.

(d) For the avoidance of doubt, the nominal ground rent referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection shall mean reasonable ground rent -

(i) taking into consideration circumstances of each case; and
(ii) in any case, of a non-commercial nature.” 

The justification:
Subsection (a) above addresses the concerns of the President for returning the bill for reconsideration. It guards against possible abuse by the land boards when determining nominal ground rent by ensuring the involvement of the minister, that is, Government.

Subsections (b) and (c) above ensure that the minister does not unreasonably and indefinitely withhold the requisite approval or disapproval.
 
Subsection (d) above defines “nominal ground rent” in an attempt to set the parameters for the determination of ground rent, which should neither be too minimal (token) nor too high (commercial).

Otherwise, Section 14 of the Land (Amendment) Act, 2003 as passed earlier by the House does remain and stands part of the law. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  I concur.  (Applause).

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, Section 32(3)(b) says, “The minister shall, within 60 days after receipt of a request for approval under this subsection, communicate his or her decision in writing to the Board.” What will the situation be in case the Minister communicates negatively? 

The Board may decide that after viewing all circumstances surrounding this prime land, you are supposed to pay, let us say, Shs 50,000, but then the Minister is not in harmony and he communicates as is stated here. When the Minister communicates negatively, what steps will be taken by the district land boards? It is not indicated here.

Secondly, in 3(d) they mention “reasonable ground rent” and then they went ahead to throw more light on what they mean. They say: “(i) Taking into consideration circumstances of each case; and (ii) in any case, of a non-commercial nature.” 

When you talk about a non-commercial nature, what do you mean? We need more light on this, because in Kampala here, the land is prime and it is commercial. 
One may have land and someone has put up a five-storied building on it and is earning millions of shillings. So, it is commercial maybe for the squatter or the tenant, but what about the landlord? You are telling the landlord that he should not be paid in commercial terms when someone has put a four-storied building and getting a lot of money out of it. How can we harmonize the situation here?  

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I am a member of the committee and I wanted to inform my honourable colleague. If you read Page 5, paragraph 2, any party, either the landowner or the tenant, who may be aggrieved with the rent that has been determined by the land board has a leeway. He can appeal to the district land tribunal under Section 32(4) of the Act. 

Therefore, in case the communication from the minister is not consummated, is not wholesome to one of the parties, there is an avenue for one to appeal to the district land tribunal, which has powers of court. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you for that clarification. So, when the minister communicates to the land board and you are not in agreement with what the minister has communicated, is it the land board which goes to the tribunal or the owner who will go to the tribunal to present his or her grievances?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Latif, it is the aggrieved party who should go to present the problem.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, we assume that the district land board would determine the amount of money for the rent on behalf of the landlord. It will be the district land boards to determine the amount of rent the landlord has to get from the tenant. 

So, they have communicated to the minister and the minister is not in harmony with what the district land board has communicated. Now you are saying that any party aggrieved will go to the tribunal. So, I am asking, will it be the responsibility of the district land board or the responsibility of a landlord?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Madam Chairperson, really we discussed that matter at length in the committee.  Setting this ground rent, honourable members, is a process. I imagine the minister would not just blatantly say, “I will not approve your ground rent” without reason. That is why we are putting all these conditions here.

The fact is, these district land boards, as you recall in this law, are receiving their emoluments from the Consolidated Fund. So, naturally, they have got an obligation of accountability to the central Government. Actually, they are put in place by the minister. 

While this can be for argument purposes, I believe where the minister does not concur he will give the reason. The board will then sit with the minister and show that actually, their case should be understood the way it has been presented. In the end if they cannot agree totally, that is where we say they become aggrieved parties. They constitute aggrieved parties, and we have already set up a special court under this law. 

So, hon. Latif, that one should not be a major problem. That is why we are indicating consideration of circumstances of each case. The minister will be looking at each case of the district. The district land board will also be looking at each case of the land they have, because every district has got urban, rural, and all those areas. So, that is why we included the consideration of circumstances of each case. 

I do not believe that the Minister will be at parallel with the board or the board will be at parallel with him. (Interruption) 

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, section 32 (3) (a) says, “The tenant by occupancy shall pay to the registered owner an annual nominal ground rent as shall, with the approval of the Minister, be determined by the Board.” That is clear. 

Now when you come to (b), it says, “The Minister shall, within 60 days after receipt of a request for approval under this subsection, communicate his or her decision in writing to the Board.”

The issue being raised here is the two possibilities. The minister might write back to say, “I concur”. In that case, there is no problem. The minister can write back to say, “I do not concur for these reasons”. Here the situation is, the Board does not agree with the minister’s reasons. 

Suppose we put a provision in this law to say, if the minister’s communication is contestable it can be appealed against in some form. We spell it out in the law so that there is no ambiguity with regard to how that situation would be handled if it arose.

Then the second one is what has already been referred to in (3) (d)(ii), which says: “For the avoidance of doubt, the nominal ground rent referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection shall mean reasonable ground rent – (i) taking into consideration circumstances of each case.”  I have no problem with that. 

Then it goes on to say, “(ii) and in any case, of a non-commercial nature.” Why do we have to add this? Suppose we just stopped at (i)? Because the moment you begin to qualify it to a non-commercial nature, it raises the whole nature of scarcity. If the land is scarce, the value becomes - If the nature of the activity being conducted on that land is commercial, as a landowner I also have to take into consideration giving that rent. It raises more complications. 

However, if we said, “taking into considerations circumstances of each case”, I would put a full stop there. We would leave it to the land board to put whatever variables they want to and come up with something they can send to the minister. 

This will cause a lot of possibilities, because this provision is a seed that will grow into sources of dispute and delayed decisions. Well, I guess the chairman and the minister will give some clarification. But it would us save us trouble if he stopped at “taking into consideration circumstances of each case” and left the circumstances to be determined by the board. Thank you.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Chairperson, I did not anticipate that we would re-open the debate on this matter to this depth. 

Who is this tenant? This tenant is a statutory tenant created by law. This is not the ordinary person who comes to rent land for a short period or during the period after 1983. These are historical tenants who appear in the busuulu and envujjo in the Toro and Ankole landlord and tenant laws of 1937. These are a special category of people. That is why the committee came in to define what this nominal rent is.  

I wish also to clarify that the district land boards and the Government are not antagonistic institutions, they are all working for the common good. 

Now, determining rent is a scientific matter. It is not like getting a number, dividing it by two and the answer is Y. There are indexes of the economy. There are factors like the capital value of the land, economic returns of the land and other regression factors that are built within the historical factor of busuulu payment by these people. This is a special category of tenants.  

There are other tenants. Like I explained some time back, when I go to acquire land in Kyengera, the rent is not determined by this law, it is mutual agreement, it is market value. But this one is a matter of history. That is why we took a lot of time to consider it. And for the land board to come out with figures, which the minister will not have to dispute from time to time, under Section 94 the Minister will give technical guidelines. 

How do you arrive at this type of rent? This is a special type of rent. All those factors and others I have not mentioned here will be communicated in good time to the boards and harmonious rent will be paid.  

This also includes categorising urban land quite distinct from rural land. Even the terminology in urban areas has changed from kibanja to plot. Studies have indicated that trend of development. All this is in the package that goes in the form of regulations and guidelines to the district land boards. This is the explanation behind these amendments, and it took us a very long time.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I need clarification from you. Is there anywhere in the Act where these particular tenants are defined, so that they are well known and they are not mixed up with the other tenants?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Madam chairperson. For avoidance of doubt, Section 30 of the Act has a side note that says, “meaning of lawful occupant and bona fide occupant.” 

However, before we come to Section 30, we refer to Article 237(8) and (9) that created this constitutional tenancy. Other tenancies are not governed by these laws. Now, the lawful one is defined in the terms I have already explained, the Busuulu and Envujjo, Toro landlords, Ankole and so on

There is a new element now in the course of our political and economic development. Rich people and others in places of influence acquired huge leaseholds, four, five square miles, without taking the interests of the customary occupants into consideration before getting those titles. Now the customary occupants have also become statutory tenants according to the Constitution and this law. Section 30 has defined this broadly and has added on a new phenomenon.  

Hon. Jack Sabiiti would wish to hear this. People who have been settled by Government on registered land are also, according to this law, bona fide occupants. The rent they are paying is non-commercial, going by the proposed amendments. I take that explanation to be adequate, Madam Chairperson.

11.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Ndawula Kaweesi): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the Minister has explained that very well. 

From what hon. Latif Sebaggala raised, that somebody puts up a storied building on land, I think one has got to find out how that person accessed that land in the beginning. If he is a licensee, this law does not cover that one. 

However, if somebody was a tenant on this land and the town became bigger and bigger, he was a kibanja owner and you cannot disenfranchise him because it has become urban. That is why we are including this issue of a “non-commercial nature”. 

We believe these tenants, as explained by the Minister and as defined in the law, are tenants by occupancy. 
In a way they have rights because they had some ownership on that land. They were disenfranchised by government policies, the 1900 Agreement that gave some people land, and then the subsequent agreements that have been written. So, that residual ownership should also be recognised. 

This is why we say it is very unfair to charge somebody a commercial rate on something, which actually has got a certain level of ownership. That is why we are only looking at those who are statutory tenants, not a licensee. Somebody comes to negotiate with you, the landowner, and says, “I am going to do a, b, c, d, and you levy whatever you want”. It is a matter of contract. This law does not cover that. 

If somebody told you, “I am going just to grow tomatoes” and he puts up a building, you cannot take him to court for breach of contract, breach of a memorandum of understanding. You do not plead the land law. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Latif Sebaggala, you still have a problem?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, I am yet to be convinced. It has taken us a lot of time to reach where we are now in as far as the Land Bill is concerned. If we are to make a law that will stand the test of time, we must put into consideration various attachments to this law.  

Madam Chairperson, I am not convinced because if we enact a law and we put this clause as it is now without any amendment, I am more than convinced that we are going to experience various land disputes emanating from this very clause. 

Madam Chairperson, I suggest, and I agree with hon. Kamuntu, that we delete “non-commercial nature”, since the district land board will have to sit and agree on how much should be paid as ground rent and the minister has been given power to come up. In any case, if the district land board decides on a higher rent, then they have to sit and ensure –(Interruption)

MR TOM KAYONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I thank you for giving way, hon. Sebaggala. I think this clause should stay as it is because we in the city suburbs where the rules and regulations change. 
From time to time the city is extending and when it extends, it finds people settled in their bibanjas where they are entitled to stay. 

If you do not put “non-commercial nature” as a consideration, people will be asked, and are already being asked, to pay huge sums of money. They are already failing to pay what they are being asked. In my constituency it is happening. People are complaining; it is a problem. 

If we remove this, which guards against excessive charges by the districts, our people will be really done away with and cheated. Some are already too old to go and find elsewhere to settle because that is where they have settled for years. So, I would like this non-commercial nature be retained as it is. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Chairperson, I have a dictionary here and “nominal”, in terms of land, rent, et cetera, means virtually nothing, much below the actual value of a thing. So, when you say “nominal”, it is already implied and you do not have to say non-commercial or anything else. Nominal means virtually nothing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Latif Sebaggala, I have looked at Section 30 and it is really specific. It is defining this person as a person occupying land by virtue of the repeal of (a) Busuulu and Envujjo law of 1928, Toro landlord and tenant law of 1937, Ankole landlord and tenant law of 1937. It is specific. I do not know whether section 30 of the main Act does not satisfy you?  

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, thank you for that guidance, but I only request the chairperson of the Committee or the Minister to define the non-commercial nature. What do you mean by non-commercial? If you define that for me, then I will think twice. But now I am at a loss.
 
MR KIWALABYE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. Because of the concerns hon. Sebaggala is giving, this committee tried to define what it means by the word “nominal” as opposed to the general definition of the term “nominal”. 

We defined it not to mean nothing or a token but something reasonable, and courts have already interpreted the word “reasonable”. From the word “reasonable”, there is also a suggestion that the parties concerned would be consulted because the parties concerned would look at the determined rent as reasonable. So, the landowners and tenants will come into the process of fixing this nominal ground rent. 

So, “nominal” in this Act does not mean what the dictionary is saying. Here it specifically means reasonable, but not too high to be commercial.

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to be corrected, but I think this particular law is trying to address the historical imbalances that were in Uganda. For instance, Byanyima finds himself as a landlord when actually it was like a gift from a chief, from a king. You just found yourself owning that piece of land. 

Originally, the landlord would get a calabash of beer and it would be a mutual understanding. But now the Government is coming in and saying, “have something nominal that is reasonable”. When we start tagging monetary values, of course, it is very bad. 

I would want us to have a touch of reality. When they say nominal, it is because we had not accepted Shs 1,000. Which means we should accept. Actually, between the tenant and the landlord, there must be a mutual understanding because they had been living together for many years and they had been settling those disputes and whatever. 

So, we should not stick on nominal as meaning nothing, really, because these people had been living together and it is only that Byanyima has found himself that chunk of land. I felt that I should support this committee’s work and we move ahead. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 14 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Speaker, I wish to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill and adopted it without any amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003 be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

12.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, we are in the process of divesting Nile Hotel International and two weeks back a Member of Parliament raised some queries, which I responded to on the Floor. After some discussion, you ruled that the Committee on Finance should study the case and report in two weeks.  
Madam Speaker, I note that this appears as item No. 10 on the Order Paper. I would like to appeal to you that since the report is ready and the divesture is very important, we should consider it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have the report but I do not have the chairperson. That is my problem now.  

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, Item No.11 on the Order Paper has been outstanding for close to a year now. The people in these districts have been expecting this project to take off. I am seeking your guidance. What happens if the chairman of the committee is not here and yet this project should start? For us in the districts we want to benefit from this project. 

I have seen the deputy chairperson and the report is ready and it has been circulated. Why can’t the deputy chairperson of the Committee on National Economy present the report before this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agree with hon. Kizige on this particular matter of the Livestock Productivity Development Project. You know that this matter came here in February and now, the year has ended. Can I ask the vice-chairperson - Oh, here comes the chairman of the committee.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I note, Madam Speaker, that this item No.11 concerns livestock but I do not see any sector minister here. Would it be procedurally right to proceed without the sector minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe they have delegated. Because this is a law, normally it is the Minister of Finance who handles this on behalf of the Government. But here comes the minister.  

Hon. Nandala, I have been calling you, you are disrupting the programmes of the day. Or you had gone to collect the Minister? Please present your report.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 36 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR LIVESTOCK PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this report was distributed two or three days ago.  

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I picked my copy as I came into the Chambers, right from the tables outside there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, those members who do not have copies can secure some from outside. Hon. Nandala, report. They moved the motion and it came to your committee, so your committee reports first and then we hear from the ministry.

12.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request for the Livestock Productivity Improvement Project. This loan request was committed to the Committee of National Economy in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 159(2), and under our Rules of Procedure, rule 138(2)(b). I wish to report as follows:

Livestock production is one of Uganda’s major economic activities, covering milk, meat and hides/skin production. By the end of 1970s, Uganda’s livestock industry had nearly collapsed, causing considerable decline on livestock numbers by about 30 percent. Since then, several donors have been assisting the livestock sub-sector, with the major emphasis on daily development. 

Meat production has remained relatively un-addressed by donor assistance. 

The Government of Uganda requested World Bank group assistance to finance the proposed project of the meat industry that emanated from the recommendation of the Meat Master Plan Study, which was carried out in 1996.  
The Livestock Sector:
The Livestock sector is an economic resource for over 80 percent of Ugandans. This economic resource includes meat, milk as well as providing power for cultivation (oxen ploughs), farm manure, and investment opportunities in related fields. These, however, are still in small undertakings and there is need to increase the productivity of the available livestock resources.  

In the 1960s, well-funded and coordinated government schemes led to a viable and profitable livestock industry covering milk, beef and non-ruminants. 

In the 1970s, there were over 560 ranches and 3000 privately owned commercial dairy farms. There was a supporting infrastructure of 475 dams, 428 valley tanks, 7500 boreholes, 2100 dip tanks, 43 quarantine stations and about 170 well-equipped livestock markets. However, the political instability over the years gradually affected this sector.  

In an attempt to revamp the sub-sector, the Uganda Meat Master Plan Study was carried out in 1996. It recommended, among others, a programme of 21 investment projects valued at 65 million dollars for a period of 21 years. This is the basis on which the Government requested African Development Bank (ADB) in 1999 to finance the livestock project with emphasis on meat production. 
 
The Salient Features in the Livestock Sector:
This sector contributes 7.5 percent of GDP and 17 percent of the agricultural GDP. In 2000 the livestock production was estimated at 5.8 million cattle, one million sheep, 6.2 million goats, 1.5 million pigs and about 24 million units of poultry. 

The production level as per year was estimated as follows; 93,000 tonnes of beef, 570 million litres of milk for the cows, 41,000 tonnes of chicken, 16,000 tonnes of goat meat and 9,000 tonnes of mutton. From the above figures, it was observed that per capita consumption was as follows:
Meat, a person ate six kilogrammes per year; milk, they drunk 23 litres per year. Of course there are maybe others who never tasted. These figures are below the Food Agricultural Organisation minimum per capital requirements of 50 kilogrammes and 2,000 litres per person per year, for meat and milk respectively.
Due to civil unrest and cattle rustling, almost 24 districts in the cattle corridor are under-stocked and about 14 districts are moderately stocked. The districts in the cattle corridor make up 47 percent of Ugandan’s surface area and contain 40 percent of the total population.

Efforts to Restock:
Government embarked on a restocking programme in 2000 with the objective of:
1. Increasing the level of agricultural productivity of poor pastoralists.
2. Meet income and asset needs of the poor.
3. Improve nutrition and food security of the poor, rural pastoralists.

The programme has so far achieved the following in the distribution to the livestock: 25,208 cows/heifers; 1,848 bulls; 2,802 goats; 1,451 ploughs. The programme also procured acaricides (animal drugs) and spray pumps. 

The programme has, however, not performed to its expectation in all the 45 districts. Only 30 percent of the targeted clients in Masaka and Kiboga have been served. Cattle rustling has also greatly affected the programme in the Northern and North East and the Eastern Districts of Uganda. 

Other efforts to stock re-distribution of livestock by the private sector include:
· The non-governmental organizations like the Heifer Project by the Christian Children’s Fund, that has boosted about 5,000 families.  
· Send a Cow by the World Vision and Red Cross.

Madam Speaker, this background leads us now to the analysis of the project under consideration. 

The committee met the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Agriculture with their technical staff. The Ministry of Agriculture was represented by the Minister of State in charge of Livestock with their technical team. 

The committee further held a joint meeting with the sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The committee analysed the following documents:
· The Appraisal Report by the African Development Fund on the National Productive and Improvement Project, Meat Production Master Plan. 
· The World Bank Implementation Completion Report on the Livestock Service Project. This is the one, which also dealt with the valley dams.

The Project:
The project is as a result of the long awaited livestock development across the country. The project was a product of the earlier mentioned Meat Production Master Study (MPS). This was meant to produce an overall strategic and compressive plan, which would provide a basis for sustainable development of the sub-sector. 

The Meat Production Master Plan Study identified constraints in the production, processing and marketing of the livestock and the livestock products. Some of the constraints include the following:
1. Overstocking of the livestock in some parts of the cattle corridor and a severe under-stocking in some traditional cattle corridors of the Districts of East and Northern Uganda.
2. Inappropriate breeding methods.
3. Inadequate supply of water for livestock production. 
4. Prevention of animal diseases.
5. Lack of credit for the farmers.
6. Poor marketing of livestock and livestock products due to poor infrastructure and lack of information.
7. Poor quality of livestock product.
8. Low per capita consumption of livestock production in Uganda among others.
 
The project is designed to address some of the above constraints through four major components:
1.Livestock Genetic Resource Development.
2.Animal health
3.Water supply and Foliage development
4.Livestock marketing infrastructure and information systems, and the fifth one is just a project coordination unit; it is not part of the components.

The above components are expected to increase livestock in the cattle corridor and the quality of both livestock and livestock products. The project aims at controlling the main animal transmitted and vector borne diseases, and supporting veterinary delivery and regular services.  
Valley dams and small water facilities will be constructed.  

The livestock infrastructure and information services will be put in place in order to provide training and settling livestock and meet standards.  

A database system and the range of inventories will be provided for livestock.  

Degradation and Coverage.
The proposed programme concentrates in 29 Districts of the cattle corridor. These are: Kotido, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Kitgum, Pader, Soroti, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Kumi, Lira, Apac, Sironko, Pallisa, Nakasongola, Luwero, Masindi, Kiboga, Kibaale, Mubende, Kenjonjo, Kamwenge, Mpigi, Sembabule, Rakai, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Kayunga and Kamuli. Appendix (1) is attached.  

Some activities such as setting standards and veterinary registration, stock regulation will be national in scope.  The project will be implemented over a period of five years to cover the above districts.

The Funding:
The projects costs are in appendix (2) and the total cost are estimated as follows:
US 33.6 million on average, you get that times 1.3 per dollar. So you can tell the dollars. The loan request is for US 23.74 million, which is equivalent to Shs 29,604,406 million, while the rest will be contributed by the Government amounting to US 3.17 million; Local Government - US $ 1.88 million and the farmers – US $ 2.02 million. It was reported that the contribution by Government would be mainly in form of salaries and wages for staff working on the project. The loan has a maturity period of 50 years with a grace period of 10 years at an interest rate of 0.75 percent per annum. These are the standard ADF conditionalties and are in line with Government Debt Strategy of accepting only concessionary loans.

Implementation:
The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will execute the project. 

The project will be staffed by seconded staff engaged from the ministry with specialist skills in planning, monitoring, evaluation, finance and procurement.  
The project coordination unit will arrange a number of annual audits of the programme accounts as well as the mid-term review of the implementation of the programme.  

Institutionally, there will be a committee composed of Ministries of Finance, Liaison Officer, Commission for Animal Production and Health Commissions for gender, Representatives from the  Ministry of Local Government, NEMA, LC Vs from some districts and may co-opt other members as need arises. The committee will meet twice a year. There will be a strengthened linkage between national and a devolved institution and time will be allowed for each LC III and LC V to include in any proposals in their own budget-processing timetable of procuring the items.  

Other supplementary components like water supply, disease control, will be carried out by the relevant Government departments, for example, water will be by the Ministry of Lands, Water, and Environment.

Observations:
1. Livestock supports many poor households in form of disposable income, animal protein, to mention but a few.
2. Livestock sub-sector can be upgraded to be a major export earner if the quality of the products is improved.  This project is addressing the issue of empowering the women and other economically vulnerable groups. This has worked through other programmes like the Send a Cow project, Heifer project, to mention but a few.

3. The livestock re-stocking will be carried out through the existing structures, which will save costs.  Livestock will be restocked using the following criteria: 
(i) Cattle will be distributed on credit using a person-system in areas, which have surplus feed and those, which have been heavily de-stocked; these are 13 districts in number.  
(ii) Oxen re-stocking will be restricted to districts where there is demand and experience of the previous use of ox-ploughs.
(iii) Grass will benefit all the 29 districts.
(iv) All re-stocking, except for the boar goats, will be procured within Uganda from better-stocked areas to under-stocked areas.

4. The establishing of the Implementing Committees at various levels will not duplicate the work of the existing system, but the technical officials of the districts in the various fields will be part of the committee at the relevant level. This, therefore, is not a parallel arrangement.

5. Re-stocking will be given on credit on a person-a-heifer system and this project, unlike the arrangements under the Prime Minister’s Office, who is absent today, where re-stocking is free.

6. The project will support the control of economically epidemic and exoneratic diseases, which will include promotion of vaccines for new cattle diseases in poultry, broccorasis, lamb skin diseases, East Coast Fever in cattle, contagious bovenia - what the Minister has mentioned, and Foot and Mouth Diseases. These will be controlled by strengthening controlled cattle movements by establishing stock routes, emergency quarantine stations and animal checkpoints.

7. If cattle rustling is not effectively controlled, the re-stocking programme in the highly de-stocked districts in the North and Eastern districts of Uganda will not take off.  

8. The budget allocation for vehicles is high especially bearing in mind that the project will utilise, in most cases, the existing information and staff.  

9. The animal-breeding centre is poorly equipped and nearly a total waste.  

10. The counterpart funding may be a hindrance to some districts to access this project facility if they cannot meet the required counterpart funding. 

11. There is little money allocated to buy livestock for re-stocking in the project.

Recommendations: 
1. More funds should be allocated to procurement and distribution of livestock, this includes cutting the expenses on foliage and vehicles.

2. The issue of counterpart funding should be addressed in favor of the poor districts.
3. The past experience of valley dams should not be ignored. 

4. The provision of water by valley dams should be strictly maintained to avoid the past shoddy work.

5. Poultry should be promoted because it is the most common type of livestock in most households and is easy to sell, rear and eat.  

6. The provision to empower women and other vulnerable groups should be emphasized because these are the most affected groups economically and have proved efficient in managing money-generating activities. For example, the Send a Cow, Heifer projects, the FINCA programmes.

7. The project should maximally utilize the existing capacities of veterinary services to fight the livestock epidemics to improve their productivity.

8. The cattle rustling should be addressed by disarming, also continuing to disarm the rustlers for effective implementation of the project.

9. Government should attract other programmes to address promotion of livestock industry in other parts of Uganda for equitable distribution of development.

10. Every effort should be put to end the war in the country and this is one of the major problems for the livestock industry.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, this project clearly addresses the issues of eradication of poverty for the poor in the households.  This is a concern of PEAP, PMA and other national programmes.  Uganda is conducive for the livestock industry and this is for the promotion of such and our committee, therefore, requests you to approve this loan, which has positive multiple effects that are multi-sectoral in outcome.  

The committee strongly urged the implementing agency to adhere to the provision of the project programme and the committee recommendations and follow as agreed at all levels.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you and I beg to report. (Applause).
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.

12.45
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairman for this wonderful though belated report and for his recommendations.  Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Is the Member in order to say I brought a report belated when he is very aware that this project is going to start to be implemented according to the whole programme in June next year?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I think it is  common knowledge that this loan request has been here since February.  So, do not make a big issue out of it.

MR KIZIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I want to state that I am from Kamuli District which is within the cattle corridor and Bugabula County North Constituency has one of the biggest livestock markets in Busoga region and its clients come as far as Mbarara, Busia, and the whole of Teso. So, I am interested in this project.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to say that I participated in the preparation of the Appraisal Report by the African Development Fund on the National Productivity and Improvement Project in 2002, initially as a guide to the team to a conducted tour of Kamuli District where they visited livestock markets, where they visited farmers, where they visited households with one to two heads of cattle.  Later on, I participated as the financial analyst to the team when the team realised the potential in me in that field.  

The committee has identified the need and the urgency for the project. In their observation on page 10, the second last bullet; they raised the concern that the counterpart funding may be a hindrance to some districts to access this project. This is an issue that should be addressed because if the counterpart funding will stop the districts given the revenue collection in the district presently, it will become a problem to the implementation of the project in those particular areas. My suggestion is that Ministry of Finance should send money to the districts to enable them fulfil the counterpart funding because it is a life-giving project. It is multi dimensional in nature and it is going to benefit the people. It is recognized with the PEAP and this should not be a hindrance.  

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee once again and urge Members of this House to pass this resolution with no further debate because it is essential and greatly necessary. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NUWAGABA MUNTUYERA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I thought I would correct two areas for the benefit of Members who are going to debate the report.  One is on page 3, second last paragraph, where it says these figures are below the FAO – minimum per capita requirement of 50 kilos and 2000; that should be 200 litres per person per year of milk. That is correction No. 1 - 200 instead of 2000.

Then the second correction is on page 9, iv, which says, “All livestock except boar goats”. There is no breed called “boar goats”. Boar is the male pig; it is South African.

12.48
MR MULURI MUKASA  (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the committee for coming up with this report. In paragraph 6 of page 9, last bullet, the committee has observed that livestock will be given on credit, but in case this livestock dies, is there any provision for some replacement? The example from other programmes, which have given livestock, is quite alive. For instance in ‘Send a Cow’ project for giving the cow the empano cow. Some of these cows have died and their intended purpose, therefore, has not been achieved. That is of controlling poverty at the household level. Is there a way of compensating like in the traditional way where if your cow dies, your neighbour obviously comes in and gives you another cow so that you are not completely knocked out of the system.

Madam Speaker, I quite agree with the observation of the committee on page 10, somewhere in the middle, which says that the Budget allocation for vehicles is high, especially bearing in mind that the project will utilise, in most cases, existing information and staff. I think this is a very important observation. As much as possible, this money that is going to be received should go towards the actual maximisation of benefits of the project, that is, the Livestock and Infrastructure and as little as possible should go on administrative costs like fuel and so on. 

Otherwise, if there is more money on fuel and even seminars, then we shall lose the whole point of the project.  

Madam Speaker, paragraph 7, again in the recommendations on page 11, where the committee recommends that more funds should be allocated to procurement, which is okay, and distribution of livestock, that is okay.  But they also recommend that they should cut expenses on foliage, which I thought maybe was forage. I would like to disagree here or maybe propose that as much attention should be given to forage as to the procurement and distribution of livestock.  In some areas of this cattle corridor, forage is actually quite important, particularly in the dry season when there is virtually nothing for the cows to eat and obviously the cows die. If this happens, then the intended benefits of the project will actually go to waste.  

There is also one other important aspect that I think we should pay attention to, that is, the menace of termites against forage, against grass, against the vegetation, particularly in the cattle corridor. The termite menace has been rightly observed to be more serious in Nakasongola District. I think the termites there are of a different breed; they are actually threatening to turn that area into a desert. I think the project could also address this kind of thing. How do we mitigate the bad effects of termites? Maybe the project could link in with other aspects of vegetation growth, vegetation protection even of trees both for fencing and for provision of the necessary tree cover in this project area.  

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, this is a very good project. It should have been here yesterday, but thank God it is here.  I beg that we pass it.  Thank you. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are there very pressing issues you must raise?  

12.53
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I only have two issues to raise. The first one is a serious matter, where the committee has taken a whole year to give this Parliament a report. I think that one reflects badly on this House, because wherever I go I have always been lambasted why this has not been passed. So, if it happens that maybe either the chairperson or a few people on the committee were the ones delaying us, I think that is unfortunate. I request that the chairperson tells this House why it has taken a whole year because this is serious. The public knows that sometimes we have always not done work for the people in terms of, say, approving these ones. Instead, it could be Parliament to be asking the ministry why it has not implemented.  

Secondly, on page 7, 5.1, this one is in as far as the corridor is concerned. I would like to seek clarification on what method was used to determine the cattle corridor.  What was the yardstick used, because if I look at a district like Iganga, especially Northern Iganga, Kigulu North and Busiki, I would think it would be part of the corridor because other districts like Mayuge get most of the livestock from there. So, I do not know what method was used. Supposing one is in Kigulu North, which is near Kamuli, does he or she benefit from the cattle corridor? So, maybe the Minister will give us the yardstick used for determining the cattle corridor, because if I compare Iganga with Sironko, I think Iganga is more of a cattle corridor than Sironko. I thank you very much.

DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the committee.  When you refer to point 5.1 that the project is only covering 29 districts, Kapchorwa District is not included in those 29 districts and yet Kapchorwa is within the cattle corridor. The committee Members or those who have studied veterinary, and I imagine even the Minister must be aware that we have a sub-county in Kapchorwa called Ngenge, which borders with Nakapiripirit. I am told by those who are informed that in the 1960s it had one of the biggest cattle markets in East Africa, but it is now deserted because of cattle rustling. (Interruprion)  

MRS KULANY: I just want to inform my colleague that actually if Sironko is included, this is the same zone that hon. Yekko is talking about. So, I do not know whether this omission is by design or they just forgot about it. We suffer from cattle rustling and we are not mentioned at all.  So, I wanted to inform him.

DR YEKKO: Thank you very much, hon. Member. So, I really need that clarification. How on earth do you include Sironko, Kumi and Nakapiripirit and you omit Kapchorwa District?  

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I want to give information. Colleagues, I do not want us to dwell on the issue of saying the Chairman was the one who designed the project. We have the Ministry of Agriculture, all Ministries in Uganda, which design projects; and when they design there are so many intervening programmes in different districts.  I want you not to assume that this is the only programme, which came to satisfy the livestock programme in Uganda. We have Northern Uganda –(Interruption)

MS AANIMU ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Chairperson, I want a clarification on the difference between the re-stocking programme, where almost all the districts have been re-stocked –(Interjections)- Just a moment, let me get protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, you are protected.

MS ANGUPALE: I want a clarification between the districts, which are already re-stocked with cattle and now the cattle corridor of which this programme has been focused to.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I think you can see the reason why this loan has delayed to come to the Floor.  We want to enter in correspondence with the Prime Minister to give us the gaps, what he has done, so that we know if really there are problems, which need to be addressed.  

Secondly, you will also notice that the question of talking of some districts not being included was asked at committee level.  I have letters here, a full bundle, which I will lay on the Table, to show you what the committee did; and I want to ask my colleagues who are thinking in a negative attitude, like my colleague from Mayuge, I as a chairperson and my members, there is no ill intention. We want this country to develop, and if you do not know, I am the one who wants peasants to be better. But if you feel that the project has delayed and I am the one, the Chairperson and some Members, it is illegal. I want you to withdraw that statement because it is going on record that this chairperson, because he is the one presenting, he is the one who has delayed the project. So, colleagues, let us have a starting point. If there was an error -(Interruption)

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, I thought in a debate of this nature, the Chairman of the committee would take issues raised so that he responds at the end, not to engage presenting Members. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you listen to the comments and then you respond, because if you keep on getting up it means you will answer every member.    Is it a distraction?  Okay, honourable minister, if there is a distraction let us know.

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to make a clarification so that we don’t have more questions hitting on the same issue, and this is to do with the districts of the cattle corridor being the only beneficiaries.  Can I have your attention, honourable members? I have just realised that restocking is in 13 districts of the north and the northeast which have been restocked for different reasons, but which have a high potential for beef. That is one.  

Disease control is in all the districts of this country, so is marketing and infrastructure.  Now, when it comes to water and foliage, which has been mentioned that is pasture.  That is where we are mainly focusing on the districts of the cattle corridor, the 29 districts where there is severe dryness; where we need water, we need pasture development and where pasture is not, or is having problems with termites as the honourable member, Muruli Mukasa, was mentioning. So, this programme in a way is covering the whole country in some aspects; it is focusing on some parts of the country for different reasons as I have said.  I thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is true I am a member of the committee and it is true that this report was based on an appraisal report done by the technical staff and indeed he has made reference.  He was part of the team, which appraised this project.  Therefore, the innuendo which seems to be coming from the House almost wanting to say since the chairman of the Committee comes from Sironko, therefore, that is why Sironko is included in this, it is not true. I want to dismiss this.  This is a result of a technical appraisal and on the basis of that appraisal these districts are listed and it is out of that report that we are referring to them in this report.  That insinuation should not really influence the debate.  I wanted to give that information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, maybe what the Minister of State for Animal Industry did not highlight is that one of the components of the project is supposed to be monies to the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre.  This NAGRC, as it is known has got farms all around the country, and that these farms breeding of livestock are supposed to take place and anybody will be able to access these improved breeds for buying and stocking their own farms whether you are from Karamoja or not.  I thank you.

DR YEKKO: I thank all those who have given clarification, but it is still not clear to me because the honourable minister has said that the other districts are under restocking in the northeastern Uganda.  I do not know which those other districts are because they are already covered under this restocking programme.  So, since Kapchorwa is within the cattle corridor and is not covered and there are also other districts, I really urge members not to approve this resolution until there is a clear criterion on how they omitted the other districts.  Thank you.

1.04
REV. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Rukungiri): Thank you very much Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I have two comments: One is that this report is very good and the sector needs to be developed.  But I have two very important questions.  The first one is the plan for its sustainability because we can see that it is handing over cattle- one person benefits and then hands over to another person. On one hand that is a relief from the way we have been borrowing to give capital to people in the rural areas for poverty alleviation.  But we have borrowed money many times and it is lent to village banks who are agencies, but it has failed to make meaning because people borrow it for crisis.  So, the way this plan is designed actually takes the money borrowed directly to the producers and that is a very important aspect, but we need to put in place a question as to how this fund or this project would be sustained.  

Then the second one is about how these districts were determined.  If an appraisal was done, then really it was not done in an acceptable way because this is a loan taken by a country.  The tax payers in 50 years’ time will be paying back this loan, but if you say that it was done on the basis of one potential areas to produce and develop the livestock industry, and two, on significant obstacles to the development of the industry, then I would find that appraisal very unreasonable to curve out Rukingiri, Kanungu and leave them there and take Bushenyi.  There are realities that these areas are very potential and are active in the livestock development and that there are significant obstacles to the industry.  

Like in the mountainous areas where you have got water in the valleys, but as land pieces become smaller, you cannot take your cows through somebody’s farm to drink water and there is need to actually develop a system of delivering water to where the cows are.  So, whereas on the one hand it is a good proposal, I think the criteria upon which the cattle corridor was defined would be found very acceptable to many people who would be taking responsibility for this loan.  Thank you very much.

1.07
MR PATRICK AMURIAT  (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to say thanks to the committee for a report well prepared.  I have got a few concerns: one of my concerns is on the design of this project.  Whereas we are talking about livestock development, it appears the project is designed in such a way as only to address beef production thus ignoring the other benefits of milk production.  So, how is the project intending to handle the production and processing of milk within the cattle corridor?  

The other concern and request probably I would like to pass to Government is special consideration that needs to be given to areas that are affected by the war and cattle rustling.  By this, I am actually specifically asking whether it would not be possible to brand these kind of districts some form of affirmative action.  We know that the war one day will come to an end.  We are so optimistic of that, but the problems that the war will leave behind are definitely going to be immense and therefore, giving credit to a person who cannot even afford credit. I think is being unrealistic.  So, therefore, my call is for some bit of consideration to be given to these districts rather than actually giving them credit.  

Is it not possible merely to just give them the cows and they will be able to manage until such a time that they have been lifted to a level where they can then be able to afford credit.  This should also go, Madam Speaker, with counterpart funding.  Our districts have been brought to their knees; there is no revenue collection going on in the districts for some time now, and so when you come out with such a programme and demand of these districts or individuals to raise money as counterpart funding, you are actually denying them the project.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, there is no way we can talk about stocking Karamoja and Teso yet there are problems of insecurity within Karamoja and the cattle rustling.  The border between Kenya and Uganda, Sudan and Uganda, and Somalia and Uganda are actually porous.  We shall in effect be borrowing money in order to re-stock Kenya and those other countries.  I would prefer that we should guarantee the security of this cattle that is actually going to be distributed to the people, or going to be given on credit.  What does the Ministry of Agriculture have in store?  How is it going to liaise with the Ministry of Defence to ensure that cows that are brought in on credit will actually be secure within the borders and the frontiers of the respective districts?  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.10
MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have a very small point because I have already cleared it with the minister.  On page 7, the list of districts that have been included in the cattle corridor is made, and I am just trying to request the Committee to include Masaka district.  I have also been advised that Masaka and Bundibugyo should have been included in that list.  So, I just want us to correct the record so that Masaka is highlighted –(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member in order, after the Chairperson has clarified and the minister has also clarified, to insist that the committee should include Masaka when it has been clearly stated that it is not the Committee which determines these districts?  It was the ministry and after an appraisal of some projects.  Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, really, if this arose from an appraisal, there must have been a criteria.  But I do not know really whether we have capacity to sit here and say, “Insert this, delete the other one.”  I think it is a bit of a problem, hon. Namaggwa.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, it is not a bit of a problem, sorry to  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon?

MS MUGERWA: I am sorry to respond to you like this.  I am saying - in fact, recently I attended two seminars where this issue was raised and I was advised that Masaka is included in the cattle corridor, and the minister has just sent me a note that Bundibugyo and Masaka have been included, and I am just requesting the House to include it on the list. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we do not normally amend reports here really.  If the minister has agreed then that is okay, but we do not amend reports here on this Floor.  Minister, what is the position?

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, would you want me to respond to this?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, respond, please.

MRS MUGYENYI: The position is that some of the areas of the cattle corridor were missed out of the original document by typing error or mistake; Masaka is one of them.  About two counties in Masaka are definitely within the cattle corridor.  There is also Bundibugyo district; there is the area at the border with Congo - Rwebisengo.  Rwebisengo happens to be a cattle place, very dry with all the manifestations of the cattle corridor, and we agreed to include it.  So, Madam Speaker, part of Masaka is in the cattle corridor and it will be included.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, has it really taken one year for the minister to realise that there was a mistake because now Sebei will demand that they are part of the corridor and they should be included?

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I do not know if it was a typing error.  I have known about project designs and appraisals.  The moment you want to change a project, you have to go back to where you applied.  Let the minister come and clarify to us if it is true there was a typing error in the appraisal, there was typing error at negotiation, there was a typing error at approval and they have gone back and agreed, then we shall include all the districts including Kapchorwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am really reluctant to accept your reasoning that it was a typing error; it cannot be a typing error for one year. No!

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, maybe I should not have used the word “typing error”.  But in the process of reviewing, committee meetings and several meetings that have taken place, we did accept that Masaka district should be included and this took place during several meetings that we have had with the Committees of this Parliament.  The reason being that we have a clear map of what we define as the cattle corridor and parts of Masaka district are within this map and this is why we accepted it.  We had an appeal from Bundibugyo district, and this particular area of Rwebisengo; again we listened.  It was not that we did not know that these places did not exist.  So, it was through negotiations and committee meetings that we accepted that these areas should be brought in for reasons that we had used as the criteria for defining where this project should be located.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, you know, I do not really want to engage wrongly with you on this matter.  But you know I come from Kamuli, it is part of the cattle corridor, many projects have taken place in this country where Kamuli has not been considered yet it is part of the cattle corridor.  Has it just been discovered that Kamuli is part of the cattle corridor?  This is a shoddy way of doing work.  I think you come up with an amendment as a minister; it should be amended from this Floor.  That is my decision.

MRS RAINER KAFIRE: Madam Speaker, reading on the project area and the area covered, I am surprised that Kapchorwa, which is near to Nakapiripirit, Moroto on the other side and then Sironko, is left and Kumi on the other side is left just hanging there.  Can we ask the minister, when making an amendment – I am not from Kapchorwa, but I find it really looking out of - I do not know what to say. Could you make an amendment including Kapchorwa, honourable minister, please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister, I think it will not be fair –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Rainer has observed, when I was looking at the area of coverage, I saw Sironko, Pallisa and Tororo left out.  Certainly, the conditions, which exist in Pallisa, exist in Tororo and Busia.  There is no way you can carve out.  Then from Sironko, you jump Mbale, then you go to Pallisa, from there you jump to – we are wondering how this corridor was really defined.  What was the criterion?  So, in amendment, other than Kapchorwa, I do not think Pallisa and Tororo could be left out.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, first sit down. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, it appears all the 56 districts of this country now want to benefit from this credit. I thought that initially this credit was meant to benefit districts lying within the cattle corridors.  Would it not be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for us to define the cattle corridor and in so doing settle the issue of which districts would actually benefit from this credit? 

MR KIZIGE:  Madam Speaker, I have mentioned earlier that I was part of the appraisal team for the African Development Bank.  The problem I see is arising from the listing as given on page 7; because the cattle corridor in the project document as was seen by the African Development Bank, was given by sub-county, not by district.  I want to give an example.  You have Kamuli district listed here as a district and yet it is Budiope County and parts of Bugabula north that are within the cattle corridor.  Iganga district was included, but I do not see Iganga district listed here.  So, there are so many other districts that you may not be seeing here but are included in the original document.  So, I think it is appropriate for the minister to go and bring the list as it appears in the cattle corridor and as was picked on by the appraisal team to include in this project.  I think that is where the confusion is coming from.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Madam Speaker, as minister now responsible for water and specifically water for production, I am associated with this proposed project and our programme in the ministry for supply of water to the cattle corridor is linked very closely with those who drew up this project.  Now, if we expand it to areas that are climatologically and culturally known as a cattle corridor, we are going to have a problem.  We would rather have another project to cater for those areas that have no characteristic seasonal migration of cattle culture people moving for water for whom we are trying to fight. 

Nomadism, this is the background to this project.  I am appealing to colleagues with this information to interact with the minister responsible for Livestock, but also the minister responsible for provision of water to fight nomadism in the cattle corridor; that there are maps and there is also an IGAD project fighting desertification which also follows this partner. It is a diagonal line from Dodoth down to Bukanga, to Kikagati.  It is a diagonal line across the country.  Other districts are marginal to it.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Madam Speaker, I would like to add information but at the same time make an appeal to the honourable members that if we go by what is happening now, this project will never take off; it will never be approved because there is no district that will not want to have this project in their areas. As I said from the beginning- and I think the chairman of the Committee actually said that this is a project on beef.  It is a beef sector project; it is not a diary sector project.  We have had other projects that have addressed different issues of livestock, or of other development issues in this country.  Now if you talk about areas like Kapchorwa for example, like Sironko where the rainfall is relatively high, where there is no need of making valley tanks and dams and so on, compared to districts that are dry –(Interruption)

MRS KULANY:  Information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the minister give us her information. 

MRS KULANY:  I want to give her the geographical position of what we are talking about.  She is talking of high rainfall, but the area we are talking about is called Ngenge bordering Karamoja; it has all the conditions of Nakapiripirit.  So, to say that this area- and it is actually a cattle grazing area- so we are talking about Ngenge belt, which stretches from Sironko up to Kenya border, a stretch of about 50 miles which is semi-arid.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Thank you for the information.  Madam Speaker, we have an ecological map which defines the cattle corridor and this ecological map is based on the rainfall, on the partners of the people who live around that area and the problems that they face and the need for the development of those areas.  If that particular area whether it is a sub-county or a county, as indeed I have said in the case of Masaka is supposed to be within the defined areas of the cattle corridor, then, yes it will be covered like other areas.  But we have a clear map, an ecological zone, it is clearly defined as the cattle corridor and it has distinctive features that need the attention of this project.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we shall come back and we will have some members saying, “Why doesn’t this project go to my district, and why to the other districts?”  It will never take off.  I think we should design another project, which is addressing every area of this country. And as I said before, many aspects of this project are addressing the entire country of Uganda like disease control.  

But then there are other areas which clearly deserve the attention of foliage of water development and if we do not approve this project, I do not see what we are going to add, quite frankly, that will not be challenged later in future when we come back still with some districts not covered because one project cannot cover everywhere.  For example, we can all say, “Why are we not buying or re-stocking our areas with these new breeds of animals that will be brought in?”  We cannot afford it; this loan cannot afford it.  If you gave me cows to take to my area, I will definitely take them with pleasure, but we must define where the real need is and put this re-stocking there, so are other aspects of the project.  I want to make an appeal, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I definitely do appreciate the explanation of the minister in charge of the sector, but I am somehow at a loss.  What is the criteria of defining the cattle corridor as it should be, because my impression here is that there are as many corridors as there are people interested given what is coming on the Floor because there is no clear convergence of ideas of what it is.  So, it should be clearly stated such that the project area handling those particular aspects- in which case we should be able to appreciate that this particular project is designed to handle a specific requirement and maybe other projects can also be designed at a later stage to extend to other aspects.  But there seems to be some bit of misunderstanding of what it is, because everyone is saying, “My area is a corridor.”  Even if it is a sub-county, there should be a clear designation of what should that be, and as long as that is not clear, it will put the project into jeopardy.  So, I suppose we need to harmonize ourselves on that particular aspect so that we appreciate the project area.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  If you look at the report of the committee, on page 6, the project is designed to address principally four major components.  One is the livestock genetic resource development; the second one is the animal health; the third one is water supply and foliage development; and then the fourth one is livestock, marketing, infrastructure and information systems.  

In the appraisal report, the cattle corridor is specified as having special problems, deserving special attention, and in the project design the special attention for the corridor is particularly water supply and foliage development.  

In the animal health and livestock genetic resource development, the genetic resource is cross breeding of animals to improve them.  Therefore, really the project in fact is national in character except that the country, having specific special problems in particular areas, there are programmes which are suited for those areas.  

The third is the component, which the minister has explained.  It is that this project should not be taken in isolation of other projects.  There are projects covering concerns raised by members whether it is goat rearing or rabbits rearing or dairy or fish; all these are projects within the ministry addressing these particular concerns so that members would help. If you saw this as a component of the total- meaning there are other problems addressing the concerns you have raised so that we do not need to delay this project, which you have complained has delayed for one year.  Every time you delay, there is an opportunity cost foregone by not putting this thing in time.  I am pleading as a member of the Committee that we support the Chairman and the minister, and we pass this loan and we move forward. (Applause).  Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the minister want to say something?

MRS MUGYENYI:  I was just about to conclude.  I would like to add to what the hon. Kamuntu has just said by saying that, first of all, the cattle corridor is clearly defined, there is no doubt about it.  Secondly, I would like to appeal to those members who think that they belong to the cattle corridor and have been left out- because as I said, we have a clear map and distinguishing features of the cattle corridor, and then we can discuss it rather than delaying this loan because it can never cover the entire country.  

So, Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to the honourable members that the loan get passed and then the individual members who think that they qualify to be within the cattle corridor, come to the ministry and we can discuss and adjust because it is not curved in stone.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

MR MUZOORA: I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that we put a question to the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you objecting to the loan?  I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that this House approve the loan request for Livestock Productivity Development Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$2.95 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR RURAL MICRO-FINANCE PROJECT

1.34
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to seek the members’ indulgence so that we complete business of loans today.  Honourable members, this is a report by the Committee on the National Economy on a loan request for Rural Micro-Finance Project from the Islamic Development Bank.  

Madam Speaker, the loan request for the Rural Micro-Finance Project from the Islamic Development Bank –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA:  Madam Speaker, while I appreciate that actually we can move a bit faster, but we do not have this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable members, I think they were distributed yesterday, at least I received my copies.  I am told there are some reports outside.  Can the usher please go and get some reports from the table outside.  Sergeant, can you ask the usher to bring the reports.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, as they look for the reports let us proceed.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I propose that we continue because this is a straightforward loan on Micro-Finance.  Members of Parliament are eagerly waiting for the passing of this loan so that this money is extended to our people.  This report as a member of the Committee, I feel it is a straightforward report, we can continue.  I do not see any problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Sabiiti, actually the reports are here, please proceed.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for your indulgence.  This is a report from the Committee on the National Economy on the loan request for Rural Micro-Finance Project from the Islamic Development Bank.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the loan request for Rural Micro Finance Project from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), worth US$2.95 was laid on the Table on 20 February 2002. And in accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedures, it was committed to the Committee on the National Economy.  The committee now wishes to submit the report.

Madam Speaker, this loan request was sent back to the minister to address the issue of incorporating it in the Rural Micro-Finance Support Programme, (RMSP) which has a wider outreach component.
It was, however, noted that the loan request was brought back without any improvement or addressing the concern by members.  In fact, even at the committee level, the honourable Minister of Finance, in charge of General Duties, hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa, withdrew it and we erred not to have reported to Parliament about that issue.  That is the reason why this loan request has delayed at Committee level.

Background: 
There have been efforts by the Government to promote rural development by encouraging the establishment of financial institutions to render financial services that are accessible and affordable by the rural majority.

There is an African Development Fund (ADF) funded project of UA13.1 million for a project called “Rural Micro-Finance Project” which is on going.  The committee noted that this proposed project is to carry out the same programmes as the one mentioned above.

The Project:
The project was to be implemented (if approved) by the office of the Prime Minister through a Project Implementation Unit (PIU).  The project has two components: 1.Micro-credit and savings mobilization services. 2.Institutional capacity building.

The Rural Micro-Finance Project is to be implemented through a Project Implementation Agency to be called Micro-Finance Centre that is to be registered as a company limited by guarantees.

The Project coverage: 
The project proposed to cover the following districts: Kisoro, Mubende, Lira, Kumi, Kabarole, Kibaale and Wakiso. All the above districts are planned to receive an equal amount of US$287,500.

The criteria of choosing the districts was given as follows:
·Poverty indicators
·Population growth rate
·Human development indices
·Adult literacy rates
·Disease burden
·Water coverage.
The committee was further informed that the Micro-Finance Institutions, Non Government Organizations (NGOs), and the community based organizations would work with the project staff.

The following are the MFI, NGO and CBO to participate in the project:
·Uganda Women Efforts to Save Orphans (UWESO)
·Foundation for Economic Empowerment and Development 
·Uganda Agency for Development Limited (UGAFODE)
·Uganda Micro-Finance Union (UMU)
·Micro-Enterprises Development Network Ltd (MED-NET)
·Foundation for Credit and Community Assistance Ltd (FOCCAS-Uganda)
·Kiwafu Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Ltd
·Uganda Women Finance Trust (UWFT)

Project funding:
The total project funding is estimated at US$ 3.35million in which IDB will provide 90 percent mounting to US$2.9 million  
Distribution: 
Capacity Building and Training 	 -0.54 million
Micro-Finance Scheme 		 -2.3 million
External Audit			-0.06million
PIU (MSC) (management costs)-0.37million

The loan is to mature in 30 years with 10 years of grace and a service fee charge of 0.75percent per annum. 

Observations and comments:
The Committee observed that some Rural Micro-Finance Institutions apart from being short term lending institutions, charge high interest rates which enhance poverty instead of alleviating it. (Applause).

This project is not addressing the issue of long term lending to developing the agriculture capacity of rural women. This project will be run by a company limited by guarantee (MSC). The Committee observed that the Government has promised not to guarantee private companies loan.  This is therefore a contradiction in policy.

The selection of the districts and the indicators given are a falsehood.  These are human development indices, poverty indicators, literacy rates, to mention but a few, are not generally reflected in the selected districts.  The districts of Karamoja, Kitgum, Bundibugyo, to mention a few, would be first to qualify.

The criteria for selecting MFI, CBO and NGO were equally unscientific.  These all have an element of private companies and though it is important to empower them, the criteria should be well known to all other similar organizations and should also have been given a chance to participate.

The committee further observed that the issue of capacity building and training should not have been raised/funded as these were covered from the previous project, which was of the same nature. This is the one called Rural Micro-Finance Project, on page 1.

Parliament recently passed a loan request for outreach programmes, which is comprehensive, and in line with fighting poverty than the proposed arrangements in this loan request.

Recommendations: 
Given the above observations, the Committee therefore, recommends that this loan request should not be approved.  It should be re-negotiated and be incorporated into the wider Rural Micro-Finance Development Programmes with its outreach components, which this august House approved.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the issue of empowering the rural poor with financial products is crucial in the transformation drive.  However, care should be taken not to waste the more scarce resources on non-viable projects.  The committee requests the House to adopt this report and support the committee position.  I thank you and I beg to move.

1.46
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County south, Mbarara District:  Madam Speaker, I had problem with this loan request in the first place.  First of all, look how much was being requested.  What can you do given US$287,000, surely, and moreover some of that has to be given to eight NGOs; some of it has to go to headquarters to run this Micro-Finance Agency and some of it has to go into capacity building.  So, I think this is really wasting our time here, and I think in future we should look at poverty in its broad sense rather than just going to packets.  Otherwise, you can actually promote that poverty because I have seen projects, which are well intended, like the re-stocking project.  I was a beneficiary and I spent a lot of sleepless nights trying to sort out the mess that was being brought in by the project because the project was highly politicised.  There were too many committees and all the money was consumed to the extent that in the end a cow was costing about Shs 500,000 and what they bring looks like a cow worth Shs150,000.  So, I support the committee in this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee is recommending that we do not approve- does anybody have a contrary view to that?
1.47

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to agree with the committee, and especially on the issue of the coverage area and the criteria used to select these districts.  It is not only in this project, but also in so many projects that the criteria used is not favourable for districts that are really poor.  I am wondering, there are districts that were forgotten by past governments and this Government is also continuing to forget such districts.  

Madam Speaker, I am annoyed and I think we need to analyse this criteria properly.  Why are the same districts that receive a number of projects also receiving this kind of funding, and other districts do not receive projects and also funding, and they are districts that are really poor and they are not on this list at all?  We just passed a loan here on the cattle corridor.  Historically there are districts that have people who have been taking care of animals, especially cattle.  But because even past programmes did not focus on them, they abandoned taking care of cattle and switched on to other things. I think it is just an elimination strategy, because you find that there are crops that can grow even in some areas, but they say such crops will not grow in such areas.  They are put in particular areas and all other programmes go to those areas.  

Madam Speaker, I have said many times in this House that we need affirmative action for areas that have consistently remained poor. We need to identify projects for those areas and money to fund those projects. Madam Speaker, I am not happy with this, and I agree with the committee that we do not pass this loan.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the Government insisting on going ahead with this loan?

PROF. KASENENE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, we are all aware that it is a major concern currently that poverty levels are rising in this country and all efforts can be made – (Interruption)

MRS RAINER KAFIRE:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you minister for giving way.  We are aware that the level of poverty is very high, as you have stated.  What will this loan do if you choose only – how many districts - and each one is getting US$280,000?  What will that do?  Out of that, you are going to divide it into so many separate institutions.  By the time it gets to Mrs Kafire in her house, she will only get two dollars.  Do you expect me to get out of that poverty?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I just want to know from the minister, are you insisting that we proceed with this loan?  That is all I want to hear because our Committee is advising the House that we should not proceed with it.

PROF. KASENENE:  Madam Speaker, I would like just to make brief clarification then answer this question.  I agree with the honourable members that the money involved is little.  But, Madam Speaker, little is better than nothing.  So, why don’t we start with this little and then see whether it could help in those districts.

MS NANKABIRWA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for giving way.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I remember when Government brought the Entandikwa Scheme to this House, it was meant for a few districts as a start-up so that we can make an impact.  But the Members of Parliament insisted that each one of us needs something in our constituencies.  We overstretched the Entandikwa, each constituency got Shs 60 million; some got less than Shs 30 million and the Entandikwa Scheme ended up making no impact at all.  I want to call upon my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, that we know all of us need projects in our districts.  But I think we must move systematically so that we can cause an impact.  It is very difficult to get money, which will be enough for all of us at ago.  What we have to do is to make sure that we monitor.  If there are districts that have been persistently getting and others have been persistently missing, that is where we should concentrate and see how we can involve such districts.  But to say that we can spread equitably, I do not think we can cause an impact.  So, I was just calling upon the members to allow the loan; we pass the loan and we move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to hear from the Minister of Finance.  What are you saying about the report of the committee?  That is what I want to hear before we do anything else.

PROF. KASENENE:  Madam Speaker, in view of the comments that have been made, and in view of the recommendations of the report, I would like to appeal that the ministry should be allowed to appear before the committee and clarify these issues they wanted to raise. So, I would accept the recommendation in view of the fact that I will appear and maybe clarify the issues that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether he is the right person; the Prime Minister should have been here. But maybe it is time the Government brought to this House a list of all the projects in this country so that we know who is getting what. (Applause). I appreciate the point raised by the honourable member from Adjumani because my own district does not future most of the time. So, maybe we shall inform the Prime Minister. 

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, in view of your guidance, I would like to withdraw.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister has withdrawn the request. Okay, what is burning, hon. Kabushenga and hon. Atwooki?
REV. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the work of the committee in pointing out to us major weakness in this report. However, I want to inform the committee that the heart of the weaknesses in these issues is the interest rate issue. 

When you are reviewing this loan, I would like the committee to be involved in the business planning for the end users of these loans. People are taking these loans at 15 percent from Government, the village banks are adding another 15 percent, and the producers are borrowing at an incredible 30 to 40 percent. They are using it on projects and making no impact. 

I, therefore, want to inform the committee that as they review this- (Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, the report was tabled and the Minister has withdrawn the report. Could we know what the honourable member is debating when the Minister has withdrawn?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the committee said we should not approve this. The Minister says he is withdrawing it for re-negotiation. 

When the committees are sitting, there is a notice board where all the meetings are indicated and what they are doing. Let me ask members who want to contribute to this matter to go and appear at the committee sittings. I now want to put the question.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want members to understand this issue of the loan. It was submitted on 20 February 2002 and today is 19 December 2003; this is almost two years after. 

The reason why this report has delayed has been because of the Ministry of Finance. I want you, honourable members, to help the committee by avoiding these issues like my friend of Mayuge said, that the chairman and some committee members have a hidden agenda. No, we want this country to move.

Recently a report was submitted to Parliament showing how the rural micro-finance project has mismanaged money. 
Here is a report in Parliament, you are aware. Now, I seek the indulgence of members to decide on this loan, we either disapprove or approve. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, you are the same person who has said it should be re-negotiated; this is what is in your report.  So, I am sending back this loan request to your committee and you re-negotiate with the Minister of Finance. And when you are sitting, please invite members so that they come and contribute there.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ENABLE THE TABLING OF A BILL THAT ESTABLISHES THE LOCAL DEFENCE FORCES, HOME GUARDS, ARROW BOYS AND OTHERS INTO A LEGAL FORCE KNOWN AS DOMESTIC SECURITY FORCE (DOSEFO).

2.01
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara District): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion that seeks the resolution of Parliament to enable the tabling of a bill that establishes the Local Defence Force, the home guards, the arrow boys and others into a legal force known as Domestic Security Force (DOSEFO).

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For all the bills that are tabled here everyday, we talk about financial implications. Some even at committee level are returned in order to be submitted again for first reading. Should we proceed without hon. Muzoora giving us the financial implications?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a motion seeking to present a bill. He is only asking for permission from this House to see whether you allow him or not. When the bill is tabled, he will have to come with them. 

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, I beg to move as follows:  

“Whereas it is common knowledge that the Local Defence Forces and others do exist as a non- established force with no law and regulation governing them and generally unguided as to how a good local defence person should behave; and 

Whereas the public security at a local level remained in abeyance and without a law governing the local security around them; and

Whereas the Government is determined to have a local protective force, properly guided, disciplined and controlled by making every member thereof learn and understand how a respectable member of the National Domestic Security Force should conduct himself or herself in an exemplary manner; 

Cognizant of the relentless service rendered by the previous Local Defence Forces and other forces on voluntary terms; and 

Aware of the responsibilities the forces have as people who must work and develop a livelihood; 

Considering it as expedient in the interest of security at local level but nationwide, to put in place a law relating to the local security for better control and discipline of members thereof; and

Well knowing that Government is determined to remunerate and protect the morale of the Domestic Security Force; and

Well aware of Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which protects the Consolidated Fund; and

Well aware of the prudent but miscellaneous budget codes in the security institutions that have always contributed to the local defence and other forces’ survival; 

Considering the transfer of such fraction of miscellaneous codes in the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs and the President’s office to this cause; and 

For avoidance of doubt of any encumbrances on Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

Now be it resolved by Parliament of Uganda that the Domestic Security Bill be tabled to establish the Local Defence Forces, Home Guards, Arrow Boys, Amuka Boys, Anti Stock Security Forces and others into a legally recognised force known as the National Domestic Security Force.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the move by hon. Muzoora. All of us had waited to see whether such an area would be covered in the Army Bill that is before us. Now that the Army Bill is with us, is it not appropriate that when we come to debate it we take care of those auxiliary forces because they operate under UPDF?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, does that really prevent a member from seeking permission from this House? I think it should be considered on its merits. If you want to allow it, you allow it; if you want to reject, you reject it.

2.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion moved by hon. Muzoora seeking to table a bill for the establishment of the Domestic Security Forces. 

I also appreciate the fact that it is only recently that the Minister of Defence tabled a bill here regarding the security forces in Uganda.  But you are all aware honourable colleagues that there have always been a lot of gaps in as far as the terms and conditions of the auxiliary forces in Uganda are concerned. 

Even yesterday we cited an issue in a report delivered by hon. Patrick Amuriat. There is still a lot of confusion between Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs as to who should be managing the affairs of the Local Defence Units all over the country.  

Madam Speaker, I am not trying to pre-empt the contents of the bill that was recently tabled by the Minister of Defence, but for those of us who have gone through it, there is a lot of silence on this. The bill is rather very silent on this particular category of security forces. 
For that matter, Madam Speaker, I would pray this House allows this bill for the establishment of the Domestic Security Forces to be tabled. You will see for yourselves, it will actually reinforce the harmony that we require in delivery of security services in this country. I beg to support the motion.

2.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I also appreciate the concerns raised by the mover of the motion. I just wanted to have a few things corrected, which have gone in the Hansard of this House. 

In paragraph 1, the mover says that the Local Defence Forces and other existing forces have been operating with no law and regulations governing them. I thought I should correct that. The supreme law of this land allows such forces to be raised.  So, it is not right to say that these forces have been there with no law at all. I thought we should –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I do agree with the honourable minister that the executive head of government, if he is running the operations of this country, must have been doing it legitimately.  But may I seek clarification from her as to the specific law she is talking about. If she can guide this House by way of reference and quotation, so that we can appreciate whether it has been adequately provided.

MS NANKABIRWA: I thought I talked about the supreme law of this land and we have only one, which is the Constitution. Article 17 (2) especially, and even Article 3 (4) allows Government to raise forces. If you could listen and see how I was going to conclude my submission. I do not oppose the motion; I just want to correct a few things so that we can move.  As far as I know –(Interruption)

MR ETONU: I would also like to inform the House that the NRA Statute takes care of what we are trying to amend now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I would like to understand this issue. Does the Constitution specify how they are recruited, how they are paid, their terms of service, and how long they can serve?
MR SEBALU: My understanding is that when the Constitution prescribes something, there should be an enabling law to operationalise the articles of the Constitution. So, you cannot derive those armies directly from the Constitution. There must be further legislation to enable the implementation.

MR SABIITI:  Madam Speaker, I think I am stung to pains, because this issue of various auxiliary forces has been coming up and we have tended, as Government, to just rationalise it and leave it hanging. Really, the Minister should come out clearly to convince this Parliament that the law covers all these auxiliary forces, which I think it does not. 

Madam Speaker, our Constitution is very clear on how an army or any force can be raised.  There are other laws like the army law, the Act on Police, and under the local government we have also provisions how these can be raised. But to go and use Article 3(4)! 

Because of our failure to clearly come out quickly to expand our army properly and expand our Police force properly, we have tended to try to make Ugandans believe that these forces we have are legally in place. So, I would request the honourable minister to be fair to this House and the country; Muzoora’s question now touches on this issue.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Sabiiti in order to insinuate that I am not being fair to the country and yet I am not opposing the motion? I stood to make a few clarifications and before I even concluded he has already made a conclusion that I am being unfair. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have already said you are happy with the proposed motion. Honourable members, if nobody is really opposing this motion, could I put the question?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, before you put the question, I also strongly support the views of hon. Muzoora. You will realize that when we were debating the report of the hon. Minister of State for Defence on the security situation in the country, those specific questions were asked. What happens when an Amuka boy dies in combat? What happens when that Amuka boy shoots someone?
The Minister actually acknowledged that there was no law operationalising and guiding the operation of those functions.

MS NANKABIRWA: I did not accept that there was no law. I actually informed the House of the NRA Statute, which caters for auxiliary forces. I remember a certain Member of Parliament from this side asked, “You mean if an Arrow boy dies in the operation he can benefit like the UPDF soldier?” I said, “Yes; the problem is that we have not made enough effort to tell them of this provision.”  That is what I said.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, basically for the hon. Minister of State for Defence to stand on this Floor and support the motion, that is an acknowledgement that there has been a lacuna, which this House must help this country to address.

Secondly, I still wish to affirm the position of the Deputy Speaker when she asked, “Is there a law streamlining recruitment, deployment and functioning of these institutions,” and the answer was “no”, from the honourable members. So, I stand here to firmly support the position of hon. Muzoora that in the absence of law, this Parliament should go ahead and pass legislation that should govern and direct the running of these forces.

MR SABIITI: Hon. Muzoora’s motion talks of the existence of non-established forces with no law. The Minister is saying the law exists, and that is my worry. There is a big contradiction here, you see. This is why I want, procedurally –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, in order to solve that question, could we give leave to hon. Muzoora to proceed to move a motion so that he can table the bill, and then when it comes we have all these arguments. I put the question that this House do approve the request by hon. Muzoora Kabareebe to move a motion to table a bill establishing the Local Defence Forces, Home Guards, Arrow Boys and others into a legal force known as the Domestic Security Force.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure will be as follows: You have tabled a draft bill. Since the motion has been carried, the Clerk will print and publish the bill in the Uganda Gazette. After the publication in the Gazette, the bill will progress in the same way as ordinary bills do. 

The Clerk is now directed to publish the bill. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PRIVATISATION OF NILE HOTEL INTERNATIONAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recollect that you asked our committee to examine a few aspects of the transactions of Nile Hotel and to report back before we leave. So, it is appropriate that the chairperson of the Finance Committee gives his report.

2.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Hon. Speaker, this is the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the divesture of Nile Hotel International Limited (NHIL).

Madam Speaker, before we proceed I would like to make a correction. On page 2, second paragraph, the second line, the word “wholly” is mis-spelt as “whooly”.  

Introduction.
Madam Speaker, the matter of divesture of NHIL was referred to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 4 December 2003 after the Minister of Finance presented a statement on its divesture process. 

The committee was given a period of two weeks in which to report back to this august House. The time limit was given after the Minister pleaded with the House to expedite the consideration of the matter to enable the exercise to be accomplished in the interest of time before the House goes for Christmas recess. 

The committee has accordingly considered the matter and would like to report its findings and recommendations to this august House.

Background.
The NHIL is in class II of the First Schedule of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Statute, 1993. This implies that the majority shareholding of 51 percent would be retained by government and 49 percent would be divested. 

In accordance with the Statute, the Government has attempted several times to divest the 49 percent shares but has up to now not succeeded. The recent failed attempt was the deal reached with the Tunisian firm M/S Tahar Fourati International, which had reached an agreement with NHIL on the management contract. 

In 1994 His Excellency the President invited M/S Tahar Fourati to own, manage and market Nile Hotel and the International Conference Centre Complex. This initiative resulted into the execution of two agreements namely, the joint venture agreement on 21 October 1994, and the management contract on 16 January 1995. 

Government repossessed the complex after the termination of the management contract with Tahar Fourati in April 1997 and the joint venture in May 1997. 

Since 1997, a board of directors has managed NHIL and it is wholly owned by the Government of Uganda. In order to ensure investment in the refurbishment and development of the complex and in compliance with the PERD Statute, the Government has again offered the complex for divestiture but this time using the concessioning method and not sale of shares. 

Methodology.
The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance and his technical team from the Privatisation Unit. The committee analysed in detail the following documents:

1. Statement by the Minister of State in charge of Privatisation to the House

2. The comments by the Attorney General in his letter to His Excellency the President on the claims by M/S Tahar Fourati against Government and NHIL (Appendix I); and the projected profit and loss for the period 2004-2033 (Appendix II)

3. The profiles of Aga Khan Fund and Serena Hotels

Divestiture Process:
Madam Speaker, the concessioning approach was reviewed by the committee. This approach is new on the Ugandan scene. Concessioning is a mode of divestiture in which a firm or individual can acquire and manage an enterprise for an agreed period of time at an agreed fee and other commitments, if any. 

The concessionaire may be committed to invest in business, which investments will be taken over by the business owner after the agreed period. In this method the asset remains the property of the owner of the business (concessionee). At the end of the concession all the assets, including those brought in by the concessionaire, revert to the original owner.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in the NHIL case, the concessionaire undertook to raise the complex to a five-star hotel with all the conditions of maintenance of a five-star hotel as stipulated in the standards set by the industry internationally.

The committee was informed that when the NHIL was offered for divestiture, five firms submitted their bids. These five firms, which were pre-qualified, are: 
1.  Tata (Uganda) Ltd,
2.  Mosa Courts Apartments Ltd,
3.  Legacy Group Holdings (Pty) Limited,
4.  Kersaf Investments Ltd, and 
5.  Serena Tourism Promotion Services (SA).

The concession bid structure was disclosed to every bidder. The following are briefs of the bid document:
(a)	Length of concession, 30 years.
(b)	Fixed lump payment, US $1.2 million, which is 10 percent of the fixed assets.
(c)	Minimum investment, US $15 million.
(d)	Performance bond, US $3 million, which is 20 percent of the minimum investment.  
(e)	Annual concession, four percent on gross income.
(f)	Expected standards, five-star hotel and a conference centre.

The financial projections were based on the consultancy services of Bahemuka, Johnson Nyende & Co., and M/S C.D. Robertson Dunn, Chartered Surveyors and Registered Valuers. 

The submitted stipulated minimum investment was US $15 million. Madam Speaker, before I move very far, I would like to lay on the Table the valuation report by P.K. Bahemuka and Co.

Observation.
There was only one bidder at the end of the bidding process, that is, Serena Tourism Promotion Services. 

The committee was informed that other bidders either expected an outright sale or the commitment fee and bond performance were rather high and they opted not to venture. 

Serena offered to invest US $19 million, high above the minimum requirement of US $15 million. In other words they bid US $4 million higher than what was expected by the Government. 

The Claim by M/S Tahar Fourati.
These are the people who had entered into agreements with the Government of Uganda to manage the complex but later on they were terminated. As shown in the Attorney General’s letter, the following observations were made (Appendix I):  

The disputes between the Board of Directors of NHIL/PU on one hand and M/S Tahar Fourati erupted in mid 1996 and the management contract was terminated on 29 April 1997 when it had eight more years. 

The agreement did not provide for termination. An audit by Deloitte and Touché advised the Privatisation Unit that the dispute did not justify the termination of the agreement. 

The company is demanding for US $1.5 million for the wrongful termination of the contract. 

The issue before court is the wrongful termination of the management contract and not the ownership of shares. This can, therefore, not affect the divestiture of NHIL.

Honourable members, M/S Tahar Fourati are not demanding for ownership. They are demanding for damages and they believe that it was Government, which frustrated the contract against them. So, it does not contravene and it cannot stop the process of divestiture. 

The caveat by M/S Tahar Fourati was removed by a court order and the complex’s certificate of title is attached as Appendix III.

The Profile of Serena Tourism Promotion Services.
The committee analysed the profile of Serena and Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development. The following were observed:
·	Serena Tourism Promotion Services (STPS) is a wholly owned subsidiary of Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development, which is financing the investment. It is the tourism arm of the fund. 

·	The company is registered in Switzerland. The certificate of incorporation is attached as Appendix IV. 

·	Tourism Promotion Services Ltd, an associate company of Serena, which owns and manages seven luxury hotels in Kenya, is listed on the stock exchange through STPS, though STPS is not registered itself.  

The Concession Interest of Four percent.
Members observed that the concession fee of four percent might be applied in the entire concession period that would contribute minimum returns to the country. 

The fee is marginal in case the business booms after the initial period of rehabilitation.

Government is the main user of the complex premises and if there is no provision for discount in the agreement, the potential earnings would reduce since Government is not the best payer. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in business if you have somebody who buys from you in bulk or who utilizes your services in a big way, normally a discount is provided. The committee thought that in this agreement some discount would be provided for the Government because eventually they will be using this complex, especially the services of the International Conference Centre.
General observations.
NHIL is reportedly making losses due to mismanagement and political interference in the normal running of its business. The hotel lost customers due to inconveniences caused by permanent occupancy by the President’s Office. 

Madam Speaker, in business people want to spend their money and get the least inconvenience. Members observed that when you go to Nile Hotel when it is raining, you park in the lower parking area and walk upstairs in the rain. We also observed that this is actually scaring off customers. 

We know some of us sometimes prefer walking over there because the distance from the gates of Parliament to the International Conference Centre is even shorter than when you walk down to get into your car here. 

There is no legal basis upon which the former management company, Tahar Fourati, can block the divesture of NHIL. 

The bidding process, Madam Speaker, seems to have been carried out transparently and the bid terms were clear and precise. We are informed by the Minister in charge that to the best of his knowledge, there has been no political interference or any other interference from outside. The committee did not find any evidence to prove otherwise. 

The tax exemption accorded to Aga Khan Development Fund does not cover tourism and, therefore, Serena will not be tax exempt.  

The concern of the committee, honourable members, was that some time back Government entered into a memorandum of understanding with Aga Khan. You remember we had a debate about it here, that Aga Khan would feature elsewhere and would be tax exempt. We have been informed and assured by the Minister that this is not the case and we have discovered that the exemption does not cover tourism. 

Divesture Reform Implementation Committee (DRIC) approved the concession method in principle because the sale of shares would require Government to inject in the investment funds, which are commensurate to the shareholding. Government cannot easily raise these funds. 
Members were informed that there is no conflict in maintaining the enterprise in class II of the PERD schedule, even when it is to be concessioned for 30 years. 

Other bidders pulled out mostly because of the minimum investment of US $15 million and the bond of US $3 million. Another reason given was that the Kampala market is small for another five-star hotel. Honourable members, if you take a tour of Kampala now, most of these hotels are occupied by foreigners and you know the level of inflow of foreigners here is not so high. 

The divesture of NHIL this time round seems to have been an initiative of the Ministry of Finance, and the whole process was technically managed by the Privatisation Unit. 

The workers of NHIL were told they would be paid their terminal benefits from the redundancy account and that the funds are reportedly there. Serena offered to retain and train some of the workers to manage the five-star hotel. The training will include attachment to other Serena hotels outside Uganda.

The 30-year concession period was arrived at after projections of payback period (profit and loss) were developed and agreed on between the Privatisation Unit and Serena. This is to allow the investor to recoup his investment (Appendix II).

The internal rate of return will be at seven percent, which is lower than the industrial practice, which is at 15 percent. 

Most of the investment by Serena is equity financing and the hope to promote tourism in Uganda. Honourable members, a business that is highly privileged is very risky. We have been told - and according to the Aga Khan profile - they are using equity to develop the investment they undertake in foreign countries and particularly this one. 

We have not been told, and we did not see any clause in the agreement like we have seen in some agreements here, where Government has to facilitate the investor to get a loan.

All outstanding claims will be to the Government and the abilities will be borne up to when Government hands over the complex. 
According to the agreement, Government will take responsibility for any liabilities for the period before. 

The business will have to be insured to guard against natural and unnatural incidents including terrorism attacks. This is a provision to ensure safety of the complex. 

There is need for a new board of management that will ensure that the provisions of the agreement are adhered to. Such provisions like investing US $19 million will be monitored to avoid air supply. Madam Speaker, it is one thing for the investor to say that he is bringing in US $19 million and another for him to actually put in that US $19 million. 

It is the strong view of the committee that the board, which has stayed longer than is necessary, be replaced by a new board to take on the new mandate of ensuring that the investor is bringing in money according to the agreement. This will also take care of the concerns and the interests of the taxpayers of Uganda who own the complex.

Recommendations: 
·Government should ensure that the concession fee of four percent is re-negotiated at least every 10 years.  
·A new board of competent personalities should be put in place to take on the new challenge and a model for future concession, if need arises. The existing one has stayed for too long.  
·The dispute between Tahar Fourati and the Government of Uganda should be settled expeditiously to avoid accumulation of interest to be awarded to the company as per the Attorney General’s advice.

Madam Speaker, sometimes it defeats our understanding - you have an agreement to pay somebody but you opt to go to court when you know that you are obliged to pay! It is against this background that the committee is advising the Government to stop dragging its feet on obvious things and take the advice of the Attorney General seriously so that we can avoid unnecessary surcharge, if any, of the money we are holding in dispute with Tahar Fourati.
·	The process of concenssioning should be carefully studied further and if found feasible should be applied to the remaining enterprises that are mainly service providers and are of strategic important.

Madam Speaker, it is the view of the committee that service providing entities should be owned by the Government because at one time or the other, we may need to use them. At least the Government should have a say in case of an emergency so that we can utilize these services.

·NHIL should be divested through the process of concessioning, as requested by the Government.

Conclusion.
Madam Speaker, concessioning is a new phenomenon which if well managed has more benefits to the country, than outright sale. Strategic investments should be concessioned to enable the future generation participate in management of the concenssioned service enterprises.

The concessioning of Nile Hotel will be a starting point of this new approach in Uganda, which should be well managed. The committee, therefore, requests this august House to adopt this report and allow Government to concession NHIL for 30 years. I thank you. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as you recall we had a debate on this matter and we gave specific instructions to the committee. This is what they have come back with.

2.45
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one concern, which I want to raise. On page 4 of the committee’s report, the sixth bullet says, “The agreement did not provide for termination…”, that is the agreement between the Government and Tahar Fourati did not provide for termination and it is because of this that Government went ahead and terminated the contract and Fourati took Government to court. 

What lessons has Government learnt from this? I would have wished the committee to give us more information on that. For the new arrangement that Government is entering into with Serena, is there a provision where if Serena does not abide by the conditions set Government is at will to terminate that contract? Is it inbuilt?  
Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Attorney General gave advice to Government that they should pay Tahar Fourati. But then I imagine the Attorney General should have seen that in the drawing of the agreement termination of the contract should have been inbuilt. Has the Attorney General now woken up or what? I will need clarification from the chairperson on whether in the new agreement with Serena the issue of termination is being taken care of? I thank you.

2.48
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is also about the agreement. The committee gave us the methodology in (3), unfortunately they never looked at the draft contract. I do not know whether they looked at it because once you do not look at the draft contract, that is the cause of problems as you have pointed out on page 4. You should have looked at the draft contract and looked out for problems. 

Again the committee has not seen the model of this. I do not know where the money is going to be invested. I saw the model of the International Conference Center, and it is supposed to be a 22-storied building. What is this investment going to be? Is it going to improve on the conference hall? Most of the tourists recorded in many countries are brought by conferences and if this complex is not going to be improved upon, the hotel alone is not going to bring in money. As you have rightly pointed out on page 6, the market seems to be small, so we need that one.

On page 3, we are told about these evaluators, how were they procured? Were you convinced about the way they were procured or they just appointed someone? Maybe the chairperson will give us more information on that. 

There is also a recommendation - but before I come to the recommendation, I will tackle the last table in the appendix. We are told about figures but I find a problem consuming these figures here. There is nothing indicated on them, you cannot know the differentiating factor; they have just been planted there. What were the percentages considered when they were making these projections? They could be either low or very high and we cannot know when the money will be recouped. Were you happy with the percentages? It is not shown on the table.
Then the first recommendation that, “Government should ensure that the concession of four percent is negotiated at least every 10 years.” Given the activities that are going to be covered, 10 years seems to be a short time. If there are constructions to take place, 10 years could be a very short time. Maybe 15 or more could do? I think 10 years is a very short cycle; it could scare off the investor. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.50
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, it is a pity that the hon. Bamwanga who raised a number of issues, is not here. During the past debate he talked of the valuation and the methods used to evaluate. In his view what we were selling was grossly undervalued. So, I do not know whether the committee had chance to interact with hon. Bamwanga, who is a valuer, and whose opinion I think carries a bit of weight.

Secondly, onto this very report is attached a long correspondence between the Solicitor General, the Attorney General and the President. A lot of it is legal jargon and very hard to digest in the given time. Perhaps the chairperson could tell us the substance of this, because I see accusations, counter accusations and so on, between the Solicitor General and the Attorney General.

One of the things they point out is that the Privatization Unit tends to use private lawyers who do a lousy job and this leads to financial loss. That is a long document and it is very hard to digest especially if you do not have a legal mind.

Finally, I am also concerned about the actual contract. Was it possible for the committee to at least get the gist of the contract? The contract itself - you can have very good intentions but it is what is written on paper and especially the bottom line, which is in fine print. That is when you find for instance, is the concession for 30 years or for 50 years? Hon. Bamwanga raised a concern that in the contract itself there was a provision for a further extension of 20 years without further negotiation or something like that.  I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make three important clarifications.
One is that we were availed a copy of the agreement and we still have it. We discussed it with our legal officer and we raised concerns when we met the Minister, most of which were answered. The agreement also provides for the termination of the concession in case the concessionaire does not perform his part. 

The value issue raised by hon. Bamwanga is the reason why they tendered in this document because it is very big. We were given a very short time and we want it to be circulated to members so that they can have a copy and look at it. The total value of NHIL was at Shs 24 billion, which is almost US $12 million. 

Again the four percent that Government gets is on gross revenue, regardless of whether they make profit or loss and we did not find a problem with that. We were requiring that it be reviewed for 10 years; it is not that we are recommending termination for 10 years; it is that the business is likely to boom. There should be a provision that Government has a chance to reconsider its gain because 30 years is a long time. 

As for 50 years, the provision in the agreement provides a condition that the concessionaire may negotiate with Government and get an extra 20 years. It is not guaranteed, according to the agreement. I thank you very much.

2.54
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo):  Madam Speaker, I just want to add on to what hon. Mugambe has said; the need for us to look at the agreement, because I think it is very important.

My first point is on the issue of termination of the whole arrangement. If the termination was a problem earlier, has it been catered for in this new agreement? When you read further and you see what the Solicitor General wrote, you find that he is making some grave remarks. He noted that Government should assure the claimant that the dispute will be settled through negotiations and there should be assurance to foreign investors that Government is committed to respecting and applying its domestic laws and international investment laws. 

I think that although it has been repeatedly said that there is encumbrance and that Tahar Farouti cannot block the divestiture; it would only be in good faith that this other venture, which has not been concluded, is concluded in a neat manner. The next investment, or any other person, should come in without any kind of fear.  

My other issue is that of settling out of court. I thought that since it has been said by the Attorney General and the Solicitor General, the Government should move on to this. As you know, we have very many court claims against Government. In fact if you total up the number of court claims against Government and the court awards that have already been granted, you find that we are in a very delicate situation. So, I would like to urge Government to quickly settle out of court so that we do not incur any more losses on this.  

Finally, it is good we have got the definition of this issue of concessioning and what it is all about. I think there may be need for us to look into it further and analyze its advantages and its disadvantages. It is a new term, as the report states, and when things are new, sometimes mistakes are made. I was in the Post Office when we did the first licensing of national operators. Celtel was the first one and we gave them a very long time - I think it was about 15 years - but we realized that eventually we had tied our hands by giving them a very long period. 

So, when you give a person 30 years – I am thinking about our children. My daughter will be as old as I am now by the time the deal is concluded. I fear that we may need to have a shorter time and then have some monitoring mechanism. This could be at least five years or so, to see that what we mean to get out of the whole facility is got because 10 years is for me, quite long. It may not be changed but I wanted to make these remarks anyway. I thank you.

2.57
DR JOHHNY BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start by adding to what hon. Byamukama was saying. This is a dynamic economic world. Ten years is too long. It does not stimulate even the investor to do things in a hurry and when you say you will assess him after 10 years, it is too much; you cannot correct a thing. You cannot change a thing in the agreement then. I would rather it is considered every five years, and you review it then. If there is no cause to change, you leave it at that. That is one.
Concessioning as one said, might be very good. Concessioning is very good but let us have a comparative knowledge so that we do not have to start with ours and say “concessioning is very good”. Can we quote where it is in practice? Africa is very big, the whole world is very big and some of us are well nourished with the whole affair. Be it in South Africa, be it in elsewhere; after all we have gone to the African Union so we have a chance to value what we are taking on in comparison to what exists elsewhere.

Madam Speaker, it is very good and it is high time you considered changing the board. The current board has taken too long but how long has it taken? If you say it has taken too long, what time limit have you put there to say it will change? And if it will change how long will it last? Because it might be repeated. The new one might again take as long as this one has taken.  

Another thing is the evaluation. Are you sure there is a lot of knowledge that things are done the way they are done and at times done properly or badly? These evaluators, how were they selected?

What comparative evaluation of such an enormous investment did you have over other evaluators to say these two were the best and they quoted all the references and the terms in the best way? In economics, in philosophy, appreciation of better work is by comparison. 

You call me tall because you have compared yourself to me and found yourself shorter; or clever because you got 22 percent and I got 88 percent. Let us have a comparative degree of judging the valuation of one of our best investments. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the process they went through, and for the report. I would also like to thank members for their input and contributions. A few issues were raised and I would like to respond to them. 


One of them has already been answered by the chairman of the committee, but since it was raised again after his response, I will respond to it again. It is the question of determination of the agreement, whether it is taken care of. Madam Speaker, this has been taken care of. In addition, as we said, we learn from experience. 

The honourable member was saying, “Did you learn from the experience?” That is why this time we have put a service bond of US $3 million. In the event the concessionaire does not perform according to the agreement, he forfeits the US $3 million. But the determination of this has been taken care of, and as the chairman said, the agreement has been made available to the committee. The legal advisors of the committee went through it and raised a number of points, which we have clarified and they are happy with it.

Another point is the procurement of valuers. Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is a procurement process for valuers and this is determined and outlined in the divestiture implementation manual, which guides us. This is followed. It is not that the project just picks any valuer at will. We call for show of interest and various companies put in bids for valuation. DRIC, a committee that is responsible, goes through this and determines who will be the valuer. 

A related point, which had been raised by hon. Bamwanga and -(Interruption) 

DR BULAMU: Madam Speaker, when I talked about valuers I did not doubt the procedure. I doubted the essense of getting another valuer from elsewhere to compare with. Thank you.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, this was done and indeed we had both the financial and legal due diligence, which was done by these valuers. So, the comparison was done. 

Hon. Bamwanga, unfortunately he is not here, but I would not tell a lie because this will be in the Hansard. He can always refute it, but he has looked through the relevant documents and he is satisfied with what went on. Actually, yesterday he was here when we thought this was going to be discussed. As you remember -(Interruption)
MRS BYAMUKAMA: I am sorry, Mr Minister for taking you back a little but we are concerned. When you look at page 6, it says that some workers will be retained and trained, and when we look at the very first recommendation, “Government should ensure that the concession fee of four percent on gross income is re-negotiated at least every 10 years.”  

If the four percent is to be collected at all and can be reviewed, it means in the agreement there must be a provision on how the Government will sit on the board and be part of the finances so that the Government can know the gross income and, therefore, be in position to have the four percent. Because we have not been given some of the documents, which you say hon. Bamwanga got, we are kind of discussing and debating from a position where we are disadvantaged in a way. These issues keep on coming up and we are concerned.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The documents were actually not availed only to hon. Bamwanga. They were availed to the committee, including the draft agreement. All these concerns, which the member is raising, have been taken care of. That is why the committee was also happy about it. The process has been transparent, all the documents were made available, and they are still available for any other member if he or she would like to look at them.

The issue of the use of private lawyers. I think there has been a misunderstanding here. We do not engage private lawyers without the consent of the Attorney General. It is only when the Attorney General’s Office is too busy and they give us permission to use private lawyers. But as government, we cannot use private lawyers if a case can be handled by the Attorney General’s Office.

The question of the 10 years; should we review the concession fee every ten or five years? The view that it should be five, not ten as the committee had recommended. We will look into it and re-negotiate it with the concessionaire. 

As to the concessioning process, I do not know whether I understood the honourable member. Was he saying it is something that is being done by Uganda only or whether it is an international practice? Madam Speaker, if that was the question as to whether the concessioning as a mode of privatization is an international practice, yes, this is common practice. We have compared notes with other countries, which are involved in the privatization process, including South Africa. 

The member wondered whether South Africa is using it? Yes, even the United Kingdom. Many countries are, and we can provide this information if you come to us. By the way, although the committee is right in saying this is relatively new, it is not absolutely new. We have already used this method in other modes of privatization. But this is an international practice and DRIC supervises all this.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I promise that we shall take the recommendations of the committee and implement them as they are made.

3.09
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that the Minister has accepted the recommendations of the committee and I hope that he is going to include them in the draft agreement. Of course now that the House has adopted the report, I think it will be appropriate to eventually have that report laid on the Table to ensure that actually our recommendations have been taken on board.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, this report was done hurriedly and we spent all the time here. Hon. Mwandha has reminded me of something that our report talks about in the text but does not come out clearly in recommendations. 

We raised an issue that Government is going to be one of the leading customers of Nile Hotel International as far as conference facilities’ use is concerned. We raised it with the Minister that it is most likely that we may never get the four percent. It will go in form of the regular use and we had indicated to the Minister, and I want it to go in the Hansard, that Government as a regular and frequent user of conference facilities should enjoy some discounts on the facility.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a small problem here, on page 7, with one of the observations. They said that outstanding claims and other liabilities will be borne by the Government. Do we have any idea how much these claims and liabilities are, because for most of these properties we sell we almost end up losing? Even the Government is adding more money to it, and we might find that there are even claims, which are going to be manufactured in kavuyo. 

Madam Speaker, I want to know whether the committee has that information. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please. Do you have that information? Are they documented?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have evidence that there is a dispute in court as per attachment and certainly somebody who is coming in to take over the Nile Hotel complex cannot take over these disputes. He wants to get it on a silver platter. 

Unless the honourable member is trying to say that we reduce the amount of money that is coming so that we can offset the other. Otherwise, is normal practice even when you buy a house the title must be given to you free of encumbrances. If you buy a car and somebody fails to transfer the title, again you are not the holder to the title and you do not own the car. So, the encumbrances are raised or caused by Government and are the responsibility of Government. That is what the committee means. 

Secondly, according to the agreement, the Government is supposed to take care of the terminal benefits of the employees and we thought as a committee that it would be very appropriate to make it known to this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please wind up.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a question that had been raised - which I forgot to answer. How will the final structure of the hotel be?

Two weeks back we gave the visual impression of the hotel as it will be and I still have a copy. I will avail it to those members who may not have it. In short, we shall have an additional floor on the existing structure of the hotel. In addition, there would be a construction in the second phase of a second block, which will make an additional 100 rooms. So from the 85 rooms, which we have now, we shall move to 204 rooms. That is how the hotel will be like -(Interruption)  

MR MUGAMBE: This is in relation to the conference centre facility. That facility, is it going to remain like that for the next 30 years or is it going to be improved on? That was –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those things were circulated to this House and everybody has got those diagrams. We have them because they were brought here.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, you are right and we still have them. The conference is going to be a modern conference centre with - I want to use a lay persons language - with the ability of to press certain switches and chairs change and move. You have a different configuration where, for example, if you have got an international boxing tournament within the country, you can host it there. So it will be a multi-purpose hall. We thank you very much for your comments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the divesture of Nile Hotel International Limited be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work you have done since the 4 of November. I apologize as usual for disturbing your weekend and keeping you here for a long time, but thank you very much. I appreciate what you have done. I would like to wish you a very merry Christmas and happy new year. The House will go on recess for now and will reconvene on Tuesday, 10 February 2004. Thank you very much.

MS NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I have a concern. Now that we are going on recess, may I bring it to your attention that our seats here are worn out. Could Parliament do the needful while we are on recess and replace the seats on this side? Otherwise, our garments are getting spoilt by the torn seats.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have taken note and I think the commissioners will handle that.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to take you back but there are some committees, which are supposed to work during recess. Several committees were appointed and I am concerned about the ones on industrial relations law, and pornography. Members need to be notified that some time in January we may have to resume, otherwise, we may have no business. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairpersons should come to me, we look at what we are going to do and work out a programme. The chairpersons of the committees and you, will be informed over the radio.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, the air conditioning is poor and yet when we are here we cannot even remove our coats. I beg that they also work on the air conditioning. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much honourable members, that is the end of the business.

(The House rose at 3.17 p.m. and adjourned sine die)





