Wednesday, 15 December 2004

(Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Business Committee sitting today, 15 December 2004, decided as follows: That the House will meet on Friday, 17 December 2004 from 10.00 a.m., Monday, 20 December 2004 from 10.00 a.m. and Tuesday, 21 December 2004 from 10.00 a.m. with a view to winding up to 5.00 O’clock on the 21 December.  Thereafter, we shall go for a recess for Christmas and resume work on 1 February 2005.  

Now, this is the business we intend to accomplish between now and the 21 December.  Tomorrow, Thursday, we expect a Ministerial Statement from the Ministry of Energy; we expect to complete the Report on Election Violence; we expect to handle the HIPIC loan; we also expect to handle the Report on PAFO Members’ Molestation in Jinja; and we shall receive the Cabinet Report on the Resolution of the House on the Cotton Sector in Uganda.  So, that is the work for tomorrow, and we expect that this might spill over to Friday, 17 December 2004. 

On Monday, 20th December 2004, we shall consider The Seed and Plant Bill, 2003 and the Uganda Tea Authority Decree Repeal Bill.  We shall receive the Report on Mr Kaijuka’s payment of terminal benefits; receive the report on the White Paper and the report on the Road Map.  Tuesday, 21 December 2004, we shall receive a report on the computerization of Driving Permits, Ratifications of the East African Customs Union, PAC Report on the UShs 108 Billion writing off and the Domestic Relations Bill.  So, we hope that by 6.00 O’clock on the 21 December 2004, we shall accomplish this business, which I have mentioned. 
 
We also agreed in the Business Committee that we should remind the Leader of Government Business to prompt the Minister of Foreign Affairs to brief the House on the Ratification of the Protocols and Treaties that have been signed by the Government, but which have never reached this Parliament.  Thank you very much.

2.46
MR OMARA ATUBO: Did I hear, or did I not hear anything on the UPDF Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am actually lost –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Because what is remaining is very small- a few clauses only, and yet this is a bill, which has taken Government 10 years to bring to this House; and, Madam Speaker, if you interact with some of these men and Officers of UPDF, they are very concerned about this bill because it affects their welfare.  They are now actually blaming Parliament.  Some of us who, by virtue of being in areas where you cannot afford not to interact with soldiers, this is the first question they ask, “What is happening with our bill?”  I think it is even here, “Business to follow - UPDF Bill.”  Can we –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem we had is that the minister and the committee were supposed to interact, I do not know when that was; I have been waiting, I did not see it.  So, this morning we had the committee, we had no report of their having accomplished their work so I did not put it here. But if they can sit by midnight today, I will put it on the Order Paper tomorrow.

2.47
CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The committee, which was established today met; I happen to be one of the members co-opted, but the Minister of Defence was not around.  The Minister of State (Defence) was attending another committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs and she did not attend.  But the Permanent Secretary and his technical team were going to inform the Minister about what the committee came up with.  The committee was of the view that the UPDF Bill should be brought as fast as possible before we go for recess, and that clause 80 should be looked into closely and seriously so that it does not delay the bill.  It is true, hon. Omara Atubo has expressed concern, Officers and men are eager to know what has come out of the UPDF Bill, and it is good that we discuss the bill before we go.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you can see, hon. Members, the problem is not in my office; the bill is stuck somewhere else.  But like I said, if by 8.00 O’clock tomorrow morning you can report that you have completed it, I will find you time on the Order Paper. 

MR AWORI: Supplementary to the same issue, Madam Speaker.  Yesterday I raised concern on a matter pertaining to the Prisons.  There was a Prisons Bill, the same committee, and it is very urgent in the light of the fact that prisons under local administration are really suffering.  District Councils cannot afford to maintain them, and we are hoping that this bill will come up with a solution, and yet is nowhere to be seen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs?  Can you update us because we had no report on that Bill this morning?  They are not here. 

2.50
MR JOHN ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I am so glad the hon. Minister in charge of Public Service is around.  I just wanted to inform him that for the last couple of months, the President of Uganda and obviously the Cabinet, together with the department of Health, they have been distributing vehicles to sub-counties for health purposes.  But, hon. Minister, including the House, I have this information that we have already started seeing these vehicles, which are supposed to be in the villages; they are roaming all over the place here in Kampala and you do not see any patients in them; all you see is charcoal on the pick-ups.  In other words, what I wanted to say is that these vehicles are seriously misused, and we would like the hon. Minister here to come up with a statement –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Did I hear you correctly saying, “a pick-up for an Ambulance?”  Is that what you are talking about? How can –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I have not seen those Ambulances here, we were talking about the work we are doing between now and Tuesday.  But, hon. Alintuma Nsambu, you can effect a citizen’s arrest -(Interjection)- No, let me finish with the timetable first.

2.51
MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the timetable that has been read to us regarding the business that we are supposed to undertake between now and the time we go on recess. With consultation with the Clerk’s Office, we members of the Pan African Parliament had a report to present and we are under obligation to report to this House on matters regarding the activities of the Pan African Parliament and we had submitted our report.  I am wondering whether it appeared on your schedule, as you were discussing the business, to be undertaken between now and recess because it is ready.  We already worked out the modalities and it even includes some aspects that are reported by our colleague from the FUSO.  We feel we are under obligation to be accountable to our electorate, and that is the best way to do it.  So, I am wondering what befell that, or what advice we can be given regarding that matter.  Thank you very much.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will be given time, but we are looking at what the most urgent issues are that must be handled in the next four days.  

2.53
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.  I was delighted to learn from your briefing that the Minister of Energy is giving a statement tomorrow.  That obligation to give a statement on energy comes at a time when there is already a pressing problem.  At the beginning of this year, over 10,000 people walked on the streets of Kampala to demonstrate their concern about the unaffordable electricity bills.  The report, which came out of the petition, which I personally presented here, is ready and it has long been ready for presentation.  May I beg you, Madam Speaker, since you are in charge of all this arrangement on the programme, to append this report of the petition to the report or the statement the Minister of Energy is going to present tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was looking for the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee this morning, but by the time I came down I had not yet located him.  But when I do and he assures me that the report is ready, we shall ask the Minister to respond to it as well.

2.54
MR NYEKO OCULA: Madam Speaker, arising from your communication, some time last week the Minister of Education, when asked about payment of fees for students who are in IDPs, I think it was hon. Malinga who asked about it, he had promised to give a statement in two weeks’ time; and now given the schedules as you have given in your communication, it may appear that it may not come out; and yet when we go for recess, by the time we come back these students have to go back to school.  Already last term they received only UShs 7,000 instead of UShs47,000 as promised by Government.  So, I think it would actually be prudent that the Minister comes out, maybe even today, to give a way forward so that it can be communicated to them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we have got him for the good part of this afternoon, I hope he will say something.

2.55
MR JACK SABIITI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am raising this matter as a very important matter for the country.  Some time back during those bad days, a number of Ugandans were kidnapped from Kenya and brought in this country.  I was at one time kidnapped and taken to Kenyatta Airport ready to be shipped back here because of my political views.  Now, yesterday in our mass media and today, I have seen that one Ugandan who was in Kenya was again kidnapped and brought back to Uganda.  I would like to know whether there is an extradition treaty between this country and Kenya or an abduction treaty.  

I would like the relevant Minister or the Leader of Government Business to explain how a Ugandan, who had gone for medical check-up in Kenya, was kidnapped and brought back to Uganda, whatever reasons the Government has in terms of his role, I do not know; but I would like to know whether really this is the way we should handle Ugandans because in those bad days these things happened.  Now I can see these things again happening, what is happening?  So, I need your guidance on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance from me?
  
MR SABIITI: From the Leader of Government Business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I think the Government has heard.  I do not know who is in charge of that project - Minister for Internal Affairs.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank hon. Jack Sabiiti for raising this matter.  First of all, there is no question of Government being involved in any way of kidnapping anybody.  That used to be part of the bad history of Uganda that hon. Sabiiti is talking about.  The Movement Government is open, clear and transparent- (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in line with this transparency and openness, Government after due consideration will come with a statement on this matter, in fact next week, and will clarify the facts after we have investigated it.  I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Supplementary, Madam Speaker:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I do not know how many times I have said this, that if you really have an urgent matter, you notify me so that I take into account how much time I must give the matter.  But some of you do not even try to reach my office and then now you want us to take 40 minutes.  You wait until the Minister brings a statement, then you can bring your supplementaries.  For now I want to finish with the timetable.

2.59
MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, I raised the issue of a security report, I think you remember, that the Government normally gives a regular security report to this House; and we were promised that that report would actually be presented.  If we counted the two weeks ago, it would have been presented this week.  Noting the prevailing situation in the country, some of them positive, others negative; positive in the sense of what is going on with negotiations of Kony rebels, but also negative in the sense of noting what is going on with what we read in the press about the PRA, about this abduction of Ugandans in Kenya and Congo, which is contrary to all civilized international practices and laws, I do not know whether there is an agreement of an extradition treaty between Uganda and Kenya or Uganda and Congo, which we should follow.  If it is an abduction treaty, we should also know –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, I thought you are talking about the timetable –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: I am wondering when this agreement – because this report will help us to discuss all these issues of abductions, of security situation, PRA, Kony, cattle rustling and so forth.  Can you squeeze that in the report before we go, because if we are coming in January or at the end of January, by that time you can imagine what would have happened; and I am personally very interested in the security report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, can I know from the Government when the report is coming?

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING): (Capt Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, hon. Members.  I would like to thank hon. Omara Atubo, but having been a Minister in Defence, he knows how Government works; having been a Minister of Regional Cooperation, he knows the relationship between our countries; and therefore, as far as I am concerned, he should help us, having had that exposure of how the system works.  I feel it is very unfortunate for him to pick bones every time he comes here.  When a minister of this Government has given a promise that by next week, he is going to produce a report, and I am only requesting that instead of capturing the moment, why don’t we wait until the report has come here and then we can hear both sides equally and then debate from a position of information?  Otherwise, it is unfortunate that we keep on hearing press reports, which sometimes are invoked by us, and then we turn them into topics in this House.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.02
MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, even though we did not go deep into this, but there was a question about the use of Government vehicles to the extent that they can even be used over the weekend.  I can imagine what would happen to me, how the public would haunt me, if the Government of Uganda gave me a vehicle and they found it carrying goats and cows and charcoal and all that.  Now, the point of procedure I am raising is, the Minister in charge of all this is here, is it possible for you, Madam Speaker, to have him tell us something about it?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.  Hon. Members, I have got a programme, which is on the Order Paper.  Allow me to do the work, which is on the Order paper, please.

CAPT GUMA: Madam Speaker, I do not remember whether it was at the beginning of this seventh Parliament when there used to be a provision for we Members of Parliament to ask questions on the current issues as they are, in the press, as you get them from your constituency and so forth.  That –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I do not know where that came from; it is not part of our rules.  There has been a proposal that we amend the rules and create that time.  The rules have not yet been amended, so it depends really on the Speaker and on how much business we have.  But, hon. Members, we have so much business today; we have been debating whether we should sit on Christmas day.  Please, let us do what is available and get it out of the way.

3.04
MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I do not know whether the Business Committee has realized that we have a big backlog of business.  I am particularly concerned about petitions.  When Ugandans petition this Parliament, they expect that Parliament will expeditiously look into the petition and inform them of the decision of Parliament; and we have a lot of petitions, which are pending.  

In particular there is a petition, Madam Speaker, which I presented here on behalf of disabled entrepreneurs in Kampala.  Now, that petition was presented last year in November, up to now Parliament has not had the occasion to look at this petition.  In the meantime, the Mayor of Kampala is selling the particular area over which these entrepreneurs petitioned the House and they came to me and said, “Look, hon. Member, what are we going to do if we can come to Parliament and after a year nothing happens?”  I am sure there must be many other petitions, which are pending.  There are also reports, which ministers are requested to give to this House.  I can quote two incidences –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Mwandha, you do not really have to quote all those incidences.  This morning in the Business Committee, I brought up the issue of those petitions.  I am aware about the disabled and their difficulties in Kampala; I am aware about another petition that came from traders in Jinja, whose premises were locked and a few others.  But despite notice to all the Chairpersons and their Vice Chairpersons to attend the Business Committee, a number of them were not there.  So, we had all reports from those Committees, but those who were at the meeting know that we raised the matter.  If the committees give me the reports, I will squeeze them here.  Let us end it that way.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL, 2004
3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE (INFORMATION) (Dr Nsaba Buturo):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2004” be read a First Time.  It is my pleasure to submit the Certificate of Financial Implication.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does it comply with Section 10 of the Budget Act?  Okay, I have seen a Certificate of Compliance, it is committed to the relevant Committee and they will report back in due course.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FIREARMS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

3.07
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda):  Madam Speaker, I would like to move that “The Firearms (Amendment) Bill, 2004” be read a First Time. Madam Speaker, a letter of Financial Certification is available and will be presented tomorrow to the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable ministers, the practice and the rule of this House is that, when you bring a bill for the First Reading, it comes with the certificate.  So, if you have not brought a certificate, it will not get a First Reading –(Interjections)- but I have said it cannot go for a First Reading, now what is he withdrawing?  The bill is incomplete; you get away from the Table.

DR RUGUNDA: Yes, when I am fully prepared tomorrow, I will move the bill- (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, I duly gave you notice on an urgent question in conformity with Rule 29(1) of our Rules of Procedure, and the matter I wish to raise is of an urgent nature and requires that maybe we look into the re-arrangement of the business of this House.

Madam Speaker, hon. Members, when you look at section 4 of the Ratification of Treaties Act, it states that, “All Treaties ratified by Cabinet shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible.”  This Parliament has however noted that the treaties ratified by Cabinet have not been laid before Parliament as per this legal requirement, which omission has created a gap in the information flow. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Members, currently there are three important treaties that Parliament needs urgent information and action on.  First is the Customs Union Treaty, which treaty obliges our Government to have implemented certain obligations before January 2005.  Second are the treaties agreements and agreements, which were mentioned in the Minister for Regional Cooperation Affairs’ Statement on the Peace Process in the Great Lakes Region.  This came up when we were discussing the Uganda-Rwanda relations.  Third, is the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa.  Uganda signed this Protocol in July 2003, but we have not taken the important step of ratifying it.  Ratification of this important protocol is of great urgency because it will not enter into force until 15 member states have ratified it.

Laying ratified treaties before Parliament serves two purposes, Madam Speaker, hon. Members.  It is informative and gives the relevant Committees of Parliament opportunity to monitor implementation of these Committees.  In light of these observations, I would like to pose these questions to the Leader of Government Business and also request him to: one, appraise this Parliament of all signed and ratified treaties; two, to avail information as per request on the issue of Rwanda and Uganda relations; and third, I would like to find out whether he is aware that Uganda did sign this important protocol on Women’s Rights, the protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights, and if he is aware of what Government has done to ensure that this protocol is ratified.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister going to say something?  Actually a statement is due from him, is it not?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE (REGIONAL COOPERATION)(Mr Nshimye Sebutulo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to appreciate the concern of hon. Dora Byamukama, but normally the practice is that as much as a member may give notice of her intention to raise a matter of vital importance, normally the Ministry concerned would also be given notice.  But I would like to inform this House that all treaties that have been ratified will be presented to this House next week.  

Number two, on the question of Rwanda–Uganda relations. This morning I and my technical people were appearing before the Presidential and Parliamentary Committee up to about 1.00 p.m.  I believe the Committee will be making a report, which will be subject to your debate.

Now on the protocol on Women that has not been ratified, I think we shall have to ask the line ministry concerned to go ahead and do that so that it is ratified to satisfy the concern of the hon. Member.  Thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for his response, but I think he has forgotten my issues.  The first issue is of the Customs Union; there is urgency because there is a deadline to it.  Government has to put into effect certain obligations so that they can move along in the spirit of the East African Union and do what we are obliged to do.  Secondly –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are supposed to have brought a statement here on those matters.  The Prime Minister gave an undertaking that you would produce the statement here on the Customs Union, on the Community and on COMESA.

MR SEBUTULO: Yes, I have undertaken that, we can do that next week.  We can present it starting from tomorrow to next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we put you on the Order Paper for Friday.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, the second issue was on the issue of treaties and agreements, which were mentioned in his very statement, the Minister for Regional Cooperation.  Several statements were mentioned including the Lusaka Peace Accord and the Speaker directed that we should be availed these statements, and to-date I think I have only seen one.  So, I would like to appreciate his appearing before the committee, but what remains is that we do not have these statements.

Third and last is this very important protocol to the African Charter on Human People’s Rights and on the Rights of Women in Africa.  Uganda has been a trailblazer on the issue of women’s rights and we would like to stay on record and keep ahead by ratifying what we have already signed.  It is not very explicit because when you say the line Ministry, it is not very clear which the line Ministry is and we need more information, and we also know that this House has communicated to the Prime Minister on this very issue.  So, we would like some explicit answer as to when and why this Treaty is not being ratified.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was perplexed to hear the Minister’s statement.  I doubt whether the Minister checked the statement he has just given us because as far as I know, there are protocols, which necessitate Parliamentary approval in ratification and there are protocols, which may not necessitate; and on that point I would like the Minister to let us know here whether when Uganda is ratifying the Stockholm Protocol, and if Uganda is ratifying the Stockholm Protocol, what arrangements have been made to ensure that Members of Parliament access the literature related to that protocol because that protocol is environmentally important and many of us who travel outside get bothered with reason as to what status we are on in regard to those protocols.  So, I would like the Minister to clarify that.

3.18
MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I got a bit confused by the Minister when he talked about the African People’s Protocol on the question of women.  There is also the African Protocol, I think, on Gender equality of the African Union, which now dictates 50 per cent representation by women.  Now, he is shifting the blame to Ministry of Gender, if I got him well.

I think according to foreign relations, it is Ministry of Foreign Affairs that ratifies and signs on behalf of the country, and if they want they will transmit to the line Ministry.  But it is the duty of the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs to ratify all documents, sign and lay before Parliament.  So, for him to shift it to Ministry of Gender, I think he is relegating women’s issues like it is always done to some kind of desk, and not making it a central issue in this development of the economy. So, I want the Minister to really clarify if we are to wait from the Ministry of Gender or it is the role of Ministry of Foreign Affairs to bring all issues related to a Government’s signing with other countries to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I think let us not have a question and answer session.  But let me remind the Government that under Section 4 of the Ratification of Treaties Act of 1997, all Treaties, Conventions, and Agreements that are ratified by the Government must be laid before Parliament, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a depository; you are the custodian.  So, when members complain yours the first vote of call.

3.20
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to react to this representation by the Ministry of Education.  As one of my colleagues observed, the statement was full of lamentations.  I believe it could be taken as a chapter to be added to lamentations, which appears in the Bible.  

Now, Madam Speaker, we noted the minister’s desire that he wanted the budget with regard to Teachers’ Colleges and other colleges to be under Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF), and I wondered whether he wanted Parliament to pass a resolution and direct Government to put it under PAF, or is it not something that the Minister is capable of negotiating within Cabinet itself.  So, that left me a little bit surprised, and if we are going to put everything under PAF, what are the criteria for putting things under PAF?  I thought that is a matter probably he should have sorted out with his colleagues in Cabinet.  

Now, I see here that there is a big problem about the bursary scheme.  This is a scheme, which was introduced by Government at sub-county level for children who are bright and cannot afford to pay the fees; and I am very surprised that Government is also providing insufficient funds for a policy they put forward as something to address the needs of children at that particular level.

Now, when you come to the issue of National Teachers’ College again on page 4, it tells us that the required Capitation Grant for Teacher Training Colleges is Uganda shillings 2.9 billion.  Now, the cost per student is UShs 1300 per day for 270 days; the available budget is only U Shs 1.6 billion resulting into a deficient of UShs 1.35 billion.  How does Government intend to tackle this problem?  Will Government send the children home or - what are they going to do because this is money we budget for?  

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much for giving way.  I wanted to inform hon. Mwanda very briefly that at the time when the Ministerial Policy Statement was presented and when the preliminary indicative budget allocations were presented to this House, the figure, which the Minister gave was UShs 708, now he is coming up with a figure of Uganda shillings 1300.  I think at an appropriate time, he may have to clarify which figure he is basing on to calculate the deficit because there are two figures now.

MR MWANDHA: I do not know whether the Minister would like to give us the information now so that we debate when we are better informed because otherwise what is the discrepancy between the two figures?  Madam Speaker, is it not appropriate that the Minister gives this information, or if he does not have it he should say he does not have it so that we can get debate knowing that he does not have the information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, what figure did you base your report on?

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I have indicated the unit cost, I have indicated the number of days and I have indicated the total number of the students who are affected.  This, Madam Speaker, is my position.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I would like to start, first of all, by saying that I am a Member of the Committee of Social Services.  I have been on this Committee for the last three years and inconsistency is becoming the middle name of the Ministry of Education. What the hon. Kiraso Beatrice is saying is correct because our committee did put this question to the Minister of Education.  We asked him what the unit cost was, and in a written reply we were informed that it is UShs708. I was therefore very disturbed yesterday when I saw the Minister talking about U Shs 1300 yet for universities - I have to crosscheck my records, but I do not think it is about that.  

I want this Parliament to get very serious because I strongly suspect that the Ministry of Education is used as a conduit to siphon money out of our budget.  Last year we discovered UShs 1.19 billion unallocated in their budget.  When we asked them they told us that we want Parliament to pass the budget then we shall allocate it.  I want to ask the hon. Minister, under the Budget Act - we are fortunate that we review the budget before we deal with the indicative figures, and during that time the ministers are given opportunity to raise problems that they have.  

Between April and August the hon. Minister never raised this at all.  It is profound unfairness on his part to this House many months after the budget has been passed to come and say now the unit cost is UShs1,300.  I think the Ministry is not taking us seriously.  I have great respect for the Professor, but I think he is being given wrong information; and as a Professor I believe he has capacity to go back and read some of these things.  

So, the Minister must respond to this question. Why did he tell the Committee of Social Services and Budget Committee that it is UShs 708? This is similar, Madam Speaker, to the question of numbers of pupils in UPE. At one point our committee is told six million, after two months when you call them they say 7.8 million and all this is money.  So, I request this House to take this very seriously.  Unfortunately many a time when people get serious with some of these issues people say we are becoming political and we are anti-government.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Mwandha, try to wind up.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am just starting.  But, Madam Speaker, there is a big problem.  Can you imagine, Madam Speaker, that National Teachers’ Colleges were supposed to open on the 18 September 2004 –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure with respect to the submission by hon. Kiraso Beatrice and also by hon. Wandera Martin regarding the figure we are now dealing with. Are we dealing with the figure that the Minister has given us now or what has been pointed out in the budget?  Before we proceed we should be clear regarding the figures we are dealing with so that we know exactly what we are talking about, so that we can determine whether there is a deficit or there is no deficit.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, are you changing your position in view of the submissions by the Social Services Committee and the Budget Committee?

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity.  I think we need to go back to the origin of this statement, and the origin of this statement is an inquiry by this very House as to what was happening in the NTCs, in the PTCs and in the BTVET Institutions.  It is true that at the time this inquiry was made the NTCs were actually closed, and I stood here and I explained that they were closed because in my own judgment it was riskier to open these institutions without being sure that you will have the resources to operate them.  We know the nature of the times today; we know the type of students we are dealing with, you open and two weeks later –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: I am sorry to interrupt you, hon. Minister, but the question being asked is on the unit cost that you presented to the Budget Committee and the unit cost you are presenting now. It is not about the origin question that was asked, but there is inconsistency of information.  Simple as that, hon. Minister.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, once again and I would like to thank my honourable colleague for insisting that the question is inconsistency of figures.  Now, Madam Speaker, I have only one text here and what is being deemed inconsistency is being pointed out to me now.  I need to go and compare the records, which are being presented by hon. Kiraso Beatrice with my records to establish whether there is inconsistency; and if there is inconsistency I will own it.  But I cannot answer this conclusively on the spot here. I need to go and compare this record with the record the hon. Kiraso Beatrice is referring to, and I can assure you that if there is inconsistency I will own the inconsistency.  I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, Minister seems to be diplomatically accepting that the figures he presented are wrong, and we have an authority here who happens to be the Chairperson of the Budget Committee saying the figures we agreed at the committee is this and the Minister is presenting a different figure.  I do not know if it would not be prudent for the House to let hon. Kiraso Beatrice to tell us the exact figures because it is not a subject of debate; it is not an opinion, it is just a fact.  Anything less than that we will have the report thrown out pending proper documentation by the Minister.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, is it not possible for your Officials to establish this matter because you proposed yesterday in your No. 5 that you were asking that some of these institutions be placed under PAF, and also that 100 per cent be released.  So, now the question is, which is the 100 per cent, is it the UShs 708 or the Shs1,300?  Is that something which they cannot establish?

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, this is something which can be established.  This is why I have said that it is not possible for me to establish it instantly; I need to compare records.  This is only one point in a comprehensive report.  Could this matter be stood over until next week when I have compared the record, the matter of the figures?  I beg to move.

DR NKUUHE: This figure here in appendix 2, he gives you the total number of students, the percentage contribution and unit cost and then at the bottom he says, “the Government contributes Ushs 700 per day for students for 270 days.”  It is possible to work out some of these figures.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I think this is a good point except that appendix 2 relates to budget for technical institutions, but the figure in issue is a figure on National Teachers’ Colleges.  So, I am not sure whether we are talking about the same thing.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, can we stand over that particular issue and deal with the other points?  Please wind up, hon. Mwandha.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, of course you can appreciate the difficulties of the Minister.  Being a Lawyer, I would have asked for adjournment if he was appearing before a Court, but Parliament must proceed with business and make decisions.  The funding of this Ministry is a matter of concern to me when you read through this. 

I am particularly concerned that the Teacher Training Colleges (TTCs) were supposed to open on the 18 September and for some reason or other because there was no money, the TTCs opened on the 13 November, and the Minister tells us, “I am very happy to report that the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury has since committed himself to provide accelerated recess.”  You see, this is the Minister of Education and the Permanent Secretary is a subordinate to the Minister of Education.  It appears as if he is begging the Permanent Secretary to release funds, which Parliament has actually approved.  

So, what actually goes on?  We approve money here, the money is not released in time, the people who are supposed to do work or to go to institutions do not go on time and these are young people – the youth; the Government calls them the leaders of tomorrow and I think my colleagues, representatives of the youth, you should be concerned.  Why on earth would money, which we have voted, fail to be delivered from September to November?  This is not clearly explained in this statement.  It appears that the Minister of Finance has all the powers and we have a problem here because it seems to me that when we have taken decisions, Ministry of Finance may vary them and the subject to some of these ministries to considerable difficulties; and I think this is a matter, which really comes up very clearly throughout this statement of the Minister.  

Madam Speaker, on page 7, the Minister gives the National Health Service Training Colleges, and to the best of my knowledge, there is a Training Institution, which should be classified together here, located in Mulago Hospital, known as the Orthopaedic Training School.  The Orthopaedic Training School is the one which trains technicians who make devices like callipers, like clutches, like wheelchairs and so forth. I do not know whether this college has been closed, and if so, why it has been closed.  So, I am really very much concerned.

Finally, on the question of Makerere University problems, I was equally saddened by the death of one of the students on a road, which the Ministry of Works had failed to provide humps; and as if God planned it, it was the vehicle of the Ministry of Works itself, which knocked and killed a student; and as we are told, since that time the Ministry of Works is now putting up these humps, ‘closing the gates when the horses have bolted.’  I think the Ministry of Works should take personal responsibility, and by now if we were in situations where people respect responsibilities given to them, the Minister would have made a statement to this House and apologized for actually his failures, which resulted in the death of a student –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I thank hon. Mwandha for giving way for this clarification.  First of all, the regulations of national and regional roads or highways is that there should be no humps at all, but people should observe speed limits.  If you are going through an urban area and you are supposed to travel at 50 kilometres or less, you should observe that regulation.  We only provide humps reluctantly on request, and we do not put humps anywhere an accident happens because as you know accidents happen in many parts or in many sections of the road.  

It is, of course unfortunate that that accident happened, but as the Minister explained in his statement, the drivers have been arrested and charged; and any driver and any vehicle, whether it is for Ministry of Works, or from anywhere, if it is involved in an accident and it is proved that the vehicle was careless, the Law takes its course.  Now, that the University has requested for humps at that section, that is why we have moved to put the humps.  It is not that we are trying to do the work that we should have done earlier; otherwise the whole road from here to any border of Uganda will be having humps in order to control speeds.  The control of speeds is not through humps; humps are provided when they are requested and we do it reluctantly on national roads.  

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for accepting me to seek this clarification.  In the Minister’s statement, it is clearly stated that accident occurred at midnight and yet we also do have a circular from Ministry of Public Service to the effect that all Government vehicles must be parked by 6.00 p.m. in the evening unless an express permission is granted to the Officer using the vehicle, and that type of permission will all be granted if the Officer has been sanctioned to carry out official duties upcountry.  May we know from you, Mr Minister, where that driver was coming from at midnight that fateful day?

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, it is by God’s grace that this question fully comes out and brings up the point, which was suffocated somehow, of why Government vehicles and how the Government feels when Government vehicles are misused.  If someone can even drive that vehicle at midnight and it kills somebody, then why don’t we really take that as a very serious issue, and in the presence of the Leader of Government Business - now the Public Service Commission Minister is back, because this is very important no matter how much we try to avoid it.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: Hon. Minister of Works has said that humps are put on request on some of the roads.  But at times we have put in request for humps on some of the roads like on the Jinja highway and nothing has been done, and maybe in even other parts of the country. I was even surprised yesterday when I passed in my area in Nakifuma to find humps being put whereas on Jinja highway where we have experienced many accidents, nothing has been done at all.  What kind of request do you expect, hon. Minister, to be put up so that we can arrest this situation?

MRS TUMA: As we talk with the Minister of works right now there is a trailer, which has killed about six children in Bugembe, and that is the road where there is construction; and also at Magamaga adults have been involved in an accident and 15 of them have died.  I was just wondering whether there are any measures by the Ministry of Works to make sure that whoever is doing the work on those roads, which are so busy and with a high rate of pedestrians walking along, there are precautions being put in place.  A lot of our people are dying, even last week we lost about 12 children in Jinja just because the Ministry of Works is a bit negligent on the precautions to be taken whenever there are people and vehicles moving on the roads.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us first hear the Minister in charge of cars, which drive at night, the Minister of Public Service.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Alintuma Nsambu, Member of Parliament for Bukoto East has made this statement persistently, and I feel that it is important that my Ministry makes a brief statement on this matter.  It is true my Ministry has the responsibility to oversee the utilization of Government equipment used in ministries, and one of those equipment is a vehicle, all forms of vehicles being used by Government Ministries.  My Ministry has a policy and has issued instructions to all Accounting Officers that Government vehicles should not be used after office hours unless with permission, and this is a standing instruction to all Accounting Officers, even at district level -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The clarification I want to seek from the Minister is that, the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development discovered that one of the leakages where Government is spending too much is on transport and public administration.  We discovered that actually Government was spending too much on vehicles and we did recommend a computerized monitoring system that monitors the speed of the vehicle, location at any time you want it, so that you can control them; and we know that the cost of that equipment is so cheap compared to what you are losing.  Can we be clarified what steps they have taken to make sure that they are in control other than writing letters and stopping there?

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, with regard to this particular case of the vehicle of Government that travelled at that time of the night, and the Minister informing us that they have been writing circulars, letters to the Accounting Officers, can the Minister clarify to the House, with regard to this particular case, what action he has taken to this particular driver or whoever was driving at that time this particular vehicle?

MR KALULE SSENGO:  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  In the same Committee of Finance, we had asked the Minister concerned that if Government cannot control their vehicles, why don’t they re-introduce the system having Officers get their own vehicles on hire purchase so that we phase out Government vehicles because when individuals own their own vehicles they take a lot of care of those vehicles instead of using Government vehicles. Because in Uganda -(Interjection)- can I ask the hon. Member to be patient, this is my turn to talk, you will have your own chance to talk, please.  

Madam Speaker, the culture in Uganda is that people do not respect Government property, but when people are able to own their own property that is the one they can respect.  I had wanted to the Minister to inform this House how far they took this proposal or did they just neglect it, was it left there or something is being done.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have said it very many times that your Sessional Committees have authority to summon these ministers any time, not only for the budget.  But now we are going into the policy of co-ownership and some other things and hire purchase, we are talking about a man who has died; we are talking about how to manage strikes at Makerere University.  Why don’t we stick to the matters, which are here?  The policy issues, please take them to your committees.  

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your concern.  The issues by my honourable Colleagues have been raised by the Sessional Committee responsible for Public Service and Local Government, and we are handling these matters.  I would also like to appreciate the concern raised by hon. Bright Rwamirama, who is the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance.  These are issues we a re going to handle and we hope that in he next financial year we should be in a position to bring to put in place the computerization aspect, which has been recommended.  We are looking at all these.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to give an undertaking to the House that since this matter is so crucial and it concerns public expenditure, I would like to give an undertaking by my Ministry that we bring in a comprehensive answer to address the concerns of the members, I think when we resume in January.  I thank you.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, on the issue of that vehicle, my colleague has clarified and he will give more details.  But I want to refer you to page 15, paragraph 12 of the Minister of Education and Sports Statement where it was stated clearly that the drivers of the motor vehicles No. UG 0003W and Reg.No. UAF 964A, which were involved in the material accidents, have already been charged with appropriate criminal offences at Buganda Road Court.  So, to start with, action was taken on those drivers.  As for the administrative issues on Government vehicles, my colleague has handled it.  

But let me go back to the issue of accidents where the Ministry is being accused by my Sister of being negligent. First, if you check the statistics of the accidents that happen in this country, 80 per cent of the reasons that an accident takes place are due to driver error.  Whether it is midnight or early in the morning it is driver error, and therefore that 80 per cent blame straight away goes on the driver and really not Ministry of Works.  Secondly, the other five per cent goes on the condition of the road.  That is where, if it is proved that part of the accident was caused because of a poor road, then we take responsibility.  Lastly, others like weather - we cannot control the weather if it is wet.  But in the incidents you have talked about, of course it is painful when many people die of accidents and we all get pained.  But I would urge colleagues not to straight away throw the blame on the Ministry that cannot control human beings when they are on the road. 

On construction works like the Bugiri-Jinja Road, which is going on, the contract is clear that while you are doing works you have to control traffic.  In those incidents if it is found that the contractor was negligent then his insurance will compensate, and anybody who was negligent the law will take its course because within the contract we take into account controlling traffic through the works.

Finally, our duty as a Ministry in enforcing or managing the Traffic and Road Safety Act, we have issued almost all the regulations and all the laws for ensuring that drivers conduct themselves in a safe way, that vehicles are safe.  If that human error happens, then there is the enforcing arm of Government, and that is how any society is managed.  Accidents are unfortunate, they are painful, but I urge colleagues not to put the blame on the Ministry whenever there is an accident or whenever there is death due to a road accident.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Madam Speaker, hon. Members, most of our youth who are driving taxis here are drug addicts, they take in a lot of bhangi, and bhangi is one of the problems causing the accidents in Kampala here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, conclude, I think it was information for you.  Hon. Members, I think you notice that we have now moved from education and we are now concentrating on roads and accidents.  

MRS MEHANGYE: I would like to thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way.  What I wanted to know, you have said that people can request for humps; those are very lucky, of course, in Kamwenge I would not request for humps.  But what I wanted to ask is, while you are repairing the roads and you are trying to make them modern, there are some people you are not providing for and these are cyclists, those who ride bicycles.  We have had carnage of these people who ride bicycles; they are killed by these big trucks.  

Even the new roads like the Wakaliga road, which you have worked on, -it is very modern - there is no provision for this line where the bicycles can ride.  The Gaba road, which is being worked on, it is being widened and actually in the widening it seems it is getting narrowed because of these embankments put, but also there is no provision for the cyclists.  Are these provisions of cyclists also put on request, is it a new plan in future, are you going to bring them in future?  What are you doing for those who ride bicycles?  Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I think the problems on roads are many and we are getting deeper and deeper into roads’ problems.  There could be an opportunity, either through the committee or whenever there is an opportunity for me to clarify on this.  Nevertheless, I hope when I clarify this then the others could be done in future because the problems on the roads are many.  It is true that some of the requests for humps have not yet been acted on, but they will be acted on; we go according to our resources within the budget and that is why you noted that there are some humps being constructed on one of the road and yet another request is still pending.  Those which are pending, we shall –(Interjection)- can I finish this and then –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, the Minister should explain to the House why he reluctantly allows construction of humps.  Let me have this to say, Madam Speaker, the humps they are creating are not efficient. They are not means of efficiency; they are not stopping accidents.  In the first place, they are not even- I will quote a critical incident where a wheel loader carrying a number of vehicles could not go over those humps.  Some of these small vehicles like yours, Madam Speaker, cannot go over those humps; and I want you to go and check on every huge hump, you will find scratches, that means cars cannot go over them.  

Secondly, when they do them, wherever they have constructed the humps the road has given way; they have to re-do it again.  Madam Speaker, can the Minister explain why he cannot encourage flyovers and save the road, also save time we spend on these humps?  From here to Mbarara they are 19 humps, so for every 10 kilometres you move you have to stop, so the journey, which used to take three hours takes five hours. 

MR NASASIRA: Now, what can I do, Madam Speaker?  You can see some people do not want humps.  That is why I say we construct them reluctantly, otherwise if we are going to construct humps everywhere to slow speeds we shall eventually switch from cars to horses where you have to keep jumping over humps until you get where you are going.  But anyway, on a more serious note, yes, we are standardizing the type of humps we are putting in and we are eliminating those that have been dangerous to small vehicles; we are standardizing them, you will see the new standards. But most important of all, what I was trying to explain - I had finished the issue of humps - we were reluctant because highways are supposed to be highways. 

People are supposed to move, they are supposed to read road signs and when they say, “slow down,” you slow down, and if you do not there should be a Policeman who should arrest you there, but the enforcement capacity is not yet in place.  So, we use humps hoping that in future when the enforcement – in some developed countries you have even cameras, which can take registration of your vehicle, the speed at which you are travelling in and they arrest you even if you are 20 kilometers ahead.  But our capacity of enforcement is still limited and that is why we are using humps.

Now, turning to narrow roads or where the cyclists are supposed to be, on most of our roads there is what we call a shoulder, which is normally either one and half meters wide on each side or two meters; and the new type of construction, all these shoulders now are tarmacked and that is where the cyclists are supposed to be riding.  

It is true Wakaliga road is narrow, but sometimes beggars are not choosers, that is all the money we could find from the Japanese grant; and Wakaliga road is tighter but they have provided access for pedestrians where to walk from.  They have provided a better road, I am sure you remember how Wakaliga road used to look like.  Unfortunately, it is not wide enough, but there is a continuous line in the middle.  Wakaliga road is only three kilometres.  We are saying do not overtake unless there is nothing in front.  If we are dealing with a disciplined society, on that narrow stretch of the road, you do not just go knocking people you find in front of you because you are moving faster than them, you wait until an opportunity comes.  But that is the society we are still dealing with.  

Finally on Gaba Road, in some sections where you are passing through built areas, yes, the road is narrow because they are providing walkways.  Where it is not built like when you go down past Kansanga, you will see that shoulders will be there.  But most of our roads have provisions for cyclists.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope you will appreciate that the 45 minutes we allocated for this item have been exceeded.  I do not know whether to end with hon. Mwandha, whether that will be fair to the House –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am going to wind up.  First of all, I want to appreciate –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because it means that we may not reach the next item of the agenda.  So, I hope now you appreciate it is not my problem; it is the problem of the House.  Okay, wind up.

MR MWANDHA: Yes, I am winding up on two points.  First of all, I want to thank my colleagues for reinforcing my concerns, and I hope that the ministers have taken some lessons.  But the other Minister who was here and run away and he hardly sits in this House for a long time, this is the Minister of Internal Affairs.  We had a resolution in this House that we should never use live bullets to disperse people who are rioting.  Yes, it was covered yesterday but it is a pity that the Minister is – well, I will accept the Prime Minister to -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I did consult the Minister of Internal Affairs and he has left because there is an urgent matter to handle.  He has confirmed that live bullets were not used.  This was a mistake; they used rubber bullets.  So, that problem does not arise anymore.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members. I have to give chance to this side.  Please wind up.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is very interesting and it is typical of people in Government.  A Minister of Education says live bullets were used, now the Prime Minister comes here, he has checked with the Minister of Internal Affairs, live bullets were not used.  The public says live bullets were used.  Now, is the Prime Minister telling this House that actually this person who was killed was killed by a rubber bullet?  Madam Speaker, I think this is a matter for the Government to clarify.  

Finally on the issue of counseling, I was impressed by the fact that the University of Makerere is going to institute a major programme on counseling, but I was also told in same document that Makerere University has about 34,000 students and I do not know how big the counseling team is going to be to handle the 34,000 students.  Otherwise, thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, the ignites of the Members of Parliament indicate that this House and this Parliament should be ready to sit for extra hours, sit in the morning and debate up to 11.00 O’clock.  Other countries, which have developed, Madam Speaker, members even debate up to midnight or 24 hours.  I have traveled and I have seen during the budget discussion.

Madam Speaker, if this country is to develop, we have to shift and change our attitude the way we handle things.  The country must be ready and the people of this country must be ready to enforce decision, enforce legislation and enforce what has been agreed.  It will not even be necessary for us to sit in this House, spend a lot of taxpayers’ money debating this report if the Government was really serious.  

The Government would have released money and the Minister of Education would have the necessary capacity to implement decisions and technical schools would be booming in this country.  But because, Madam Speaker, this is what one of the great scholars, Makumi John, has called “the failure of State in post-colonial Africa,” the States are shifting from real responsibility of providing social-economic protection of its citizens to plundering and wasting time of its citizens.   

Madam Speaker, let me go to this report in detail.  The question of road accidents we are talking of.  Hon. Eng. John Nasasira has been in this Ministry for many years.  We have a department in charge of physical planning; if we have a department in charge of physical planning, we do not need road humps.  They should be planning where the roads are to pass in order for us to avoid building humps to reduce accidents because according to international regulation to which the Minister has quoted, on highways we do not need humps, and we are part of that convention.  Therefore that conflicts with tourism, conflicts with other Protocols to which we have agreed.  

So, if the Minister is going everywhere, towns are developing, put humps instead of us moving to serious physical planning of all our roads.  By the way, some of the causes of the accidents are because of some vehicles that drive at very slow speed on a highway.  I expect the Ministry to issue speed limits when you are on a highway, when you are near the city, or towns.  

Madam Speaker, lack of physical planning is also responsible for the failure by the Ministry of Works up to this very day to license private garages to inspect vehicles.  Most of the vehicles on the roads are in very poor mechanical conditions.  The inspection of vehicles was abolished as a condition for getting licenses some years back.  The Ministry has assured us in this Parliament that very soon they will license private garages to inspect the condition of vehicles on the road; nothing has been done.  When will the Government license private garages to inspect vehicles?  

The Minister has talked of a problem of drivers; you go to departments that issue driving permits, full of corruption totally.  In fact, 70 per cent of the people who get driving permits get them through back doors; it has been reported, it has been researched.  I expected the Minister of Works by now to have come up, licensed some private driving schools to issue license.  When are you coming up with this policy; we are losing lives and you have confirmed –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I do not want time to be consumed again, I want to move on the next item.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Ekanya.  First, it is true hon. Ekanya, with respect to private inspection of garages, we were trying to improve it, we tendered out, the results we got of those who put in bids were sub-standard because we want to do it properly and in an international way.  We have not only re-tendered, we have now hired a consultant expert who knows, because people were coming in with these normal garages.  This is not how we inspect a vehicle.  We want a vehicle to be inspected like you go through an X-ray or through a medical check-up.  So, we are coming back with appropriate people with the right gadgets to do it.  

With respect to driving permits, we have now computerized driving permits.  Starting July, all driving permits will be computerized.  There will be regions, where the moment you have an accident, your license is put in the computer; if you go somewhere else and you are checked and you have lost your points, then eventually the driving will be banned.  I am coming here early next year with Amendments in the Traffic and Road Safety Act.  All these amendments include lifting a higher driving permit for people who are going to drive Public Service Vehicles.  So, we are moving. 

Finally, let me also inform you, you said I have been in this Ministry for a long time and you kept criticizing our physical planning.  My Ministry is not responsible for physical planning.  The confusion goes further that, when we are developing trading centres along our highways, the Ministry has no power over that, but that is under local authorities.  I am looking forward to the day when we bring here a bill that is going to make the whole of Uganda one planning area.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the hon. Minister for that information.  Madam Speaker, I would also like to advise the Minister of Works and Government that we have normally vehicles - for us who travel along Jinja Road, our life is in danger.  I have called the Minister of Internal Affairs, 10.00 O’clock there are these trailers that carry sugarcane, they have no light, sometimes they break down on the road; they are parked on the middle of the road.  These vehicles belong to Kakira or Madhvani.  Can really Government not take action to stop the movement of these vehicles in the night so that we save life?  

This goes with discipline, Madam Speaker.  In other countries, there are private companies licensed, immediately your vehicle breaks down in the middle of the road, a breakdown vehicle comes, tows it away and you meet the cost.  But in this country people repair vehicles in the road, they release oil on the road and this creates tear and wear on our roads.  This could be a source of revenue for this Government so that we stop lamentation.  
 
Madam Speaker, I believe, like they have said that the Ministry of Education is lamenting, we are also lamenting and yet we have power.  We have power to enforce decisions; Parliament should take responsibility like we used to do more in the 6th Parliament.  If we appropriate money in the budget and the Ministry of Finance does not release it, we also treat them with strong hands and they normally respond.  

Madam Speaker, allow me to read the performance of the economy, a Report from the Ministry of Finance because there has been a lot of talk.  Most of the ministries have been getting 30 per cent of the quarter releases they deserve, and yet hon. ministers cannot even move upcountry to inspect Government programmes; they get fuel of UShs 400,000 instead of UShs2,000,000 per month. 

 Madam Speaker, we have been following this matter and some people have been blaming Uganda Revenue Authority, because if you read the Report of the Minister, it is under-released; that is why colleges could not open.  With your permission, Madam Speaker, it states in summary that, “Total URA revenue collection in October amounted to UShs 141 billion representing an increase of 12.4 per cent.”  Then where is the money going?  If you ask the Chairperson of Budget, she has a report from Ministry of Finance indicating that donor support is on schedule, the donors are not withholding money despite arrest and all these abuses of human rights, so where is the money going, Madam Speaker?  

Somebody is deceiving us; people are releasing money using sheets because somewhere, people are taking money in another direction.  This is a report of Ministry of Finance; let me read another clause; “Indirect domestic tax collection amounted to UShs 37 billion in October against a target of UShs 31 billion representing 19 per cent over-performance.”  Where is the money going?  

I will lay this on the Table, Madam Speaker.  Somebody is deceiving us, making us the representatives of the people to waste time here lamenting, making us to criticize the Ministry of Education; somebody somewhere is releasing money indirectly.  I asked somebody in Ministry of Finance, he said that, “Hon. Ekanya, suppose you are a Minister of Finance and the President of Uganda made a telephone call and said, “I need UShs 10 billion,’ what would you do?”  I said, “I would resign,” and the person told me, “Don’t you remember hon. Gerald Ssendaula tabling his resignation?”  There is something going on and we are wasting time here lamenting.  I call upon the Prime Minister to take responsibility to tell this country what is going on in Government because we cannot have the President here.  If you as a Professor, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: The clarification I am seeking is from the Minister of Finance to inform this House whether the UShs 20 billion that was given to Mr Basajjabalaba was budgeted for in this budget for this financial year?  I would like the Leader of Government Business to confirm to this House whether it is true or not that this money was not released.  But as far as we are concerned, we have evidence now that this money was taken from the Bank of Uganda direct without first going through the normal procedure of disbursing funds from the Consolidated Fund.  So, may I know from either the Leader of Government Business or the Minister of Finance, how any Ugandan can access funds from the consolidated fund without using the normal procedure? 

MR EKANYA: Finally, Madam Speaker, let me quote, “International Trade Tax collection amounted to UShs 77 billion in October representing a four per cent increase.”  Everything is above the target; we make our children, the foundation of this country, the education sector really not to perform.  We are moving to East African Political Federation.  

One of the advantages that this country has in terms of competing at the regional level is to provide this region with quality education because our foundation is laid on the British System.  Now, if we do not focus on training the necessary personnel, even the Private Schools will collapse; and as we speak now, the Kenyan and Tanzanian Governments are adopting the same policy because of the global pressure.  So, when we go to this Customs Union, East African Political Federation, what will be our comparative advantage?  

Somebody is deceiving us, giving our sons and daughters half-baked education.  The Ministry of Education is blaming the Ministry of Finance, the Cabinet is aware of the problem and our time is wasted here to lament.  Madam Speaker, I call upon the Government, especially the Cabinet Ministers, who have seen this lie for all this long, to take high responsibility and resign because the truth is there, Madam Speaker.  Money is released as the Vice Chairperson of PAC said, without audit warrant going through the Auditor General.  

So, Madam Speaker, I would like call upon this Parliament to come out strongly, because we have power according to the Constitution, and really take sanctions against Ministry of Finance for violating the Constitution and accepting illegal directives from the President.  I lay this report on the Table.

4.44
MR OGOLA AKISOFERI (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, I have heard on a macro level the problems with the Ministry of Education.  We are also now aware that the problem of the Ministry of Education is not confined to the Ministry per se, that there are ramifications of the problems emanating from failures from other ministries such as Ministry of Finance, that there are other complementary ministries, which must perform in order that the Ministry of Education may be on line.  I would like to shift the centre of gravity slightly to a micro level.  I am talking about my constituency in respect to the question of the Primary Teacher Education Colleges and the Polytechnics.

Madam Speaker, from around 1980, a Primary Teaching College was created in my constituency at Mulanda and it run on until around 1998 un-interrupted.  Suddenly, a decision was made by the Ministry of Education that the college must close on account that it did not have land.  This turned out to be untrue because somewhere around early 1990s, the college was asked to find land, that it should not be continuously established on a church foundation land.  Indeed the people in the area proceeded and secured land, 101 acres of land, and it was surveyed and the Ministry of Education guaranteed they would pay the compensation necessary.  

Somehow in 1998, the college was closed; it was shifted from Mulanda to Mukujju, which is a Core College on Mbale Road in Tororo.  The justification was not given because if it was land, the land was secured.  If it was a question of compensation, that was the Ministry of Education, which had promised to compensate the people; then it decided to fall back.  

When the people complained, the Ministry of Education realized that it had hurt the people.  They came in as a way of compensation and said, “Alright, we are now going to turn that college into a community polytechnic” and indeed the polytechnic was established, the Principal was posted, it functioned.  Now, if you see the list of the Polytechnics now produced here, my Polytechnic is not there.  Mulanda Polytechnic is closed and when I inquired from the constituency, they said the Principal was shifted away to somewhere else quietly, the workers were left there marooned; they have not been paid anything and they do not know what their future is.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The information I want to give my hon. colleague is that this question of eradication of Core Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs) was such a dubious exercise.  In Kabale there was even a strike against these Core PTCs and the hon. Ministry of Education was mandated to give a report at that time.  He did an investigation and he has never given any report regarding the allocation of these Core PTCs.  So, your concern, hon. Member, is not an isolated one, but is a countrywide question on how this exercise was dubiously conducted.  

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much for that information.  It reinforces my concern and I am glad I am not alone.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Akisoferi Ogola and Madam Speaker.  I would like to give the hon. Member and the august House this information, that recently when the National Teachers’ Colleges were phased out, some Colleges had land and land that did not belong to the owners, to the churches; the information I want to give and possibly to seek clarification from the Minister, what do they intend to use that land for since they have phased out those NTCs?

Secondly, since those NTCs, like Masindi NTC was phased out and now that the programme on the NTC after they had closed, you are saying you have revisited it, and the parent mother to those NTCs and the structures, they have already drawn a programme of taking up their colleges, how are you going to compensate these students?  Is the Government going to pay the Churches for their structures during this other time when you will be trying to catch up with the time that was lost when you closed the NTCs?  Thank you.

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  So, I am expressing a grave concern here, Madam Speaker, and I would like to request for a full explanation from the Minister of Education.  I would like to be assisted to quieten the excitement in my constituency, because even I, as a Member of Parliament, am not informed about these things.  I just find the chaos over there and what I am asking, is this a policy matter or was it handled by administrators on their own?  If it is the latter, then it constitutes administrative veto over the political decisions of this Government.  I have been a long-standing civil servant and I cannot expect a civil servant to come around and veto a political decision of the Government made by the policy of the Cabinet.  

I am aware, Madam Speaker, I did inform this House before that about 15/16 years ago when I was Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, the decision was made to open the Gulu University at that time and it was going to be opened through the Ministry of Health.  Hardly had we started than the instructions came that Gulu University should be changed to Mbarara University because the insecurity in Gulu had intensified.  We proceeded and we established Mbarara University supposedly on a temporary basis although temporary things have a way of becoming permanent – (Laughter)- now, it has become permanent, but I was a civil servant and I was giving the directive, I expressly implemented it.

So, is this decision to phase out first my primary teaching college, then now what was given as a replacement has been swiped away?  Is this administrative action, or is it a political decision?  And if it is a political decision, I want the explanation to be given to my people, what have they done wrong to deserve this kind of embarrassment and harassment?  I demand an explanation.  I would be very much appreciative if the Minister could give me a satisfactory explanation to pass over to my people.  Thank you very much.

4.54
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County, Kyenjojo District): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I have two points.  The first one is on Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs) and this is on page 5, and the statement is that, “PTCs did not close but sent the student teachers for child study in fulfilment of the new training requirements for the award of Grade III Teachers’ Certificate.”  This particular statement comes after another statement on the shortfall and it is very important, for example, that you realize that there was a budget to fund the gap in order to enable PTCs to operate in Term III starting on 30 January 2005.  My question is, why did it take the minister so long to come out with this statement?  

For example, I have Butiti Primary Teachers’ College and people were of the view that this PTC had been closed.  But I am also fearful that if money is not available, it may not be able to start on 30 January 2005 and indeed it may close.  Could the Minister tell us what steps he has taken because 30 January 2005 is just around the corner?  I would like to be re-assured that these PTCs would continue to operate as is expected.

Two, Madam Speaker, I would like to turn to the students’ riot.  As a person who studied at Makerere University, I am very concerned about the academic standards as well as the prestige of this institution, which was acknowledged not only in Uganda but in the whole of the African Region and worldwide.  When you look at page 12, we note that, “The riot was organized and mobilized by residents of Lumumba Hall.  The students in the rest of the Halls of residence except those from Mary Stuart Hall refused to join them.” This is historical; as a “Boxer” and a speaker of “Box”, I know of this alliance.  There should be special recognition of this alliance in view of the fact that these are the two of the biggest Halls in Makerere University, and the reason why the “Boxers” joined the Lumumbists is historical and it should also be acknowledged that this is one kind of alliance that can be utilized to bring sanity to the university community.  

But more importantly, when you look at page 14, it says, “In the morning of 17 November 2004, there was an attempt by the students to re-group and march to Wandegeya Police Station and Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters.  The Police was able to halt this move.”  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this is a very important statement, and I have just received some information that this simmering attempt to resurrect the riot was coming up last week; and therefore in light of this, when the Minister on page 15 states that, “the students’ Counselling Programme will be strengthened with particular emphasis on following established grievance procedures, the peaceful resolution of differences and self-protection” and gives it only one small paragraph, which I believe is the heart and the crux of what will stop re-occurrence of such riots, I feel very perturbed.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think there should be more put into research and understudying of the causes of this riot.  I believe that these deaths on the road were just the ‘last straws that broke the camel’s back.’  There were more underlying causes, and I would like to urge the University Administration to seriously understudy and examine the causes of why these riots occurred, and to put in place mechanisms to prevent conflict as well as to manage conflict.  When you look at the reporting mechanism where a student gets an accident and the University is informed after he has died, I think this is very dangerous.  

We need more structures, more mechanisms to give the university early warning so that these riots can be prevented because it is not only the students who are affected, it is also the communities around, and you and I who may be travelling through the university or in the suburbs of the University; and as a parent, I think it is very worrying for anybody to have a student at Makerere University when you know that any time this particular child may not be able to live to see his or her degree.  I thank you.

5.01
MR SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, yesterday, I did stand up on a point of information, but I have a very short submission.  I will not take most of your time.  My concern is about the proprietors in the private sector, the owners of privately owned Primary Schools.  Madam Speaker, these owners of privately owned Primary Schools have got a raw deal from the Government; they have not been assisted.  Actually they are filling in a gap for the Government, they are educating our children but we are not giving them any subsidy.  Yesterday I heard about the intervention fund –(Interjection)- can you give me a chance, hon. Dombo, to talk? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sitenda-Sebalu, the statement was specific.  It was on Capitation Grants Funding for National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs), Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs), Business Technical, Vocational, Education and Training Institutions for the financial year 2004/2005.  The second part was on students’ riot at Makerere University.  Your submission should touch only those areas.  

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Madam Speaker, I was justifying what I am talking about.  You cannot talk of Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs), because you very well know, that when we educate these teachers, they do not only teach in Government schools, they also teach in Private Schools.  So, the plight of the owners of the private schools must also be a very great concern for all of us because when we educate them they do not teach in isolation, they also teach in private schools. 

Recently I was in my constituency and I did meet these owners of these private schools.  I was fazed with their lamentations that even the small fund, the UPE facilitation, which these schools have been getting, was abolished two years ago.  These are stakeholders –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you said that already, I have heard that this week.  Now, you are making the same submission, hon. Sitenda-Sebalu.  I think the Minister noted that yesterday because you said it and I heard it.  You were praying for funding for those institutions, I heard it yesterday.

5.08
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a few remarks on the Ministerial Statement of the Ministry of Education.  Uganda as a country is supposed to take education as the key issue, as a centre of excellence in the whole of this Great Lakes Region.  It is very unfortunate that the Minister of Finance is belittling an institution, which would create him riches beyond what he can imagine. 

I think we should thank all the Ministers of Education for their performance in that today they have come out to say actually that the country is broke as far as funding of the education sector is concerned.  We must thank them for being sincere.  But the reality of the matter is that we as Parliament should take the blame and put it squarely on the Minister of Finance without fear or favour.  It cannot be a policy matter because we already passed the budget, so the Minister of Finance has disobeyed this Parliament to do actually what he agreed with his fellow Ministers.  So, we should go back and actually call here the Minister of Finance and some of the big economists to explain to this House why the Ministry of Finance is belittling a Sector, which should be the trigger of causing a paradigm shift in the poverty of this country.  So, I think we should be very serious about that.  

The other thing, which we should ask the Minister, which he should have done, Madam Speaker, if you ask for money, first explain to us, is your quality and quantity allowed?  If the Minister of Education wants us to take him very seriously, it is very important to assure us that what is happening in these Colleges, there is quality coming up.  If you go to Kaliro, if you come to Iganga, if you go to all these institutions, even in UPE Schools, you will find that we are not yet near anywhere causing the quality of education to go back to the standard, which we used to know when we were still young and we were taken out of our looking after goats to come and look at education seriously.  Indeed very many students are running out of UPE; that means there is something wrong in UPE, which should be addressed.  There must be something wrong in Teacher Training Colleges.  

I would like to stop there at that point that it is very important for the Minister of Education, indeed the whole Education Sector to justify about their performance in terms of quality and quantity before they ask for money.  Yes, we will sympathize with them now that the Minister of Finance is very mean to them, but also they should sell to us an idea that they are actually performing in terms of quality and quantity and even utilization of the facilities, which are available.  If you go to Kaliro Technical Institute, you will cry tears.  Several Principals have run away with money without performing anything; we should have seen that being reflected here.  The amount of haemorrhage, which is occurring to some of these institutions, is lamentable.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, let us go to the riots.  I think it is very unfair for the old people in this country, people who are above the age of 25 and 30 years, to start tackling the issue of young students striking or rioting.  Very many of our bright people today were good students when they rioted; the people who were holding the Education Sector at that time were patient enough to persuade them from going very wild and actually turned them round and they became very honest citizens.  

It is unfortunate that anybody thinks or dreams of shooting down a student who is only complaining or rioting or striking.  I think there is a lot of work, which must be done by the Government to listen to the students.  A student who is riotous sometimes can turn out to be a President; a student who is riotous sometimes can turn out to be a First Class Doctor around in this world.  If people like Nelson Mandela did not stand up to the occasion of the day and started saying, “Look something is going wrong,” we would have stifled talent from coming up.  

The issue of problems of students as articulated by the Youth Members of Parliament, both hon. Tiperu and hon. Kidega; we have to take them seriously.  They have given us a signal that if we do not address students and understand their problems, we are creating a recipe for eventually to get a style like a Chinese Revolution.  If we want to do change this country economically and socially, then the students must be listened to and we must see that they are using their time profitably and accountably.  I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, all hands seem to be pointing to the Ministry of Finance.  Even if the lamentation continues up to 7.00 p.m., there is already a big problem that the Ministry of Finance has not honoured the budget put forth by this Parliament.  Would it not be impudent for the Minister of Finance to make some preliminary comments because we are all going to say the same thing yet the man is here and the rest are at large, perhaps they just do not have money - and we are just lamenting until 6.00 p.m. then we go home.  Can he not make some preliminary remarks?  Hon. Agard Didi is competent enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let the members make their submissions then the ministers will answer.

5.20
MR DOMBO EMMANUEL (Bunyole County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much.  Yesterday an issue was raised on this Floor, and I just want to reiterate it in as far as the institution and the performance of Ministry of Education is concerned as regards budget performance.  Madam Speaker, we spend a lot of time involving all stakeholders in the process of budgeting.  I remember very well last year, the Uganda Revenue Authority paying bonuses to its staff because they had performed above target.  But when it comes to disbursement of funds, everybody is crying, every Ministry is lamenting and that disheartens us, first of all, who involve and commit a lot of time and resource in the process of budgeting.  

Recently, the President of Uganda inferred on the possibility of making an inquisition in the Judiciary.  I would rather that before he does that, he should think of making an inquisition in the performance of Ministry of Finance.  When you look at all the non-performing projects, they are being supervised or administered under the Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry of Finance, apart from allocating resources, they are also struggling to get projects under Ministry of Finance so that they can directly supervise them.  

Madam Speaker, what is the problem?  What is the use of the Members of Parliament spending so much, debating and approving budgets and when it comes to disbursement the best the Minister can do is to come here and lament?  What is the use of the Minister then?  That is all I had to say on the performance of the budget on Ministry of Finance.  

On the issue of riots, hon. Members, I want you to appreciate one thing, that it seems this country is adopting violence as an accepted method of work.  It is becoming a very bad culture.  We are complaining here, when it comes to elections we are the same people who use violence; when it comes to adjudication by the Court, people mobilize and demonstrate on the streets and Police gives them permission.  It has been put in the Constitution of Uganda that when somebody abrogates the Constitution people can legitimately take up arms and fight.  But those lower organs have not been given a way out when somebody infringes on their rights, what do they do?  That is one thing we are not addressing.  

When you look at mob justice in the country, this is all a product of the violence that has been instituted and we are keeping quiet about it as if nothing is happening.  In schools, pupils are burning schools and no firm action has been taken.  These are the people who are growing up tomorrow and they will be students at the University.  They will grow up into the same culture and no firm action has been taken.

Secondly, there is a problem at the university; I do not know whether it is still there, but at least when I was still there as a student leader - I was a Guild President at Makerere University - even recently I had an opportunity to meet the Chancellor in his office, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, and we had an interaction on how best the public relations of the University students and University Administration contact with the students can be improved so that we can get early warning signs.  

One of the biggest problems at the University is that the administrators of the University think those students are children, that they would constrict them like they would treat Primary Schools.  They are never listened to when they have an issue they must raise.  Yet when they are resisted, given their age also, they may quickly resort to the use of violence; and besides that to them they know that when they use violence actually they get what they want because violence works.  When the other time the non-residents were not being paid money when money was seated in Makerere, they used violence and in two days they received the money.

The university students of Makerere University Business School, they also wanted humps to be erected.  When there were no humps and a few accidents they demonstrated and striked, and the following day the humps were constructed.  When you look at Makerere University, all the issues that the students have succeeded into acquiring they have done so through striking, and to them strikes have been treated, tested and tried and confirmed that actually it yields results –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  Even increment of salary is now based on who strikes; if you look at people who have been attended to, it is through strikes.

MR DOMBO: Under the circumstances, we need to strengthen our institutions, we must also build – I will give you an example, Madam Speaker, when I was Guild President of Makerere University, they could hijack students whenever taxis dropped them either near Wandegeya gate or at the Main Campus gate, and I had an opportunity to go to Dar es Salaam University.  At Dar es Salaam University, I discovered that actually there is a road through the university and the taxis and buses can take students up to their Halls of residence.  

When I came back to Makerere University, I made an application asking why taxis from Makerere University, which go to Makerere university and Wandegeya, could not be destined to enter Makerere University.  Madam Speaker, it was a tug of war and I remember the then Dean of Students, Mr Kihuguru, told me that in the past there was a bus service and it was entering the university and no student was using it.  I said, “let us give it a trial”.  They allocated us near the Guild Canteen, that taxis would be packing there.  For purposes of accepting them to enter I accepted.  But when they finally entered, I told the taxis that you park where you feel most convenient and the thing worked, and up to now should you touch that tax service there will be a real demonstration.

So, those students down there have ideas, they have brains, but they are not listened to; and when they raise problems people look at them as if they are children.  Madam Speaker, it is –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way.  What hon. Dombo is talking about is so valid that in my own constituency, Lubaga South, I had to go on a hunger strike before the roads in Lubaga were constructed.  So, today you must come out in the open, demonstrate your way so that action takes place.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope you are not going to introduce that culture in Parliament-  (Laughter)  

MS TIPERU:  I just wanted to inform my colleague, when he says that the university students seem to be understood more when they use strikes, that in this particular case, I did consult the Students’ Guild and even the administration.  I was convinced that there are actually bigger problems within the university, but they have tried to sort a large chunk of those problems through dialogue.  But in this specific regard, on the issue of humps, they had failed, because the administration was claiming that it is not within their jurisdiction; Kampala City Council says it is a highway, it is supposed to be handled by Government.  So, in brief I just wanted you to know that dialogue has also been used to achieve success in the University.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the hon. Members for giving the information.  But it is the same Kampala City Council, which constructed humps at Makerere University Business School in Nakawa after another strike, and they yielded and conceded and they constructed them; and you wait, now that Makerere University went on strike you are going to see humps at Makerere University.  Now, under what circumstances will you want to prevent the students from striking when it has demonstrated that it can yield the results?

Madam Speaker, as I end I want to thank the Minister of Education because most of the reports, which have been coming about strikes in Makerere University, they have been talking about political intervention, political influence, which showed that there was a lot of something amiss.  For the time I was a Guild President in Makerere University, no single political organization tried to influence me yet the reports that were going outside were saying political influence because nobody has been going on the ground to find out what the students are saying.  But in most cases people write reports in the interest of those to whom the reports are written, and this has never addressed the problem.

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks I want to call on the University Administration and the people in charge of education in this country, that we need a comprehensive approach by the entire nation to show that civilized methods of work are supreme.  But if we tend to create an impression that oppressive and violent methods of work are an accepted means of action then we shall not complain when the students equally adopt them as a method of work. I want to thank you.

5.20
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Mine is just a short one.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister and his staff for this beautiful report.  It was technical, but there are a few areas I would like the Minister to explain.  If you look at page 4, he tells us that the overall budget for National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs) was UShs 2.95 billion; in the end, in the budget, we gave him Uganda shillings 1.6 billion.  Now, I would like to ask the hon. Minister, if Government gave you UShs1.6 billion and yet you had requested for UShs 2.9 billion, how come you went ahead and recruited teachers using your original figures.  You did not know that this would cause a problem in your institutions, because you could not have recruited new teachers without looking at the budget that had been given to you?  
  
Secondly, if you look at page 5 also for Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs), you had initially budgeted for UShs 9.94 billion and according to you, you were only given U Shs 6.5 billion; that means certainly you had a deficit of Uganda shillings 3.44 billion.  Now, if you have been given less by Uganda shillings 3.44 billion, why do you go and recruit students when you know you have no money to feed and train these students?  So in my opinion, Madam Speaker, there is a technical problem the way they handle budgets.  

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am reading verbatim from the submission of the Ministry of Education to the Budget Committee and this is in relation to the National Teachers’ Colleges, they were 10: Kaliro, Nagongera, Kabale, Unyama, Mubende and Muni; six plus the four, which were going to be returned to the founders.   I am reading verbatim; “Funds were allocated for 10 National Teachers’ Colleges because the total withdrawal of Government grant-aiding -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you start with the date of the submission?  Is it dated?  

MS KIRASO: The date of the submission; I will get the date, Madam Speaker, but I extracted this from the submission which was made by the Ministry to the Budget Committee for this financial year.  When I read you will know that it is for this financial year.  “That the withdrawal of Government grant-aiding will take effect in June 2005/2006 for those taking two-year courses, and 2006/2007 for three-year courses, for example, business education.  The total amount allocated to 10 National Teachers Colleges, not six but 10 National Teachers Colleges in 2004/2005 was as follows.  The total amount allocate 10 National Teachers Colleges in Financial Year 2004/2005 was as follows: 

a) Capitation Grant, U Shs 1,102,133,000
b) National Teachers’ Colleges individual training/examination fee/teaching practice allowance is UShs 505,869,000.  The total allocation to National Teachers’ Colleges added together therefore comes to UShs 1,606,002,000, giving a unit cost of UShs 708 per student per day.” I thank you.

MR SABIITI: So the issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is, there is a problem in the Ministry of Education because the figures given to the Budget Committee, given to this Parliament were to the effect that the amount of money required was UShs 1.6 billion.  In this report, the hon. Minister is using figures, which are outside the budgeted figures.  This means in itself that they have more students than we budgeted for, and what would you have expected?  You should have expected to run short of money, administratively that is unacceptable and certainly the Principals, the Permanent Secretary and the Minister should take responsibility.

DR NKUUHE: In addition to that, this is a circular from the Ministry of Education to all Principals, Primary Teachers’ Colleges.  It is dated 24 October, drafted 21st, probably signed 22nd or 23rd, and it is saying, “With effect from 25th October, all the College students should be sent out to Primary Schools near their homes to carry out child study and practice and counselling and so forth.”  In other words, they should go home; the fact that they are going to schools near their homes I think is just a decoy.  But the other disturbing thing is that, they give us a list of – this Ministry is amazing - they tell you, Community Polytechnic, Gombe is in Kitgum, Kihihi is in Kampala, Nakawa is in Kabale, Obyeni is in Kanungu and so forth- (Laughter)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, my point was supposed to be very short, but with this information the issue I would like Parliament to take seriously is, surely, Mr minister, why do you recruit more students when you know there are no funds in both the National Teachers’ Colleges and Primary Teachers’ Colleges?  Now, you cannot again come on this Floor of Parliament and try to deceive the country.  If you look at page 5 -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Why I have stood up for this clarification is that hon. Sabiiti is confusing two things.  Hon. Kiraso has just read that the unit cost by the time of submitting was UShs708.  So, the number of students did not increase, but he just increased the unit cost to enable him consume all the amount, 50 per cent allocated.  So, correct your discussion.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, if you look at page 4 the Minister said, “The required Capitation Grant budget for National Teachers’ Colleges is UShs 2.95 billion a year,” and then he continues to say, “The available budget for the financial year 2004/2005 is U Shs 1.6 billion.”  What does that mean?  That is the money we gave the Ministry of Education.  In fact what you have said reinforces my argument.  

The minister went further instead of using Shs 708, he used Shs 1,300. That means actually they needed even much more money. The point I am trying to put across is, it appears there is no right connection between the colleges, the ministry headquarters and the minister himself. They must first clean their house and use the available funds to run these institutions and this is why if you look at page 5 he says, “It should be appreciated that PTCs did not close but sent the student teachers for child study in fulfilment of the new training requirement for the award of Grade 111 Teachers’ Certificate.”  

Now, Madam Speaker, he should have told us the truth that actually there was no money, and in order to save the name of the ministry they said, “Go to your areas and start learning the child study.” But how do you learn child study? Even child study is taught, you do not just go to your village and sit there, these students you have sent need allowances. There is no money for even these students who have gone there.  

So, Madam Speaker, with the respect I have for the honourable Minister and he knows it, I would have expected a more technical report to this Parliament clearly identifying the problems of your ministry, and you give them to this Parliament to help you in the next budget or to get supplementaries. But you can see, it is the mismanagement within your ministry that causes all these problems.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would request the Leader of Government Business in this House to look at certain institutions and identify them as priority institutions, particularly institutions such as education institutions, teachers’ colleges and whatever. Also, look at who mans these institutions, the teachers and the doctors. If you look at all the problems we have in Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health, it is because these two sectors, other than the external funding which comes in and takes care of certain areas, we as a country we have not come in to help our teachers, to help our doctors and nurses. The management of these particular institutions, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education continue to have a problem. 

With this, Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for his report, but I urge him to go back and talk to his technical people to make sure that whenever they are presenting a report like this one, they should be more organized and they should adhere to the funds allocated to that ministry. I thank you very much.

5.13
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During this period that we are in Parliament, we are witnessing the decline of education in this country and we are not shouting out sufficiently to prevent what is going on. The thought of UPE was an excellent plan, but UPE is being responsible for the lowering of the education standards in this country. In my area on the average in primary one we have about 100 pupils, by the time we reach primary seven they are only on the average about 30 students in every class. There is a very high dropout rate, which was not addressed in the planning of education in this country. The teacher-student ratio remains high and that is what concerns us now. We are closing NTCs, we are closing PTCs without giving sufficient reasons. The budget was allocated, but why are we closing these institutions?  

One of the honourable members of Parliament from Mulanda has just pointed out that the teachers’ training college in his area was built, land was allocated, but we went ahead and closed it and yet we were planning to provide pre-primary education.  Where are we going to get the teachers if we are closing the institutions where the teachers are trained? That is simple, honourable Minister, where are we going to get the teachers if we are closing the institutions that produce the teachers?

I was in a country where if you miss a day of school, usually it is due to snow in the winter, that day has got to be made up. These teachers in training have missed months, are we going to turn out good teachers at the end who have missed in their training more than a month? Are we going to make up for those days, which they have missed in their training?  

Uganda used to be a place where everybody in Africa looked up to as far as education standards are concerned. We had Sudanese students in a high school where I went to, Nabumali High School; we had students from Kenya, some leaders in these countries went to schools in this country, and university obviously in this country. But we are looking at universities crumbling; we are looking at -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Dr Mallinga, for giving way. The small bit of information, which I want to bring to your attention, honourable members, is that education as articulated by hon. Mallinga at that time was very good and progressive because of a federal arrangement. 

DR MALLINGA: That could be partly true. The Ssekabaka of Buganda, Sir Edward Muteesa, was very active at Makerere University. In fact, that land caused the Kabaka problems when he allocated land to build a university. Some of the Bataka in this area of Buganda rioted and the Kattikkiro was killed at Nakulabye - Mr Nsibirwa was shot because he gave away land. So, people have given away their lives for the purpose of education in this country and yet this Government, due to poor planning, is destroying the education of this country -(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, honourable Member, for giving way. Before I give my information to you, I would like to mention that the report is actually confusing us more. Actually I would prefer the report to be given back to the minister to go and review it and he presents it again to this House.  

My colleague, the information I would like to give you is that I am a Member of the Social Services Committee. During the closure of these NTCs, there was no proper information given to us, actually they are stating that they are going ahead closing Arts colleges. We went ahead and informed the ministry people that some other NTCs have private students, who would pay to earn their knowledge.  But the statement was that we have to close down those NTCs and zone them. 

What is confusing me here is my colleague - I want the minister to listen - really after that explanation and after failing to give us reasons why they were closing these NTCs, on page 3 there is a very touching statement. If you go to line 4 the statement is, “The non-wage recurrent item for Vote 013 attracted other competing demands like sub-county bursary schemes for secondary Schools.”  If you go ahead, it explains that that is why the NTCs had to be closed. But the question is, when you were planning ahead to have the bursary sponsor for the sub-counties, did you not plan for it? Now you are stating here that it is eating into the NTCs budget, why? Honourable colleague, you can see the confusion. I thank you very much for that information.

DR MALLINGA: That is why I do not see people who are so enthusiastic about ekisanja when everything else is failing.  

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much. I just wanted to inform my colleague, who is saying that the standards in Uganda used to be good that it is true the standards used to be good, but even now they are not really bad because the research that has been carried out indicates that so many foreign students are coming into the country. We have Members of Parliament who are actually even managing schools, they can give you evidence. I am glad that your constituency is not very far from Busia. When you visit Busia, in the morning you see a very big influx of students from Kenya entering into Uganda, an indication that actually there is something good in Uganda compared to the neighbouring countries. I thank you.  (Applause)

DR MALLINGA: I think the honourable Member of Parliament is confusing the availability of education and the standards of education.  (Laughter).  What is happening in the Busia area, in Western Kenya there are very few schools and previously the Government, which was in power, built a lot of primary schools on Uganda side, that is why these students still come to Uganda to seek education.  

We have been informed, I hope the honourable Minister will comment on it, that because of the UPE schools and the low standards in the rural areas, there has been pressure to lower the examination standards in order to accommodate the low standards –(Interruption) 

MS TIPERU: Is hon. Dr Mallinga, one of the doctors I really respect, a former soldier in order to say that I am confusing availability of education with standards whereas we actually have both in the country? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the fact that there are many primary, secondary and university children from the neighbouring countries indicates that we are really still up there, we are first class. (Applause).

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much for your ruling, Madam Speaker. But as I pointed out, I want the hon. Minister of Education to inform the House, has there been pressure to low the examination standards in the country to accommodate the low standards of education in the rural areas? We came from rural areas, but we were able to get an excellent education because of the policies of the Government of that time and the good teacher-student ratio –(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION)(Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know my minister will come and make responses, but I would like to tell the honourable Member on the Floor that there is no pressure, and indeed as a matter of principle, we cannot polarize the education system in one single country; one exam or standard for urban and another standard for rural. That will be really very unfortunate, and I will urge that whoever is thinking about that pressure should not do it because in future we cannot say, “This doctor was trained in the rural, therefore took a lesser pressing course than the one in the urban.” First of all, I do not know who has put that pressure. 

Secondly, I would like to say that it should not arise because we shall be destroying this country. What we are trying to do is to improve the standards uniformly throughout the country to make equal opportunities for all our children. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

DR MALLINGA: I am trying to wind up. Let me say something about Makerere University and the control of riots in this country. First of all, Makerere University is a respectable university. I was a student representative in the planning process in 1968 and at that time we were convinced that Makerere University needed to be spread out. At that time, we were only 1,000 students in Makerere University and the plan was to create colleges so that the education in the country would remain standard and it would be available all over the country. But the mistake we are making is creating several universities all over the country, whose standards are questionable, instead of creating colleges out of Makerere University. 

Secondly, the university –(Dr Nsaba rose_)- I think you will have to give me more time because of the information.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Dr Mallinga, knowing that a very good percentage of our colleagues in this House are at Makerere University, to indicate that standards at Makerere are of a low nature? Is that really giving respect to our Members who are striving to improve their lives? Is it in order that hon. Mallinga should be making that point of indicating that Makerere University and other universities have low standards when a good percentage of our colleagues in this House are in those institutions? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I do not think that the quality of education in this country has yet been put at issue negatively. Hon. Munyira yesterday said that we should just take a university to the east and spread it out. I think she is right. The quality of education in this country is really very high. Please do not bring it down otherwise those foreigners will stop coming here. Please wind up.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to wind up. The handling of riots in this country has a lot to be desired. There is no need for a policeman to go out with a gun to control a university student; they should go out with sticks and shields. Watch what happens in Korea. There are continuous student demonstrations in Korea but they go just with shields, they stop the students, and on very rare occasion if the student is throwing stones, then they will hit him on the back with a stick. But in this country we are using bullets, whether rubber bullets or what kind of bullets, they are not justified. 

And at Makerere we need to re-plan the university, introduce streets. These humps are not going to improve anything, you must plan Makerere as a university town, you must re-plan the streets.  There should be no vehicles going through Wandegeya, there should be no vehicles going through Sir Apollo Kagwa road, there should be no vehicles driving at a fast speed between Nakulabye and Bwaise. The university needs to be re-planned and there should be a street going through the middle of the university. That is what a university town should look like.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification is in regard to the presentation of hon. Mallinga. One, this land where actually these accidents are so common along Wandegeya road between Makerere University and Makerere University teaching hospital which is Mulago Hospital, is known to be a land reserve for Makerere University or it has been given away?  

Then another clarification regards the disparities between the quality of education between the rural and urban, which the honourable Minister mentioned.  Honourable Minister, a principle has been adopted in this affirmative action to address the disparities between female and male education ratios, so can the same principle not be applied to address the disparities between the rural and urban intake within these higher institutions of learning? Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: I am just going to summarize, Madam Speaker. I have said it before, I will repeat it; those who have got ears to listen, please listen.  The problems we have with the budget is the military expenditure. No matter what we do, money in this country is being siphoned into sustaining the military. We have to reduce our military expenditure before we start having problems with the budget. As long as the military expenditure is high, we cannot sustain five divisions in this country; the economy is just not able to sustain five divisions. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR ALINTUMA: Point of order, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has sat down; he has finished.

MR ALINTUMA: Yes, but still I would like it to be put on record, Madam Speaker. Is it in order –(Interruption)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has gone.

5.32
MRS BETTY UDONGO PACUTO (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Before I make my submission, I want to just make one comment. Without security we cannot talk about development. I hope my colleague is hearing, without security we cannot talk about development and we cannot talk about this education that we are talking about.

DR MALLINGA: In the 1970s, we had only two brigades in this country and that was sufficient to give security to this country, you do not need any more than that.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a honourable Member to confuse the House? When you have ten people, you need only ten seats for them to get seated. But when you have two million people, you equally need two million seats. Is he in order to compare the population of six million that it needed two brigades and, therefore, 25 million today they need two brigades?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order.

DR MALLINGA: The purpose of the Army is to defend the borders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know you are a former soldier, but let us leave that matter now.

MS PACUTHO: Thank you very much. Well, thank you for the information and I think you have been appropriately answered. We still need security to be able to have a good education in this country.  

Madam Speaker, I am concerned, without appropriate knowledge and technology, all this talk about development, poverty eradication is just a dream; without well-qualified teachers and the number, it is just a dream. It is a pity that there are professors in this Parliament, professors in the making, there are chancellors or there is one chancellor, but it looks like education is not a priority. Because if we really value education and we really mean what we say about the development of this country, about industrialisation, about private sector-led growth, then we should take the issue of teacher training as a number one priority.  (Applause)

Without the finances we cannot talk about training of these teachers. In other countries, it is a priority of government. Government takes it upon itself to even go to those institutions, give them grants outside the other budgets to ensure that they train teachers that would bring a difference in their educational system. I do not know whether we still have education as a priority in this country.

The minister talked of some proposals that he has made on page 9. I would like him to help me, what strategy has he put in place to ensure that they will get their 100 per cent release he is talking about? I do not know how he is going to influence the Ministry of Finance to make this money available when the figures that are passed in the budget are different from the figures that he presented to us, which show there is a shortfall.  So, I will need -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. I would like to give you information that actually the money he demanded for as read by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was released. But the problem is that the ministry spent much more than was required to spend, and they got into a problem and they had only to get out of the problem by sending these people away.  But otherwise, the money as requested for in the budget was released.

MS KIRASO: For purposes of being realistic, can you imagine if all the ministries asked for 100 per cent release of their funds? There is a system, which is used depending on how this revenue is collected every month. So, if a ministry cannot have its organized way of utilization of these funds, which are being released, this situation is going definitely to arise. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, I said each person has three minutes.

MS PACUTHO: Okay, let me finish. Well, it is a pity that they had to send those teachers home. I believe as an educator, there is a syllabus that is always followed. So, if these teachers are not able to stay in the school up to the point when they finish the syllabus, what will we say about the quality of teachers we produce at the end? How are we going to make up for these losses? Without these teachers, all we are talking about is a dream. So, I would like the Minister of Education to really come out clearly and convince some of us that education is a priority in this country. 

When he talks about trying to get money from the Poverty Alleviation Funds (PAF), I see education is a key to poverty eradication. Without education we are not going to develop. But if we are not taking education as a priority, we are just resounding gongs nothing will be seen. Thank you.

5.38
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the ministerial statement. However, I would like to quote what hon. Kiraso Beatrice informed the House yesterday, that even the Ministry of Finance does not have the powers to under-release any portion of the approved budget to any ministry or department. However, our budget is based on Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP). 

When you look at page 3, the Minister of Education is actually in agreement with the Ministry of Finance that the National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs), the Teacher Training Colleges (TTCs), these business institutions, their budgeting is not under Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). I want to challenge him on that because when you consider the four pillars of PEAP and analyse them, they are in agreement and they actually confirm that the whole of the Education Ministry is actually under PEAP.

When you consider the first pillar, which is to promote economic growth and statutory formation, one of the major components is to modernize agriculture, and there is no way you will modernize agriculture when you do not have extension workers, who are supposed to come from agricultural colleges. So really, does the Government have the will to eradicate poverty?

When you go on the second pillar, which is good governance and security, Madam Speaker, the priority has been given to security, which is very good. But even if you spend a lot of money on security when people are moving naked, it does not make sense. Education, health and agriculture are also components within that second pillar. So, this Government should have a will to eradicate poverty if really they are committed to that.

When you go to a third pillar of PEAP, it is to promote actions, which increase the ability of the poor to earn income with the intention of eradicating poverty. And one of the key components is vocational training such that this country can create job makers not job seekers; and you only get these ones from the technical institutions, which are under-funded.

When you go on the fourth pillar, which is implementing public action, which improves the quality of life of the poor - and by the way one of the components is still education (UPE), health services, and that is why even this component of having health centres in every sub-county was included. But now I am not surprised because there is one scholar who actually told me that he actually sympathises with the policy makers because the legislators have a will but the Executive does not have the will. That is why in most sub-counties the theatres, which were built there, have barefooted doctors.

MR EKANYA: I would like to inform my colleague that whereas the legislators have a will, sometimes the Executive have a will too, but they have accepted to behave like some of the collaborators during the colonial time. So, they collaborate and accept donor conditionality without taking the situation on the ground first. So, when the donor tells them that technical schools, secondary school are not a priority and should not be part of PAF, they do accept. So, while we move on the Executive, let us also look at the donor conditions that sometimes are forced on our Government.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you for that information.  Madam Speaker, I was informing you that one of the scholars actually challenged me that these health centres, which are being built in counties, constituencies, they have doctors who are barefooted and I actually came to prove this because - I will give you an example of Buvuma, and I even raised it here. There are two sub-counties whereby Government spent over Shs 120 million to put up health centres. These health centres were commissioned, you just see the buildings but there is just one nurse. If she falls sick, the whole building is locked.  When I brought it on the Floor they said, “You see, they are training them” but where is the will to train them when all these colleges cannot be funded?  

By the way, a lot of money has been put in infrastructure. There is need to train the personnel and that is why it has been added to be the fifth pillar on PEAP. So, I urge the Executive to have the commitment to implement, otherwise some of us who come from rural constituencies are at a loss. And when you talk, people can mistake you to be anti- government, but there is no way you can support when people are dying, when people are suffering. 

I will give you a very good quotation. Most of the primary schools I have in Buvuma, have not more than five teachers. Talk about the secondary schools, the honourable Minister is aware. I even brought a petition, but even the Committee Members by the way refused to go to Buvuma, they said they cannot go to Buvuma. Imagine such a situation! A secondary school has five teachers, government-funded and the only secondary school in Buvuma with five teachers. I was having hope that maybe if these teachers graduate and they post them there, maybe they would serve, but they cannot also be funded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Member, I seem to recollect that we, in the budget, gave some money for hardship areas and the Islands were part of them. We approved additional funding for hardship areas. So, unless the teachers have not gone or something, I know that we did it because I was in charge of that budget.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to confirm to this House that it is true this august House is approving money but it does not reach there. The hardship allowance has never reached Buvuma. If anybody wants to challenge me, let him table it next week or Friday. I do not have teachers, let alone health centres.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I hope the minister will address it because I know that we handled it in the budget. Please address it.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to summarize by saying that the Leader of Government Business must caution the Ministry of Finance. We are putting a lot of blame on the Ministry of Education, but I can sympathize with them because they are under-funded. I want also to advise him from today onwards to take it a point that education in totality, all its funds are supposed to be under PAF. This business of classifying Vote X, Vote Y to be unprotected is uncalled for and should be condemned because the moment it goes like that, local students will not develop. 

You see very many first grades, but how many are from Buvuma?  The university is full, but how many are from Buvuma? You cannot say that all the people from the Islands are not intelligent. They are intelligent, but Uganda does not - by the way I have a problem, let me mention it. Mukono is one of the model districts and we happen to fall under Mukono District. So, when you talk of all this, people are surprised because the best student comes from Mukono, everything comes from Mukono. But Buvuma Islands!  Maybe, I have never gone to Karamoja, but from what I hear it is another Karamoja in the central.

5.45
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to this report and according to what we know, on the 12th of November, a second year student, Tumukunde Edgar died; and normally when parents or friends send someone to school, it is an investment. You send your child hoping that once being educated that person will become successful and in our traditional way, you also hope that this person will be more capable of supporting others. Now, what has happened, which is actually through the mistake or the negligence of the authorities, the boy has died. So, those who had invested in the boy two years have lost. 

I think at this point, in good faith, to show that we have really made a mistake as a Government that has caused the death of this boy, the money that had already been paid by this boy should be refunded by the Ministry of Education to whoever has been paying other than just buying the coffin and transporting the body. We should pay back that money so that they can invest it in someone else.  It should be refunded because the student, through this terrible mistake, has not reached the primary goal. That is the proposal I have to the Ministry of Education, and thank God our hon. Chancellor is in charge of most of the Government business. So, I hope that this proposal can be looked into and then they call up the parents of this deceased person to get this refund and give it to someone else, or at least to set up a fund –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, the submission by the honourable Member is quite serious and very intriguing. We have been informed that the boy was killed by a driver from Ministry of Works.  Secondly, the matter is in a court of law.  Until it is disposed from that court, then we shall actually know who is in the wrong, and I suppose the driver or whoever was in control of the vehicle at that time was not from the Ministry of Education, he was from the Ministry of Works. So, I would like to seek clarification from the Member on the Floor, why it should be the Ministry of Education and not the Ministry of Works to pay compensation? Two, while I sympathize with the family and I do send my condolences to them for this terrible loss, I would like also to find from the Member holding the Floor under which budget this compensation is going to be made.  

MR MIKE SEBALU: I would like to take it from where my colleague has left it, in terms of appreciating.  We definitely appreciate what befell that student, that very unfortunate incident and the death that occurred thereafter. But if we are to pursue the line my colleague is proposing and you set a precedent, then how are such issues supposed to be handled thereafter because we have heard so many accidents in this country, we have had so many accidents all over the place, but there are normal channels through which such matters are handled.

But if you are to go into compensation the way he is proposing - because we have the third party insurance, which is also supposed to cater for such. But in this case, this is a Government vehicle, which is not covered under third party and the Attorney General is supposed to compensate. If someone is to claim then it is the Office of the Attorney General, which is supposed to handle and process such compensation. That is normal procedure, which is followed in terms of matters to do with accidents, which is covered by third party arrangement.  

So, if he is going to tell the Ministry of Education to compensate, then that will contravene the established procedure of how such a person is supposed to be compensated because third party insurance is supposed to cater for that in case the vehicle that caused the accident is a private one. And in case it is a Government one, then there are supposed to pursue their interests through the Attorney General and compensation is made. I am wondering whether my colleague could benefit from that information and reconsider his line of argument.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also, honourable members, I think you should avoid making really difficult propositions. Now, in that particular incident we had yesterday, that there were ordinary civilian Ugandans whose car windscreens were smashed. What are you going to do about those windscreens, is Government going to buy them? The ordinary people who sell telephone cards, which were pinched, what are you going to do to them? Do not make proposals, which are really difficult to manage.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague, for giving way. This morning actually, I happened to pass via Owino market and also some parts of Kikuubo. I want to inform this august House that a number of women talked to me and their request is that, since Government has been encouraging people to invest, the population of Uganda right from the traditional times has really taken the issue of investing in children as a very serious investment. 

As we are moving into this period of transition, there is need for people to be told about the need for peaceful demonstrations and they should also be educated on the procedures on peaceful demonstration. Now, in the event the demonstration turns violent, they requested that Parliament pronounces itself that actually no more bullets should ever be used on these students because research has shown that in every demonstration it is only the students who are killed. The students have never killed anybody.  

So, bearing that in mind, tear gas is okay but bullets they do not want because they do not want even to be reminded of the times in Kampala when you would hear a gunshot in point X or Y. People want to relax, do their business and everything in the city should go on as required. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what do they say about the family of Alice Murungi, the lady who died in that – is anybody thinking about her? So, that is why I am saying do not make difficult propositions. Let us look at this matter soberly and make proposals, which are really feasible.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, by making this proposal, I did not want to make it difficult for the Ministry of Education. I just wanted to bring one point across, that investing in education means that someone expects some return in the end. For me my nine-year old son, if he goes to school I would be completely confused if he died and there is no one that is taking care, that is watching out to see that I am compensated for the investment I am putting in that child.

When hon. Sebalu Mike and hon. John Eresu make the clarifications that we should not pin the Ministry of Education, I am sorry if I mentioned the Ministry of Education alone and that is why I talked of Government. When I talk of Government, I do not necessarily mean that the Government should go to the public funds and look for the money. But they can use that state machinery to pin either the insurance that are supposed to cover these people so that these parents are able to get something back out of the lost investment. That is what I wanted to mean –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I want to give information regarding compensating the lost comrade. We are all aware that this Parliament has been debating to come up with a mechanism to compensate for the lost soldiers in the struggle.  If Parliament is debating to compensate for the lives of the lost soldiers, I do not see any problem why the same Parliament cannot debate to compensate for the parents, moreover the peasant parents of this lost son? So, I think we need to be fair.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I have barely spoken for a minute, that one I hope is on record, but the information and clarifications that have come up have also been very useful. So, I am going to make two more points and then stop there.  

There is something that is going on, which I am very sure the Chancellor now, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, probably is not aware of. Already inside the institutions of higher learning there is a lot of anger that is boiling. What we are seeing now is just a little bit of that kind of burning air. For example, why on earth would I finish my education and it takes me to bribe someone at the registrar’s office to get my credits so that I can look for a job? People are angry that they have to bribe people inside the institutions to get what they are supposed to be given. So, already the administration inside –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. That is a very serious statement and I always act on evidence.  So, really if there are such cases I want hard evidence and then the criminals with be handled forthwith. You know, there have been cases of unfair practices, people have appealed to me and I have worked of course through the Ministry of Education and Sports, and to the best of my knowledge there have been delays but things are on the mend. So, I want accurate information and hard evidence. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we please concentrate on the funding of those institutions because that is the information requested for? I do not know whether you asked the minister to tell you about bribes in the faculty.  Let us concentrate on the things we asked him to bring, the funding of the institutions and the strike, please.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, we are going to have a problem if we attempt to treat the symptoms other than looking for the causes –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, earlier I informed you that you and your committees have authority to summon the ministers and talk these matters with them. How are we going to solve the bribe matter now? 

MR ALINTUMA: Allow me to come to the last point, Madam Speaker. If you think the symptoms can continue and we treat the symptoms other than looking for the causes, because obviously you can see I have no gain in letting this House know that if you want your credits, for example, in Makerere University, it can even take you a whole year after completing your exams and each time you go there they do not give them to you until you cough some money. This is the –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alintuma Nsambu, I do not know whether you are on the Committee of Social Services. Can you arrange a session and invite the minister and all these ministers and grill him on why people do not get their transcripts? Let that be a full session and you report to this House.

MR ALINTUMA: Finally, Madam Speaker, when we go back to the Ministry of Education, as I mentioned on a point of information yesterday that I have had some intensive work that I have attempted to do with the Ministry of Education mainly in the computer technology. I have discovered all along that the ministers there are really very nice people and good-hearted people. The only problem is they found - and I think it is even the same in many other ministries - strong structures there that tie their hands so tight that they can hardly make decisions of their own. Even when they make decisions, eventually they are overturned by the so-called technocrats; they give instructions, “Please have that worked on” the next day they say, “Technically that is not possible.”

So, I highly doubt that the minister, given the enormous work he has to do, had time to put together this report that is questionable in many corners. It was done by the so-called technocrats; and it is so painful to see ourselves pinning the ministers here. It is so painful that they do their dirty or good job in the background and then at the end of the day they forward these poor men and women to come here and face fire. The truth is, as we work something out for the Ministry of Education, we have also to check out the performance and the rigidity and the colonial-styled type of work that the so-called technicians are doing for the ministers because -(Interruption)

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member is making a lot serious allegations about highly trained technocrats in the Ministry of Education.  They are not just technicians, but highly trained technocrats who cannot come here and defend themselves. He is also suggesting that the Minister of Education and his team, our colleagues here, are not efficient enough to realize the problems that are in the Ministry of Education, suggesting that they are weak.  

Is the honourable Member in order to make such serious allegations about these high-ranking technocrats in the Ministry of Education, who cannot defend themselves here; and even to suggest that the Minister of Education and his colleagues in Parliament are too weak to guide the ministry?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, actually that was a serious indictment on the ministers in the Ministry of Education, that they are controlled by people who are too powerful. It is a very serious indictment and I think you are out of order.

Hon. Alintuma Nsambu, why I have been asking you to arrange with the Social Services Committee to have a session with these people, the university people you are talking about are also not in this House.  All these people you can assemble in the Social Services Committee as is authorized by the Constitution, then they speak to you there and defend themselves. But you are hammering them, there is nothing I can do, you are continuing to hammer them, they cannot speak. So, please arrange, hon. Hyuha and her team, you summon the four ministers, you summon the university people and their staff, you summon whoever you want and grill them even for one week. We shall give you the opportunity here.

MR ALINTUMA: I am concluding now in a second –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, honourable members, I am surprised that among the few Members of Parliament who have never attempted to come and share with us is, hon. Alintuma Nsambu, because most of the issues you are raising here, we have intensively debated them in our Committee on Social Services and we have even submitted a report to this august House. The issues you are raising about Makerere University, over two or three times we have debated them.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Chairperson of Social Services Committee and the Secretary General of my most powerful NRM/O of which I am a member now of foreign affairs, in order to say that I should go to the Social Services Committee knowing that I am not a Member of Social Services Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alintuma Nsambu, actually the Chairperson is really inviting you that if you have pressing matters in her sector on education, health, gender, labour and community affairs please feel free join their committee so that you can take part in what they are doing. She really likes you, that is why she is saying this.  

MR ALINTUMA: I withdraw any mischief now. I am closing now, Madam Speaker. The closing statement I wanted to make is that, the Ministry of Finance is not only bad to the Ministry of Education. I think the proposal we can come up with after we finish our deliberations is simple. Ministry of Finance has to honour the Prime Minister of Uganda by making sure that all his ministries can function with enough resources. Thank you very much.

6.10
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will just confine myself on two points. The first point is on page 4 where the minister tells us that the Teacher Training Colleges (TTCs) could not, therefore, receive compensatory re-allocations within the financial year 2004/05 adjusting ceiling for the Vote. Now, what are we going to do with the teaching staff, the non-teaching staff and also the buildings? We have buildings in Nazigo, which was a TTC and we do not know what do with them. People are still there waiting for their salaries for their compensation, but this one tells me that there is no hope, whereas I have been trying to calm them down to say that something is going to be done.  

Secondly, the teaching profession is the most honourable profession there is, and if we close these NTCs and TTCs and whatever, really how are we going to carry on with the UPE? I got a letter written in English, Madam Speaker, from a headmaster of a school. The kind of English that was written in that letter was horrible. That means that we still need our teachers to be properly trained. Madam Speaker, all the other points have been said. Maybe I want to correct, we left Mukono District, we are Kayunga District; so Ahmed Seguya is in Kayunga District not in Mukono District.

Another thing, I want to talk about very briefly on is the plight of the children who were doing their exams in the nearby schools; there was the Caltec Academy and Makerere College School. I just met some students who told me that they were very perturbed by the rioting and canisters of teargas falling in their classrooms. Are these people going to be considered when the results come because they were very perturbed?

Another point, Madam Speaker, is on the 11 hours that it took - I think it is page 14 - 11 hours that were taken of confrontation. I think that was really unfair. The Police were armed, the students were not armed, the confrontation started from 9.00 O’clock up to 8.00 p.m. what was happening to the law enforcement authorities, where were they? Even the Makerere administration surely to show that these 11 hours there were people exchanging, those who were armed and the others were not armed. I feel that the Makerere campus is getting too small and it is handling adolescents, and adolescence is a very delicate age. I am sorry that I am talking when the Chancellor is not around, but I feel that the administration should be strengthened. There should be a lot of listening, a lot of exchanging between the administration, between Government -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a statement made by the honourable Member holding the Floor, which I think if she can clarify it more, it will give us more views of what she is intending to deliver to us.  You are saying the strike took 11 hours, the Police were armed, the students of course were not armed. According to you, it would not have taken that long. You wanted the Police to use their guns, you wanted the Police to be off and we use other reinforcements that were not armed? I want to get the point clearly.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, I meant exactly that. I meant that there should have been at least teargas to disperse the crowd because a lot of other things resulted. There was looting, there was a lot of people who got hurt especially this lady who was a mature student who died because there was nobody who was controlling - I was calling upon the law enforcement officers to have taken interest in that. I think I will not go further there.

MR ARAALI: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. I think the honourable Member is making a very important point because I live in Makerere Kikoni and it was around 1.00 O’clock when I was going home and I felt tears coming down from my eyes. I asked as to what was happening and I was told that it was teargas and that the students had gone on strike. But, the fundamental point you are making, honourable Member, should be noticed by even the Vice Chancellor that the university is getting too small. I think you remember that we were about 2000 during our time in 1970s, but now the number has gone over to 40,000 students. So, there is need for urgent care, for urgent attention of looking into security of these students.  

Madam Speaker, I remember very well at one of our committee meetings of Social Services Committee when I requested the administration of Makerere to see to it that the students have got security, but it is only now after so many accidents have taken place that they are putting humps on one of the spots. So, I would like to request the Vice Chancellor to advise the administration and Kampala City Council (KCC) to expedite security measures of the students. Not only humps, but also to look at these mushrooming halls of residence so that security is looked into because many -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Member, all the matters you are raising have been raised since yesterday by various Members; all of them are in the Hansard. So, please let us not go back to them.

MR ARAALI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was just informing the honourable Member –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No please, they are already in the Hansard. Yesterday many Members spoke, today they have spoken; please, what has been said do not go back to it, it is already in the Hansard. Are you through, Madam Sebagereka? 

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I thank the honourable Member for the information, but he seemed to have been contributing on my behalf. (Laughter). I am glad that the Leader of Government Business and Chancellor is here. I would like to request that these students be given as much attention, as much dialogue as possible. I thank you. 

6.20
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a victim of the confusion of Ministry of Education and partly Ministry of Finance because I am the one who raised actually the question that resulted into this report.  

Madam Speaker, I have a few issues to raise, the rest have been raised. But before that, there is one clarification I am seeking from the minister and this is the issue of contributions by Government per student in these institutions. In NTCs they are telling us they give a contribution of Shs 1,300 per student per day, in technical institutes, according to this report, they are saying each student is budgeted to get only Shs 708. I do not know the reason why there is that difference, Madam Speaker. 

Secondly, I want to disagree with the minister’s statement on page 6 under (4.2) paragraph 2 that, “It should be noted that these institutions hardly attract private-sponsored students, who could provide a fallback position.”  Madam Speaker, when I got this statement, I rung one of the heads of these institutions and this is St Joseph Technical Institute Kisubi. This is the information I have: Government-sponsored 228, private 299 the total is 527. And this raises a question now; according to Appendix 5 they are telling us Kisubi Technical Institute has 550 students. That means there is a difference of 32 who are excess according to the administration of Kisubi Technical Institute.  

Madam Speaker, I guess this issue of private-sponsored students is not only in Kisubi alone, although I did not have enough time to research on other institutions. The moment these students have chance in institutes like Rakai, like Butende, like Kitovu in Masaka they apply. So, I do not know why the minister comes up with a statement that actually these institutions do not attract private students.  

Thirdly –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Odonga Otto because he is disturbing me.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have been quietly listening to the sessions here and I have not made any comments. I do not know if it is a hobby for anyone failing to present to mention my name –(Laughter)- so, is he in order? I have not talked anything.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, you are protected from undue harassment.

MR MUTULUUZA: I hope you are protecting both of us, Madam Speaker. Lastly, I want to request Parliament to investigate because we might be having ghost students in these institutions. One example, I have given the difference between the number of students in St Joseph Technical Institute Kisubi and what is presented in the report here. So, I request that we investigate these institutes because we might be having ghost students maybe where this money, which would have been enough, is disappearing to.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you and the minister for this report, and I thank the Members for having reacted positively to this report and I hope our education sector will improve. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.24
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for this report, although it is late but better late than never. I understand the load that they had because this has been the busiest time for the Ministry of Education. Therefore, I want just to make a few remarks on primary teachers’ colleges. These are very –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we have listened and we have listened to a number of Members of Parliament contributing towards this important report. In light of that, I wanted to move a motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a report you requested for yourselves. I cannot anticipate what is in the minds of the Members.  Let us exhaust those who want to speak and we conclude the report. There may be matters, which have not yet come to light. I only ask that do not interrupt them with information and they should be brief.

MR ALONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief. These PTCs are very important institutions and must be supported fully by the Government and we really support them. I am happy to associate with one of the best in this country, that is St John Bosco TTC in Yumbe. Therefore, Government must do its budgetary obligations to release the required funds. It is unfortunate that the required funds are not only insufficient but also are not released in time. Some of these ministries really need funds in time, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Education. If you do not release the money during a particular season, then you would better not release it at all. If you do not release the money before the beginning of the term, then you would better not release the money at all. So, we urge the Government ministries concerned with the release of money to release the money in time.

On this issue of sending the students for a child study, we were really disturbed. People rang us asking, “What is happening? Is this instruction from the PTCs here or it is from the ministry?”  So, this brings into my mind very many questions.  Was this programme planned? Is it a planned academic programme out of the college academic programme like teaching practice? Was it on the calendar of these PTCs? Were the students aware that this programme was going to take place on such and such a day or was it just a ploy for the problems of lack of money? Now, how does the ministry or the National Curriculum Development Centre introduce new academic activities or programmes? So, these are questions that I would really want to get answers to. Or it was just an ad hoc programme out of the college academic programme?  

Maybe the last question I wanted to ask is, when are we going to open some of these PTCs for the private-sponsored students? Maybe it would help solve some of the problems. Or even to go further, is it now not a time to allow private PTCs to exist also so that they can train teachers because we are in dire need of teachers?  

Perhaps I will just make a very final remark on the riot at Makerere University that was triggered off by the death of one Edgar Mukundane. That was very unfortunate, we convey our condolences to the bereaved family. Then they have talked about arresting the driver, taking him to Police. What about the people who pulled the trigger of that flying object that killed that one Ms Murungi and others? Were they also arrested? Is there investigation going on to find out who pulled the trigger?  

Also on the same riot I am asking myself, why are there more riots and strikes in public institutions and universities than in the private institutions or universities? The other time it was Makerere University, then Kyambogo University, then Makerere University Business School maybe soon it will be Gulu University. Well, I heard one was in Kampala International University some time back. But in public institutions, there are more riots and strikes than in the private institutions. Can we borrow a leaf from the private institutions, how they manage to reduce the frequency of strikes and riots in their institutions? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.29
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a small one. I have been looking through the list of technical institutes and I am very disturbed because there is one technical institute which is glaringly missing, that is the one which they call Birembo War Memorial Technical Institute found in the lost counties, Bugangaizi in particular. This institute has been constructed by the Ministry of Education under the insistence of the President because at that place Birembo in 1985, a battle between UNLA and NRA raged. So, this institute is being constructed as a memorial of that battle.  

Madam speaker, just in September this year, the Ministry of Education posted a principal, a board of management has been set up, equipment is being taken to the place. Just last week, I volunteered as the area Member of Parliament to grade a road from the main road to the institute, which is about a kilometre away. And when I see the list, which has been compiled by the Commissioner of BTVET on the 3rd of December, Birembo is not there. Now, what is the Ministry of Education telling us? What is the problem? So, Madam Speaker, I want an answer because if I go with this statement to Bugangaizi, the possibility of getting a group to come and ask the minister is very high.  

Madam Speaker, just around the year 2000 I think, I even went with the Minister of State for Primary Education to that very place to break the ground as the institute was being constructed. So, I do not understand. That means apart from the errors, which hon. Nkuuhe identified, that some institutes were given locations where they do not belong, there are others like Birembo which are not even there. So, I am totally in agreement with a Member who said that this statement should be returned to the ministry so that they bring a comprehensive one; this is not an exhaustive and correct statement. Therefore, we require a corrected one.

Madam Speaker, the issue of funding. Hon. Agard Didi from Ministry of Finance is here. But I have insisted on the Ministry of Finance being restructured and possibly we need a resolution of this Parliament so that the President can act because many of the problems, which are also happening in other sectors are because of the Ministry of Finance either not taking other sector ministries as important or they do not really think others exist. We must do something and cause the Ministry of Finance to realize that they are part of Government and not the superior part of Government. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity and I am sure I am the last contributor on this. I thank you.

6.34
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to, first of all, sympathize with the minister who happens to be in a very difficult situation and it is usually unusual to see a Government Minister with all Executive powers turn back to Parliament and complain that those powers actually do not exist, so we should do something. I also want to thank the Prime Minister, I saw in the Appendix a letter he wrote requesting that humps be constructed along Makerere road. Being the Chancellor of that university, I think that was good enough, although we are bothered about the timing dated 22nd of November, almost six months after you took over that position.

But I want to raise three clarifications: One, there was a strike in Pajule technical institute, a strike we went with Police and quelled. The students from the North claimed they have free secondary education and they do not see why this free education, which the Government is offering for those in the camps, should not extend to technical institutions. So, I went, we met the principal and the principal said the cheques the Government was sending them delayed, but in the meantime he wanted the students to pay so that if Government sends the money they would then refund the students. It is like they are getting a loan from the students to run the school so that when the other one comes, they will refund students. So, using all relevant authorities, we asked all the students to continue studying. I do not know if the minister could make a general statement and a general communication to all such technical institutions in the North.  

Two, sometime in the first year of this Parliament, we resolved that Government should construct one technical school per county. I do not know if the minister could tell us how far they have gone and where they have started from because I was interacting with almost all Members of Parliament, not even a single sub-county has seen this project being implemented. I do not know if it has been stalled and yet money was borrowed for it.  

I had also wanted to ask the minister that this programme of child study, is it in your policy statement because it appears that we ask the teachers to go and study near their homes so that they study child practice, counselling skills. Then the third paragraph they are explaining the importance of child study. This is a letter from a permanent secretary but it is even explaining the importance of what he is instructing those principals to do, as if those principals are not aware of it. So, they say a child study helps the students to understand children; it helps them to learn better physical and emotional growth, guidance and counselling; helps students to assist pupils and parents. I do not know if it appears anywhere in the policy statement. 

I would want to tell you I have seen the policy statement this afternoon, it appears nowhere. So, I do not know if this Parliament would sit down and look at policy statements for nothing and then we wake up and say ‘Child Study.’ Tomorrow I do not know what the study will be; it can be studying about how unemployed teachers can be employed as to keep them busy. I do not know if you will tell us something.

Now on the issue of strikes, I just want to make one passionate appeal. I think I know students’ mentality as far as strikes are concerned, and those of you who are good authors you better get down and write a book on strikes and causes of strikes around the world. There seems to be some standard practice on all students. 

By the way, let me inform you, all students who get involved in strikes would be so disappointed if Police did not come and fight them. I am talking from a very informed point of view. I saw it, for example, when I was in London. People were striking against the laws the Parliament was making against hunting foxes, something of the kind. Now, as the strikers were walking towards Parliament, the Police were giving them sweets - it sounds very interesting; they were being given sweets. It is like saying, “Government is aware, we recognize what you are doing” and the moment demonstrators got hold of the sweets, they were totally neutralised. I do not know if we would think of such things because the Constitution somewhere in Article 29 allows an individual to demonstrate peacefully together with others.

MR ERESU: What hon. Otto is proposing is very interesting. But if we go by the report of the minister about the strike, which he submitted it is stated that when a student was hit, the following day students gathered together, became rowdy and violent. On page 12 paragraph 3, “At the time the students leadership of the university and management tried to talk to the students but they were already rowdy and violent, then they spilt into two groups; one group went to Sir Apollo Kagwa road, they erected road barriers, lit a fire on the road and smashed vehicle windscreens. They also looted property in the nearby shops including those in Nakulabye, Kasubi. Another group went to Bombo road….”

This means these students were not as peaceful as the demonstrators hon. Otto is telling us in London, who were demonstrating against the hunting of foxes. These ones had become riotous, which means, Madam Speaker, that it needed some security to control them otherwise they would go out of hand. So, what I want hon. Odonga Otto to clarify to me is, what other method would have been used. And if he thought the method of giving sweets were possible, do you think when they were smashing the windscreens of cars moving along the road, sweets would have solved the problem, and how would it have been done?

MR OTTO: Thank you so much. You know, I would say the stage at which the students resolved to do what they did was late for any pre-emptive actions. I am talking from a very informed point of view. Let me give you a case scenario –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, what about during the night vigil? You know they had a vigil before they started matching. Could there have been intervention during that vigil before they moved in the morning?  

MR OTTO: Yes, there was a vigil in Lumumba Hall, where they were lighting fire and mourning their colleagues, which is a culture. I have also been a Lumumbist. Now, that night was the best night to have the situation contained because people to sit there the whole night until morning, some wake up, others are drinking, others are coming from lectures it was obvious by any one’s standard that that morning would be terrible and for any reasonable person, he should have left university.  

Now, what I am suggesting, I still want to give a case scenario. Some time when I was at university, I led a peaceful demonstration. Now, what happens is that, those who begin demonstrations are not those who end it. Those who join demonstrations come to realize it is a very interesting thing, it is almost like a picnic, they do not know the original aspirations of those who sit down to say, “I think tomorrow we should walk around the university.” It can be passers-by, those from dancing halls and they give a new momentum to a demonstration. 

So, in that particular case, we had a peaceful demonstration opposing the 2000 referendum. From a group of 60, as we were moving to other halls mobilizing students, the way it is usually done, the staff had all opportunities to have the situation contained. But what happened, by the time the public function was beginning, there were over 2000 demonstrators and all those 2000 demonstrators did not have one leader, which should have been me.  They just joined halfway and they saw it as a very interesting thing. So, there was already a conflict of leadership to the extent that apart from saying, “We are against referendum” because we cannot vote whether we should associate or not, the agenda changed. Some people were saying the demonstrators should go and arrest the President, and unfortunately we ended up being arrested. 

So, I am trying to say that those who begin demonstrations are usually those who do not end it. And what happens in a demonstration that takes place from 9.00 a.m. up to 6.00 p.m. those who end it are new people. You come and participate for one hour and leave and other people will come for one hour and leave. There are only few hard cores who would insist to run up to the end. So, the university administration, Mr Chancellor, should establish channels of communicating to students.

We urgently need an FM station at Makerere University, just a university radio station.  Uganda Christian University Mukono has a radio station and if you go to all halls of residence, students listen to it very religiously. Do not think if you put a radio station at Makerere University people would listen to Capital FM, no, because so and so is calling from this hall and it is around such radio stations that Government can exercise influence. They can even monopolize through the use of airtime to say, “The situation that happened near Lumumba Hall has been contained and people are now calm.” Honourable Minister, this is free consultancy; just put up a radio station at Makerere University, you are going to see a great difference.

Madam Speaker, I would say, Makerere University needs to be fenced. The fence currently around the university is so miserable. In fact, it only serves to encourage a thief to try to climb it; it serves no other purpose of deterring.  Makerere University needs to be properly fenced.  That university is so mighty, but the only problem we have is that 20 per cent of those who are smart and loiter around the university are not students.  For example, if you come to the entry of Parliament, you now know you are getting to Parliament. You will learn from your own senses that this is a no-nonsense place, but you can enter Makerere University as and when you want any time.

So, the whole university needs to be fenced to create an impression that this is the university, even with some policemen with sticks. You know, people fear to violate authority because they fear pain, not that the authority looks so dangerous.  If you find a policeman with a club you will say, “Yes, this is a policeman” even if you know you can disarm him. So, as a matter of urgency, Professor, that university needs to be fenced.

The last issue, Madam Speaker, you will appreciate this concept. In law there is what they call ‘vicarious liability.’ If I am a driver to Parliament of Uganda and I knock someone during official duty, it is very unlikely that they will sue me because I was in discharge of official duty.  They can end up suing Parliament of Uganda. I do not know if that element would arise in this vehicle of UG 0003W. If he was discharging Government duty, where we can find out in a written instruction, then I think he is in a wrong place.  He should not be in prison or at Police.

So, this House would want to know - unfortunately all the ministers have avoided that question - was that officer discharging Government duty at the time of the accident? Because you will have a situation where an individual is going to be sacrificed to save the face of Government. Go to disco halls, go to public places, you will find Government vehicles parked in big numbers; those for NGOs, those for parastatals and the Army are all there and the bosses are around. It is still a standard practice that Government vehicles are being used for specific purposes. 

For example, it will not be surprising that that man who got involved in that accident was drunk or was from visiting his girlfriend in one of the hostels or dropping, as hon. Ekanya said, or doing other duties, which are not enshrined in the Constitution. But I would still insist, we need to know. Honourable Minister, we do not want to hijack the whole process and file a civil suit; we really need to know where that driver was coming from, and it is not a matter of the hon. Prime Minister coming to tell Parliament that we are going to do something.

Last month, the Inspector General of Police issued a notice that all trailers and fuel tankers beyond seven tonnes must not move in Kampala during daytime. You first go now in the traffic jams and see, they are just on the increase. This was a standing instruction from Government, and should we have a simple accident in a traffic jam, you are going to see 600 vehicles being burnt. All these trailers are moving in daytime with fuel in them. So, the instructions of Katumba Wamala are not working, so which one else would work in Uganda, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the Minister of Public Service will be coming here with the statement on the use of motor vehicles. 

MR OTTO: Thank you so much. As I sit down, honourable Minister, I still insist you can contain strikes at the university. If you do not take heed of my advice, you are even going to have strikes of political nature; and to see the Police fighting the whole day with students and failing to disperse them is a very big humiliation. It is either humiliation or it shows that the students have a conviction in what they are doing. I challenge you to find out. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

6.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, thank you. I just have one thing, just taking from what hon. Odonga Otto has raised on the issue of the security at Makerere University. You remember some time, two years ago, there were these snipers who were killing students at Makerere University and we came up strongly, the President also came up strongly and gave instructions that a perimeter fence should be erected around Makerere University. It was after a long debate, members of the community, parliamentarians had urged that let us put a wall around Makerere University. Money was availed, but what happened to this perimeter fencing? Can we get clarification from the Chancellor, the Prime Minister or the minister?  I just want clarification on that.

Two, to the Chancellor, who also happens to be the Prime Minister; it is about the lifestyle at Makerere University or the welfare within the main library especially. The main library has been turned into a dining hall. You go down to Africa Hall during lunchtime, you find food is being served there. Is that a new development, is that a new canteen, has the library turned into a dining hall where food is being served under very unhygienic conditions downstairs.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the strikes, hon. Otto has really expounded so much on it, but we must arrest the situations much early. Just a few weeks ago, a strike was going to take place because of non-payment of fees. We know most of the students are now privately sponsored, and the few who are struggling to pay, most especially those who come from the war-ravaged areas, they find it difficult to have this money paid within the twelve weeks. I want to appeal, through the Prime Minister, that the payment should be staggered up to the last month of the semester when exams are starting. 

I have been having so many coming to my office from Teso because - given the population even of Teso, this intake to Makerere University, despite the 4000 Government sponsorship, the whole of Teso region, which comprises of four districts there are only 84 government-sponsored students; most of the people are poor. So the few, who now top up the 84 to reach 150 as the people who come from the Teso region go through pain to raise monies to get to the university. I want to appeal to the Chancellor and to the Government that they should be given –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, in light of the 84 students from Teso against the so many 4,000 from the rest of Uganda, I wonder whether Government is considering seriously the issue of quota system of admission to Makerere University and other tertiary institutions because all our students who are good lose out and other people gain out of us and then we claim we are all educating Ugandans equitably.  So, may I know whether Government is considering seriously the issue of quota system for admission of students into higher institutions of learning in this country for purposes of equity?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is the point I wanted to put across to be lenient to people who come from disadvantaged areas. We have talked here about the standards as improving, but they are skewed to the regions where there has not been war. For us who come from the disadvantaged areas find it very difficult. You know Teso is the third or fourth largest tribe in this country, but we only contribute to the Government institution, which is sponsoring 4000 students, 84 students. It is a big problem. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit, thank you.

6.55
MRS BEATRICE ZIRABAMUZALE MAGOOLA (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the minister for having given us that report. As poor as it maybe looking, I think it has served a purpose. We are here because that paper is here with us; if it needs any improvement, maybe we leave it to the minister to do so.  

Madam Speaker, I am a former administrator of a Teachers’ Training College (TTC). This programme called child study teaching practice is there, it is part and parcel of the whole programme in a TTC.  But I am only dismayed that when I went home about three weeks back, I was approached by parents and students who were saying that they were not aware of how institutions are being run now, that colleges broke off too early and people were put in doubt whether they are going to be compensated with the time that they have lost this term. I would like the minister to take it from me that both students and parents are disgruntled in that, it has taken them just a few weeks for this term and they have broken off. They are not sure whether next term they will be compensated. 

The second thing with TTCs is that, when students go for teaching practice, we expect that the tutors, in one way or another, will be liasing with the head teachers to look at their schemes of work and see them teach in the classrooms. Now, when we break off in this manner, it is very difficult for tutors to go to students wherever they may be to assess them to see whether or not they are going on well. Although they will be getting reports from head teachers, it is not as good as when the tutors can have a chance of seeing their students on child study teaching practice. 

Madam Speaker, my other point is double-edged, it is a contribution to the riot at Makerere University. The students went on strike, the Police force sent policemen with teargas and guns. One thing, which overwhelmed parents and students themselves is that, even those who were not involved in the riot and had hidden themselves were attacked by Police. Two students, I was told as a Member of Parliament, hid themselves in a room.  When these people went and banged the door of the room, the girls feared to open, so these people opened the teargas into the room where the girls had hidden themselves. These two were found almost collapsing.

I think that is not good treatment. When our policemen go to institutions, they should really take time not to harm people because if they just do it because they have been called to arrest the situation, sometimes they take even the innocent ones. There is one girl who was pulled from a bed in one of the halls, either she did not want to get involved in the riot or she was sick. They forced her out of the room and she was one of those people who were taken to Police. But witnesses have it that she was never involved in the strike or the riot. 

I know when a riot is on, everybody is dismayed, no one knows what to do next, but you go in such a rioting situation and anybody can be taken. But I would like to request –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Magoola, I also received information that one of the girls was produced in court in a towel. I do not see how a student who was in a towel could have been rioting.  

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you very much. That adds weight to what I was saying because if you find someone who is not among those who are rioting, how do you take her? It is unfair. But I want to say this on the other side, having been an administrator I know what it calls for to administer an institution, and usually institutions have rules and regulations –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am dismayed with the information we have received that, a female student was produced in court in a towel. I think professionally the Police are not supposed to do something of the kind. Can the Leader of Government Business clarify on these matters, because it is very shameful for female students to be taken in court in towels and possibly without underwear. It is very sad!

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the concerns expressed by hon. Bright Rwamirama in support of the honourable Member holding the Floor should not simply go. We have in the House a whole Leader of Government Business. On an emergency note, we would like to hear from him so as to take up the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Magoola, please complete your statement. 

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I was saying my contribution is double-edged. Universities and schools have rules and regulations, and Makerere University happens to be one of those institutions, which have rules and regulations to which the students must give respect because if they do not give respect to the rules and regulations then we shall find ourselves in real chaos.  

Youths, as I know them personally, can be very good but when they turn against the administration for anything good or bad, they can be very bad and destructive. I recall that about six weeks back or two months back, students at Nabumali Secondary School destroyed one of the oldest buildings, which had cost we people of Uganda money, something which will take us years before we can re-construct it.  But such things happen because students do not respect rules.

I think it is in our interest and it is our role to see that our schools and university students obey the rules, which are set for them. Why do I say so?  Because if we are going to be all rulers at the same time, then we can as well remain at our homes and rule from there other than going to institutions –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I did not want really to stand up, but I want to inform the honourable Member holding the Floor that I was a leader in that university for three years, the general secretary of the needy students, and we used to lead students in organising peaceful strikes, and we could communicate to the Minister of Education, we could communicate to the Minister of State for Security, we could communicate to the university. But the problem is Government. What hon. Otafiire - I wish he was here - he would tell me, “Allow the students to demonstrate up to the evening peacefully, they will get tired and go and look for food.” 

But the problem was always the Government. The students would write letters, they would communicate but Government would not take action and worldwide, when people demonstrate that is when Government responds. So, it is not about the rules, but the failure of the leaders. One time Col Kahinda Otafiire slapped the dean of the university –(Interruption)- it is on record, if he was here he would have accepted - and that is when the dean responded.

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you, for that information. I am not aware of other things, but I want to put it to you as leaders that the students must respect the rules because without rules then we shall find that we are in chaos every other day. The rules here, Rule 27 is about demonstrations but I am reading 27(b) it says: “No student or group of students shall mount roadblocks on any part of the campus, campus roads or stop motorists or any other persons using the campus or public roads.”

With that, as an administrator, I think that the students went wrong and I do not want to encourage them that they should always go on strike. We people who are here are leaders, we should not be seen or heard that we are encouraging students to go on strike. All that we should do is to see how we can always go to them or they can invite us and we talk to them. But this idea of one, two or 20 students starting to line up and go on strike is very unfair because it will stop development in this country. If we are building today and tomorrow they are putting fire on one building, then another day it will be another building. Nabumali High School was destroyed, and I think it will take us time to put up what was destroyed by the students.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that if people are found guilty of organizing a violent strike, I think people should be dealt with. Otherwise, if we here do not support the administration in institutions where strikes take place, then we shall be taken for being all weak leaders or supporters of wrongdoers. I think that is enough for now.

7.08
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think a lot has been said and I want to use about one minute. Mine is on page 3, on the background that has been given on institutions that have been clarified into categories of teachers’ colleges and specialized institutions. But what concerns me more is on the second paragraph in the middle, which reads: “All these institutions are not part of the Poverty Alleviation Fund and, therefore, their budgets or release are not protected, that is, they are subject to cuts without notice.”  

I take that to be very important and it puts the Minister of Education and the ministry in a very tricky situation. It seems such occurrences can also occur again. We might be talking about what happened today in our teachers’ colleges, but it can also continue to occur. So, my request goes maybe to the honourable Prime Minister, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Finance to see how this matter can be solved. It pains for us who have institutions, and I have a number of teachers whom I fund to go in these teachers training colleges to read this, “They are subject to cuts without notice” - these are studying students and tomorrow anything can happen to them.  What about those students who are funding themselves, they are also likely to suffer.

Lastly, on issues related down here, “The non-wage recurrent item Vote 013 attracted other competing demands like the sub-county bursary scheme for secondary school students, whose budget increases every year to cover the additional bright but poor students per sub-county and Primary Leaving Examination (PLE) fees.” So, it gives our teacher training colleges to be in a very bad situation if their funds can continue to be deducted when such other occurrences do happen because if other funds are pushed in the PLE arrangement and then to support sub-county bursary schemes then it pains.  These teachers’ colleges have been here for very many years, I do not think they should be affected in such a way; it will affect our teachers and the training in our schools. I thank you.

7.10
MAJ BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the Leader of Government Business to clarify on two issues: One, I have learnt with disappointment that they used live bullets on students. We have clubs, we have shields, we have teargas and actually we have water tanks and water can be used to disperse crowds. But they chose to use live bullets that we use on enemies. What I want to know from the Prime Minister, the very officers who used live bullets, what have they done to them because we would like to see casualties, those who bring ridicule to Government? It is not a question of coming here and debate, “We are very sorry we do not use live bullets, but on these occasions we used live bullets, so many people died” and we just keep quiet.  

The second clarification, Madam Speaker, we are very good promoters of morals in this country, we have been concerned by issues of gender. I do not understand how a whole institution can produce a female student in a towel in court and nobody is disciplined. I would like to know the appropriate action taken on these funny people - I do not know how to call them - that bring ridicule to the Government and the people of the Republic of Uganda. I thank you very much.

7.12
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I give guidance, I want to give some information. The information I want to give is that in 1990, I was at the university and we all know on December 10th two students were shot dead. When members of the university were organizing a peaceful demonstration, I was party.  So, the issue of using live bullets has not just began, it is the practice. Now, the guidance -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga William, I was in this Chair when we resolved here that we should never in this country hear again that the Police have used live bullets, it is not very long ago.  This House resolved already on that matter. What we want as an explanation is why it has happened despite our very clear resolution in this House? I think that is what we should be asking. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I have stood up on a point of guidance. We are all aware that we have live coverage, and when you look at this Chamber the attendance is extremely very poor. It would not be good for the Rt Prime Minister and the Minister of Education to answer the queries when the Members who raised the queries - maybe some of them are not on television.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, hon. Nsubuga William, you are suggesting that we adjourn because Members have abdicated? The rules of this House are that we sit from 2.00 O’clock until the Speaker says you can leave. Those who are not here must explain why they are not here. Now, there were questions raised to the Minister of Finance and the Chancellor and also Prime Minister, now I do not know in what order you want to answer.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I had a motion on the Floor –(Interruption)
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No please, this is a ministerial statement. Let us receive the answers from the Government because you wanted answers. We want to know why the Minister of Finance acts like a super minister and then the Chancellor will explain his bit. Let us have these answers in the Hansard.

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENTANDIKWA)(Mr Agard Didi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, on behalf of the people of Moyo West, I wish to express condolences and sympathies to the bereaved family and to those who were injured! Secondly, I have heard two interesting recommendations one about speeding up with resolving this type of crisis, but I had directed the Chancellor. On account of our recent experience at the Ministry of Lands, when one of our honourable colleague’s office was invaded and it took a lot of time, I think caution is to be exercised.  

I am intrigued by the suggestions by hon. Odonga Otto, and I think with his experience at the university and still being a youth, I would encourage the Chancellor and the Speaker to have a crisis team comprising of such people because this might even go a long way in diffusing - I think that is a suggestion, which is in the right direction.

Turning to Finance, first of all, people like hon. Sabiiti Jack, hon. Dombo Emmanuel and others have expressed concern that maybe the Ministry of Finance is not serious with Parliament. Other statements actually even bordering on antipathy almost suggest that the ministry is contemptible, indolent and so on. But I wish to assure the House that, one, the ministry is very serious in working with this House and secondly, although currently a number of my colleagues are out of station - the minister is out of the country, the minister of state whose docket includes attending to Parliament is out of the country, two others are out, one is on leave. 

But in the Ministry of Finance, I am proud to report that we believe in prudent management that must include regular consultations about management issues and we do meet regularly so that at any one stage we are all properly briefed. Secondly, we believe that prudent management requires that you should have the capacity to get information as and when required of you. It does not make you a ‘Jack of all trades’ because we have institutional capacity to find out any information. That is why, consistent with our rules of Parliament here, when a question like one from hon. Jack Sabiiti today came about Shs 20 billion to Mr Basajjabalaba, it is prudent that it is put in form of a question so that the answers are properly researched and tabled in the House. 

We know, and I think even Parliament knows, we have even organized workshops and seminars where it is necessary to have deepening of budget issues and other related matters because search for knowledge does not end, and I want to say that –(Interruption)
 
MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam speaker, I am baffled by the response of the Minister of Finance. It is not the first time that we hear about the mention of Shs 20 billion being given to one Basajjabalaba. It is contained that, that money is too big an amount for the Ministry of Finance not to have known whenever it was dished out. What is he talking about? 

MR DIDI: If I can seek your protection, Madam Speaker. Today we are discussing the ministerial statement by the Minister of Education, and we have come prepared to ensure that all the questions raised connected with those are brought on board.  Now, when other issues come I have never denied that they do not require an answer, but I am saying consistent with our rules it is important that this is formally put. We do not go by press reports. So, any person who feels that a particular matter should be addressed, should frame an appropriate question for an appropriate answer. I do not think I am deviating from our rules of this House. 

Now, on the issues of today, I am surprised that Members have been lambasting the Minister of Education. He has stated very clearly that he has two proposals, which he has even given to the Minister of Finance. In one, he is talking about that maybe the way you forward will be to ensure that 100 per cent of this budget is disbursed. I am grateful to people like hon. Kiraso Beatrice and others, who have expressed very eloquently here, that because we are on a revenue budget, we collect and disburse, sometimes it is not automatic that we collect enough.  

On that note, I am proud to put on the Table to answer hon. Ekanya Geoffrey, who stated that revenue collection in the month of October exceeded over Shs 1.0 billion, and also to show that we are actually working very closely with the Ministry of Education - Here I have correspondents to the effect that one, Shs 370 million was released as requested by the ministry; and also a supplementary of Shs 1.35 billion is being put for supplementary in the coming Vote. So, this goes a long way to address the practical cooperation we are having with various ministries.  

But dealing with principles for the purpose of this debate I think it is more important. One, the Minister of Education is asking - this House is one of the best Houses in Africa that I am told is involved in the budget formulation process and so, an appeal to the House is an appeal to correct errors in the budget formulation process to say – Members know that in the past, even while we have had a budget framework other pressures on the budget have come. 

We had the case of Karamoja disarmament; we had the problem of the war in the North, this Operation Iron First, for which Government found itself re-scheduling. So, when the minister is asking in the first case that maybe for education, given its priority, whenever the framework is agreed upon all that money should be met and he goes on to say in the alternative why do we not make this a Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) activity –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance seems to be saying that they have released money to the Minister of Education because I have not seen the document he is laying on the Table. What is on record is that from first quota URA collected all and the donor community has been remitting all that they agreed with Government. The Minister of Education delayed to open these institutions because they did not have money. So, we would like to know from the Minister of Finance, and it is only the Minister of Education Parliament inclusive, our development fund is not being sent, all ministries here are getting about 40 per cent as per quota on what they deserve. Where is the money going since you are collecting, can you just tell us specially? If there is something you cannot tell us because you fear your appointment authority, be clear.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, our intervention here is made in good faith; we are friendly, we are one partnership. A lot of excesses articulated by the report or revealed by the report greatly and heavily impact on PAC. So, in order to save the ministry from danger in terms of checks and balances, we are coming in to assist so that you do not run negative to the requirements in accordance with PAC standards.

MR DIDI: Madam Speaker, today we are dealing with Education. If a specific question came as to why funds in other sectors have not been met in this quota, please ask that question, we shall address it. The letter I have is dated 22nd November 2004 and it is from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to his colleague of Education and Sports. It reads:

“In reference to your letter dated 9th November, I am writing to advise you that your requisition for a special fund has accelerated a release to enable you to meet needs being made.

Your ministry during the course of the financial year seeks parliamentary approval for a supplementary budget of Uganda shillings 1.35 billion to your Vote. So, this is really to tell you that what appeared may be uncoordinated or improperly coordinated work methods between the Ministry of Education and Finance to address some of the issues which were raised with regard to these two institutions” –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, specific questions need definite and specific answers. The question on the Floor is, have you disbursed money due to Ministry of Education because when you tell us letters, you tell us communications, it is not adequate? Are you refuting allegations that you are not disbursing money as required? We want to know that in the first quota you did disburse the money that was due to Ministry of Education, in the second quota you have done so, then we know where the problem is. But you are just keeping us in dark, you are reading us letters; be specific.

MRS HYUHA: Because of time it is unfortunate I was not given an opportunity to contribute as a Chairperson. But I want to add on to what my colleague is contributing. We would want to hear, as a committee, from the Ministry of Finance, was money for National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs) and Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs) released according to what we approved in a given quota or not? In this statement we are told that fees, bursary schemes and PLE fees were considered as a priority, but in the speech of the Minister of Finance it was clearly stated on the Budget Speech that bursary for six children was going to be provided. It was a priority; it was not that they were going to cut from this area to another.

To help the Committee because even my colleagues are asking me - they have been in the field, I remained patiently. I did not get an opportunity to contribute, but it will help us as a committee who analyse the budget of Ministry of Education and give a report to the Budget Committee; issues quoted by my colleague, hon. Kiraso, that are submitted by the Committee of Social Services. So, we want a clear position. We invited Ministry of Education to our committee to understand the situation. We had visited Nagongera NTC and we found the principal alarming. 

If Ministry of Finance gave a ceiling, instead of providing Shs 2.9 billion and they gave a budget ceiling of Shs 1.6 billion; instead of giving a provision of a unit cost of Shs 1,300, they gave a provision of Shs 780 and above all that one is not released, what is the situation? Let the Minister lay on Table so that we know where the problem is other than saying it is uncoordinated so that with us in a committee we have a clear position to know the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, are you in a position to give that information?

MR DIDI: Madam Speaker, when the Chairperson of the Budget Committee came here and brought variations on the budget performance in regard to this formulation, I was suggesting to seek time to prepare a submission so that these figures that are being talked about are harmonized. But if you went back to the ministerial statement on what the minister was proposing, he had two proposals and the two proposals are to do with what he has proposed to the Ministry of Finance. It does not talk about the disharmony about the figures, it is talking about the two proposals he made about the way forward and the Ministry of Finance is concurring that this is the programme along which we should be working.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, even now the honourable Minister of Finance is reading a letter from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to the Ministry of Education with effect that a supplementary budget will be considered with respect to giving funds to that particular ministry. The clarification I seek is this, the minister presented a report to the Floor of this House that they want a release, which is 100 per cent. Is your supplementary budget responding to that particular demand?

MR DIDI: Before we agree on what is 100 per cent, do you not think there will be a need to harmonise the figure that the Budget Committee seems to be talking about and that has been laid on the Table. So, rather than harmonizing these positions on the Floor of the House, I thought it was prudent that we get the officials to go and have these positions harmonized and we bring them back. 

Secondly, with regard to whether it should be a 100 per cent, that is the principle. He is saying that, why do you not treat education as a Poverty Alleviation Fund – maybe what I did not explain was this, even if it is not in the Budget Act, some understanding with our development partners has been that activities to do with poverty alleviation should not be touched. And it is for that purpose, and Members seems to be agreeing, that education could be considered as a Poverty Alleviation Fund.  So, that is not just a framework but a fund, and it is specific. 

When the minister is his conclusion of part (A) says, “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still considering the matter” it is not considering the matter that has the magic wand, it has to go and negotiate and discuss with our development partners. And it is a role that Parliament should come on board and plead to say, “I think this case of the Ministry of Education to consider education as a Poverty Alleviation Fund is good.” So, it is not a magic wand that Ministry of Finance is just going to say we accept or we do not accept –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, are you suggesting that we now hand over this matter to the Committees of Budget, Finance and Social Services to consider, to harmonise the figures and tell us really what is going on?  

MR DIDI: Madam Speaker, I think this afternoon was rather distressing with regard to the flow of figures one way or the other, and you cannot expect that on the Floor of the House somebody can say, “I think this is the right figure.”  To do justice to all the parties, I think we should go back to the drawing board, and I do not mind even the Budget people coming on board because anybody who says he has the right information - because at the beginning of this debate this was not the issue. 

I did not come with this mandate, but rather I did send the officials to find out with regard to this flow funds whether any release of money has been made recently. So, I was able to get a copy of correspondence this afternoon of what the Ministry of Finance has authorized. So, you could see it is the method I have explained to you that prudent management requires that you should be able to search and get the information that people are after.  But some of this information now is coming after 5.00 O’clock when offices are closed. But be it as it may, we got the information when it came a bit earlier.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this matter is really very important, we would like to understand whether we are giving the students Shs 708 or Shs 1,300 or whatever; and we would also want to know really how much has actually gone and whether it went according to the approved budget by this House. So, I think for now we defer this matter and we come to it in January.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should really help us. There is a Cabinet sub-committee in charge of Budget, and I think Government is taking this Parliament for granted. Cabinet sub-committee sits and harmonizes this thing. This thing has taken time; we have been following this thing when institutions did not open. The Prime Minister is not telling us the truth, now he wants a matter to be deferred and the minister seems to be disagreeing.  The truth is there. So, why do we defer it to January?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My reason for saying January, at the beginning of today’s meeting I gave you my proposals for what we are supposed to do, and really it is so much that I do not even know whether we will finish it. Now, if I also say that now let education continue taking the priority, I am oppressing the other sectors. That is really the reason. We only have three more working days.  

MR DIDI: Madam Speaker, since this is a ministerial statement, I thought the best thing was for the minister, the owner of the statement, who has heard all these statements from the various committees because he has been interacting with them - maybe before we make a final position, all I am saying is that the request to the Ministry of Finance, since this has already been pledged –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the minister should honour your –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, the Minister of Education himself had said we defer speaking about that particular matter, he says he does not have the information. So, now it has caught a few other things so we might as well really bring those matters back together.

MR DIDI: Thank you, much obliged.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the concerns of Parliament over what is happening were going to be expressed in the motion, which I was going to move, and permit me to move that motion.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I get concerned when you say that this matter be deferred until January because if we read the statement of the minister, these PTCs are on child study up to 3rd; and from the analysis, the minister is pleading that the money, which was supposed to have been released to enable these PTCs open was not released. Therefore, when we defer this matter up to January, it means that we are prolonging the study of these students and, therefore, the timetable will not be up-to-date. That is why I am getting concerned, Madam Speaker, because it means that by the time we take decision on whether they give that unit cost per child in a PTC and then the executive to take a decision for a supplementary as an emergency, it will be too late.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you proposing?  Which business are you proposing that we displace now so that we can reinstate education? But where will they report, that is the problem?

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I would have felt that probably it is a question of the executive, the Prime Minister coordinating Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education and we get the report back on Tuesday next week because from the look of things, it is a disagreement between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to supplement my colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services. When matters come to this House they need solutions, and solutions reside in what we decide on here. The question that the minister has failed to answer adequately is the disbursement, has money been disbursed, and the records are there so that we can identify the problem and pronounce ourselves. For sure, logically you can only give a supplementary when you have exhausted what has been provided for.  So, when the minister is talking of supplementary, it assumes that they have disbursed all the money, which is not the case. So, I would request the Prime Minister to take it up so that on Tuesday they report to us and we pronounce ourselves and save a situation.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: You see, the problem I am having is that everything is being thrown to me and I will not accept this because I will break down –(Interjections)- no, I am the first Prime Minister who is in this Parliament from 2.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m; no other Prime Minister has ever done it.  (Applause) So please, do not take advantage of me.  My proposal is simple, there is a sector minister in charge of Finance who should come and answer on Tuesday. The actual minister now is sick, he has had an operation, but my colleague here can go and interface with other colleagues and he answers the questions on Tuesday. It is as simple as that.

MAJ RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Rt hon. Prime Minister that one of the greatest man we respect, Sir Wilson Churchill said that, “To the supreme authority lies the blame or credit for the results.” So, I think as a Prime Minister, whether you delegate to your minister, as Leader of Government Business here, we are looking up to you for solutions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And, Prime Minister, let me add that we appreciate your being here everyday on time and your staying power and taking charge of the situation.  

Now, honourable members, on a serious note, let us defer this matter with a view to having it finally handled not later than Tuesday the 21st of this month.

MR OGOLA: I understand from the position we are taking now that, we are also sparing the Minister of Education from answering those multitudes of questions.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because part of his answer is part of it.

MR OGOLA: Will all that be done on Tuesday?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All that will be done on Tuesday. So, honourable members will take note that because of that, we have to displace other business, which we had agreed on this morning. 

MR EKANYA: Because it has been a long disagreement even during the Budget process, I would seek your guidance that the Committees of Finance and Budget on Monday meets with these respective ministers so that we get a concrete position that will not be disagreed upon. Because during the Budget process there was disagreement, now there is disagreement, there will still be disagreement. So, the Committees on Finance and Budget should intervene.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, they should find time to meet because I have already informed you that on Monday we will sit from 10.00 a.m. Actually starting from Friday, we are sitting from 10.00 a.m. until evening.  

Honourable members, the house is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. and I am saying 2.00p.m I will be here at 2.00 p.m. on the dot and we start.  Whoever comes late will not speak. Thank you.  

(The House rose at 7.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

