Tuesday, 13 December 2005

Parliament met at 12.11 p.m. in Parliamentary Conference Hall, Kampala.

SOUTH AFRICA NATIONAL ANTHEM

UGANDA NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Your Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, President of the Republic of South Africa, the First Lady of Uganda, Mrs Janet Museveni, the First Lady of South Africa, Mrs Mbeki, distinguished guests from the Republic of South Africa, honourable members of Parliament. On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, I warmly welcome His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda and the First Lady of Uganda to Parliament and to sincerely thank him for having found it appropriate to enable his special guest accompanied by his spouse and his delegation to visit and address the Parliament of Uganda despite the heavy schedule of his state visit. (Applause) His Excellency, Mbeki, has been to Uganda several times to attend different functions, but has never had the occasion to address our Parliament. 

Honourable members of Parliament, you will agree with me that before us today is an accomplished and distinguished son of Africa. His Excellency, Mbeki, and other nationalists, together with his predecessor His Excellency, President Nelson Mandela, spearheaded the struggle for the liberation of South Africa with the assistance of other progressive leaders and organisations.  

They have been able to transform South Africa from an isolated, despised, racist, violent and apartheid South Africa to a democratic, stable, progressive and respectable country with remarkable political stability and a vibrant economy -(Applause)- as is exemplified by some of the products and investments found in Uganda.  

Under the leadership of President Mbeki, South Africa is playing a leading role towards integration of Africa from the OAU to African Union (AU), whose continental Parliament it hosts; and through promotion of peace and stability in the region by mediating in conflicts in Burundi, the Democratic Republic Congo, Sudan and more recently in Cote D’ivoire.  

South Africa was at the forefront in the establishment and promotion of the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) and President Mbeki is a member of the steering committee on NEPAD, the African Peer Review Mechanism Implementation Committee of 15 Heads of State. 

South Africa has in addition been instrumental in the advancement of African interests in various fora such as: UN, WTO, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and G8.  

It is a rare opportunity for us today to host someone of President Mbeki’s stature as a freedom fighter, Pan-African politician, academician, peacemaker and diplomat to share his vast experience and achievements in them.  

It is now my pleasure to invite His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to address Parliament and later introduce the guest and request him to address us.  You are all welcome to the Parliament of Uganda once again! (Applause)

12.20
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Our distinguished visitor, His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, the President of the Republic of South Africa, the First Lady of the Republic of South Africa, Mrs Zaneri Mbeki, His Excellency the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, the Rt honourable Edward Ssekandi, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Rt honourable Rebecca Kadaga, the Rt honourable Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  

Africans are now 850 million in number. This is heartening because by 1900 we were only 110 million yet we live in a continent that is 11 million square miles in land area.  That is about 10 times the size of India and four times the size of the United States of America. We were, therefore, very much under-populated then.  

These 850 million Africans are divided into four linguistic groups: The Afro-Asiatic linguistic group including Arabic, Amharic these are some of the languages of Ethiopia - the Nile Saharan group of languages, which include: Luo, Oromo, Nile Hamitic, Somali, Nubian etcetera; The Niger Congo group of languages, which include: Bantu language, the Qua languages of West Africa and so on. Finally, there is a small language found in Southern Africa or group of languages called, the Xhoisan.  

Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania and the DRC Congo form a bridge between two of the language groups of Africa that is, the Nile Saharan and the Niger Congo group of languages. The Bantu group of languages and dialects belong to the latter group, the Niger Congo group of languages.  Many of the peoples that populate Southern Africa speak Bantu dialects apart from the small group that speaks the San languages, that is, the Xhoisan.

I am very much interested in African languages.  As part of that effort, I am about to publish, along with Dr Muranga and Mrs Muhoozi, academicians at Makerere University, a thesaurus – I cannot pronounce this word properly -(Laughter)- thesaurus, something like that.  Those academicians are the ones who taught me that word. I did not know it.  

It means a treasure of anything.  In this case, it is a treasure of the Runyankore/Rukiga dialect, but also part of the interlacustrine Bantu languages of the great lakes area.  These interlacustrine Bantu dialects are really one language because they are mutually intelligible. They include: Luganda, Runyankore/Rukiga, Runyoro/Rutooro, Lusoga, Samia, Lumasaba,Kinyarwanda/Kirundi,Runyambo/Ruhaya/Ruziba and related dialects in Tanzania. The Luhya/Kiisi dialects of Kenya, and the Rukonzo/Nande of Uganda and the DRC respectively.  

When we publish this  - whatever you call it, it will be our initial step in demonstrating that some of the African languages are much richer than the European languages - certainly richer than English.  As part of decolonisation, we must preserve, promote and synthesise these dialects and languages. 

In this orientation of mind, I am always intensely interested in the Bantu dialects of Southern Africa. It is incredible to notice how our ancestors dispersed over this huge continent and eventually defended it against invaders by their numbers, presence and culture including the very Bantu languages.  We have now defeated the invaders by the strength of our culture; despite the slave trade and colonialism, here we are.  

When I hear the brothers and sisters in Southern Africa use the words “saubona” from “kubona” in my dialect meaning to find something which is lost but used in Southern Africa to mean to see; when I hear them using the word “inkata” to mean “engata” in my dialect or “enkata” in Luganda; when I hear them using the word “mufazi” to mean “mukazi” meaning a woman, I feel very much elated, I feel very pleased.  

Northwards, deep in Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Congo, Chad etcetera, our Nilotic people link us with the ancient Nilotic and Hamitic peoples of Africa. It is becoming evident that there is a pre-Christian, pre-Islamic linkage between the peoples of East Africa and the peoples of ancient Egypt. I say this because while one can easily trace linkages of language, music and art forms between the two areas, there was no trace whatsoever of Christian or Islamic influence in Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Western Kenya, North-western Tanzania, Ituri and North Kivu areas of the Great Lakes Region. There was no trace of Christianity or Islam until about 1850s when they started coming here.  

But yet you could trace other aspects that link this area with the ancient Egypt. Why am I saying all this? It is because 11 years ago, much of Africa’s political freedom reached the Cape of Good Hope. This meant that at least nominally, Africa was now independent from Cairo to Cape - (Applause) This nominal independence must be turned into real independence, prosperity and eternal security for the African peoples.  

Eternal security:
  
The people of Africa must never be colonised again, must never be humiliated again. It happened once, it should never happen again! (Applause) And it happened because of our internal weaknesses, the weaknesses of our ancestors. One element of that independence is language. In Uganda we have evolved a three-language policy using our indigenous languages in their respective areas: districts or provinces, promoting the use of Swahili and continued to use English. Swahili is a Bantu dialect but a de-tribalised one that belongs to no ethic group. It has, however, got limited vocabulary. 

The hinterland Bantu and Nilotic dialects have got richer vocabulary but are limited to their geographical extension. We, therefore, hope to enrich Swahili with the vocabulary of the hinterland languages so that it becomes the blackman’s language, if necessary the globe over.  You cannot have people without a language. It has never happened that you can have people who have no language. People who are speaking somebody else’s language are not people. I use English as a captured weapon. The British brought their language here, we captured it, and I now use it in our Commonwealth and in the United Nations. But I use it to say my own things, not to say what other people want me to say.

Besides these languages, encapsulated important and unique to social and philosophical concepts which are important not only for the Black people but for the whole of the human race, in our dialects here there is a word in Luganda called “kukokoonya”. In Runyankore it is called “kunegura”. This is the act of stretching out your hand to offer somebody something – “kuwa oba kuha”. When the other person stretches out his/her hand to receive the offer, then the one who offered retracts the offer so that the would-be receiver is disappointed.  

This is called “kunegura” or “kukokoonya”. Although I studied English up to advanced level in school, I do not remember an accurate equivalent of “kukokoonya” or “kunegura” other than the word tantalizing, which is not as proximate as the other one. You, therefore, see that certain groups in the world have not only a language, but also a civilisation deficiency in their system.  

“Kukokoonya” or “kunegura” is abominable in our societies here. Once somebody does it to you, he must “kuhonga” or expiate. He must make amends. In other cultures, this is no problem at all. It is a way of life and they treat it as part of what they call projecting power. Somebody gives you something, when you stretch out your hand to get it he takes it back. He says: “I will not give it to you unless you dance the dance I want you to dance.”  Therefore, you can see that there is a civilisation clash. Some of the people do not even have this word in their language. It is not a problem because they did not even bother to define it.  Here it is an offence. It is part of the Penal Code. The freedom we achieved must therefore be used to protect our ancient heritage. 

Recovering and preserving identity including our languages, however, will not be enough to preserve our independence and ensure our prosperity. The imperialists neither care nor respect other people’s languages or cultures.  They respect power and nothing else. The African people, therefore, need to use their freedom to create African power in economics, science, politics and the military.  Non-African powers have been to the space and to the moon. Africans are barely able to feed themselves. The main cause of this is ourselves now that the imperialists have withdrawn from the African Continent.

India has used the period from independence, 1947 to today to stand up once and for all time. Nobody will ever think of re-colonising India; so is China. Nobody can tell China what to do.  Recently, the Chinese president was in London in Buckingham Palace - that man is still a communist.  However, a capitalist can work with a communist once he is strong. However much you pretend to be a capitalist, if you are weak, they will never earn yourself respect.  These are facts on the ground. I am not telling you ancient history; I am telling you contemporary history or is it contemporary affairs. It is contemporary and not yet history.  

Why has Africa not done the same? Why haven’t we built power here? Your Excellency, as you know, we have been discussing these issues and we shall continue to do so. We have agreed to work not only for economic integration of Africa, but also for our political integration. Where possible, we need to amalgamate the present independent states of Africa to form stronger political and economic units. 

We have discussed the advantages in a number of meetings with His Excellency, Mbeki. What is however most threatening are the strategic considerations. There are those who want to re-dominate the world. Working with other freedom-liking people, we shall not allow them to do so.  We must have a more civilized world order. The present parasitic system must end. In order to do this, we must carry out the political integration in order to plan together, especially regarding defence and strategic issues, including scientific research and development. 

In East Africa, we are working, as we have already discussed with your Excellency, for the East African Federation involving Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. Later on, Rwanda and Burundi applied to join the East African Community. I am sure they may also be interested in this union.  We think that it is easier to achieve political integration here in East Africa. This unity will then work as a catalyst for the wider political integration in order to guarantee our future in this parasite world.  

During the 300 years that slaves were being taken from Africa, there were Popes and Archbishops of Canterbury – because I asked a religious person recently, “Slavery took 300 years, were there Popes during that time or they had been suspended? Were there Archbishops of Canterbury?” I really want to find out what those people were saying, as part of my research about this slavery. What did they say and do during this time? We are the only ones that can guarantee our future. (Applause) 

In order to achieve this, you need to bring together the liberation movements and the progressive political parties in Africa. There are such words as “progressive political parties”, the parties, which want progress, which are not reactionary, wale wanaitazama nyuma hupinga maendeleo tunaiwaita kwa Kiswahili. Watu wanawo amini ukabila, wanaiamini mambo ya diini na mambo ya uchawi.

On the bilateral side –(Interruption)- I think the hon. Aggrey Awori wants to – he is thinking seriously about these issues. On the bilateral side, we have set up commissions to pull considerable potentials of both South Africa and Uganda, so that we achieve rapid results. The population of South Africa is approximately 48 million people while that of Uganda is now 28 million. By 2015 we shall have 40 million people.  The population of South Africa is obviously growing. Therefore, our combined potential now and in the future is considerable. This does not include our East African partners of Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi where our combined population is currently 110 million people.  

The economy of Uganda has been growing fast but as I said yesterday, it has been growing in low investment, low technology and quick returns enterprises such as – I amused His Excellency – bars, hair salons, houses for offices and residence, hotels, shops, transport, professional services, doctors, engineers and many others. There are also some processing factories run by Ugandan-Indians and some farming by plantation owners and large-scale farmers. 

We, however, have a serious gap, as I told you, Your Excellency; when it comes to medium and large-scale enterprises that require US$20 million, US$100 million and US$500 million. These are factories like textile mills to use our cotton, coffee roasters and grinders for our coffee, factories for tobacco, leather, fruits, dairy products, beef, fish, timber, minerals such as cobalt, phosphates and petroleum, railways, power stations and many others.  

In nuclear physics, there is what they call binary fusion. Binary fusion means that you bring two parts together to create an explosion. Given Uganda and South Africa’s different resources and history, we can create that binary fusion that would trigger that development explosion. (Applause)

I thank you very much and before I invite His Excellency to speak to you, I want to tell you something in addition to what the Speaker said about President Mbeki. I have been working with ANC since 1967. When I was a student in Dar-es-Salaam, I used to go to their offices to collect materials. We would distribute these materials in the university to sensitise other students. At that time, somebody called Piliso ran the office in Dar-Es-Salaam. I think he died because I have not seen him since. We have been working with those liberation movements including Frelimo, for a long time.  

When we came into government, we worked with the freedom fighters that had not yet had freedom that time. I, therefore, got to know His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki when he was coming here with the late Acting Chairman of ANC, Oliver Tambo.  When he took over leadership from His Excellency, Nelson Mandela, he has been very active. In South Africa, he has made a big impact by bringing stability and ensuring democracy.
 
When President Mandela started getting weak, he delegated the former Deputy Vice President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma. He followed the peace process in Burundi and finally President Thabo Mbeki took over that responsibility. (Applause)

In Congo, he has been very active. You know people have got different gifts and potential. I am not a diplomat. I really do not know how President Thabo Mbeki manages to see good situations among people I regard as not so good. But the way he mediated with the factions of Congo; they were all in South Africa for a long time. Wamba Dia Wamba, Bemba, Kabila, all of them were there and he was able to distil a common position out of those people. (Applause)

Recently, he has been active in Ivory Coast - a very unlucky country, rich but attracting a lot of problems out of that richness - and he has a tremendous job there. The progressive forces in that country have been able to survive because of his intervention -(Applause)- otherwise there was going to be a disaster there.  

Recently he has joined us in this problem of the Sudan and he is helping us tremendously! (Applause) Why? Because in Sudan he is trusted by both sides. Khartoum does not hate him as much as they used to hate me. In South Sudan and Durfur, they trust him.  Therefore, he is able to help us in that situation on our northern border with Sudan. (Applause)

He has not only been active within South Africa, he has actually been active in the whole of Africa and I am very pleased to invite him to give you his words of wisdom from many years of experience. Thank you very much. (Applause)

12.58
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA (Mr Thabo Mbeki): Thank you very much, Mr President.  Mr Speaker, let me tell you something that President Museveni does not know.  We are scheduled to leave today to return to South Africa, but we heard President Museveni talk about languages; and among the groups of languages that he mentioned were the Xhosa languages.  Now I had noticed yesterday, Mr Speaker, that he has problems with pronunciations of some of them. (Laughter)  So I have been preparing some exercise on the Bantu languages the President spoke about, for instance, to teach him to say –(words spoken in Xhosa)- and I know he has lots of problems; or to say –(words spoken in Xhosa).  We might stay an extra day, Mr President.  (Applause)  

Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, honourable ministers and deputy ministers, honourable members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you very much for this opportunity and privilege to address the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I am honoured to bring you warm greetings from the government and people of South Africa.

The people of South Africa wish to thank, and through you the public representatives of the people of Uganda, their brothers and sisters in this country for the sacrifice, solidarity and support to us during the difficult period of the struggle against apartheid. (Applause) Although far from the borders of our country, you did not hesitate to act for the eradication of the apartheid crime against humanity.

Indeed, in our time of need, you allowed the cadres of our liberation movement, the African National Congress and especially our military combatants of Umkhonto We Sizwe (MK), to be housed in camps in Uganda. (Applause) For this, the people of South Africa owe you a debt of gratitude.

In this regard, we are deeply touched by your preparedness to erect a monument in honour of our heroes and heroines. You supported us in this extraordinary manner because you were clearly inspired by the correct belief that Ugandans could not fully enjoy their freedom knowing that their own brothers and sisters continued to endure oppression, repression and state terrorism simply because of the colour of their skin.

Because of your solidarity and generosity in housing the cadres of our liberation movement and contributing in other ways to our struggle for national emancipation, today we are free and share another trench in the new war against the twin enemies of poverty and underdevelopment. (Applause)

Indeed, we are not surprised that despite your own pressing challenges, you took the decision to support our liberation struggle because the Ugandans, just like South Africans, come from the people who endured and survived wars, tragedies, divisions, the subterfuge and arrogance of colonialists who used all manner of mechanisations to take over our countries, drain our rich African resources and exploit our labour for their own development.

As if that was not enough, the people of Uganda and South Africa, together with the rest of the African Continent, have been subjected to a long season of systematic distortion and destruction of everything African. When the British formally gazetted Buganda as a British Protectorate on 19 June 1894, it was 242 years after Jan Van Riebeeck claimed part of modern Cape Town in South Africa as a Dutch territory in 1652.

Yet, despite the interval of more than two centuries, the settlers used almost the same methods in conquering the vast tracts of land in our two countries. Through the combination of bogus treaties, fake agreements and brutal wars, the native populations of Uganda and South Africa were robbed of their land, cattle and other livestock.

In this regard, as honourable members are aware, Colonel Colville entered into these fake treaties with the Kingdom of Buganda but when the Bunyoro people under their ruler, Kabalega, refused to agree to a similar treaty, they were subjected to a horrendous military campaign. After Kabalega was defeated, the malevolence of colonialism followed the Bunyoro people as famine and disease attacked them and destroyed many of these African heroes.

Two hundred years before the defeat of the Bunyoro people, the Khoi people of South Africa, in the southern tip of the continent, experienced a more deadly devastation after initially resisting the aggressive wars of the Dutch, only to become almost extinct from the curse of diseases brought by the colonialists, especially small pox.

In both our countries, the colonialists used the tactics of divide and rule, imprisonment and exile, economic exploitation and political oppression. In different ways, our people were subjected to some horrendous tyranny all the way into the 1980s, Uganda suffering the effects of neo-colonialism and South Africa under a peculiar system of colonialism of a special type.

That the people of this country have overcome the destruction wrought by the dictatorship of Idi Amin that nearly destroyed this country is an achievement of which all Africans should be proud. (Applause) Indeed, the fortitude and commitment of both our peoples to freedom and dignity have prevailed under very trying and difficult conditions. 

As we meet today, our wounds are still to heal properly; our scars are still to clear. Yet we have a duty in tribute to our forebears and the masses of our people not to procrastinate when we have the possibility to do whatever we can to move forward faster so as to banish forever the pain occasioned by poverty and underdevelopment.

Since the sound of the drums of freedom and independence were heard in many countries, more than 40 years back, much of Africa has not known conditions of stable peace. Yet, in the last 15 years or so, we have seen the emergence of a new generation of Africans, who not only speak about change, but are prepared to bring it about; who not only preach economic development but are ready to dirty their hands to change the conditions of the people for the better; who not only pray for an end to war and conflict, but ceaselessly struggle for peace and security.

Of course, in this period of the last 15 years, we have also experienced the hideous act of genocide in Rwanda, the indecencies of wars, the deaths of our people from curable diseases and famine in the age of plenty.

Accordingly, we need faster ways to accelerate change and implement the programmes of the African Union and its development programme, NEPAD. We have to collaborate better to end conflicts and wars, ensure the all-round development of the masses of our people, and advance towards the realisation of the goal of African unity.

The commitment of the people of this country to address some of these challenges has been demonstrated by the work you have done on the critical matters of peace, security and stability.  This is particularly so with regard to the contribution that Uganda made to ensure that the peoples of Rwanda and Burundi have the possibility, after many years of conflict, civil wars and instability, to live in peace and begin to participate in democratic processes.

Again, through the Inter-Governmental Authority for Development (IGAD), Uganda, together with other regional partners, has helped to pull Somalia from the abyss of anarchy and lawlessness into the possibility of a better future. Indeed, it is because of the commitment among the Ugandans and the rest of the people of this region to help bring about peace in Sudan, that today Africa has ended decades of war in Southern Sudan. These are the concrete expressions of the commitment of African leaders to find lasting African solutions to Africa’s problems.

In this regard, we would also like to take this opportunity to pledge our solidarity with you as you continue the struggle to achieve peace in Uganda, obliged to confront such groups as the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army. (Applause)

Hon. Speaker, both Uganda and South Africa have committed themselves through the roadmap provided by the African Union and NEPAD to collaborate to achieve greater unity and solidarity for the development of our respective people and our continent. In this regard, in the past we have entered into a number of agreements on trade, finance, investment, health and agriculture.

Yesterday, we signed other important agreements as a further concrete demonstration that the partnership between our countries is driven by the pledge we made as part of Africa’s development agenda, to work together to eradicate poverty and place our countries, both individually and collectively, on a path of sustainable development. (Applause)

One of these agreements is the South Africa-Uganda Joint Permanent Economic Commission (JPEC). (Applause) This commission, which will be chaired by the ministers of Trade and Industry and directly supervised by the presidents, will focus on important matters relating to joint action to achieve mutually beneficial economic development, addressing issues such as investment between our countries, infrastructure, development, and working out the best possible ways to encourage balanced economic growth and development between us to promote the goal of a better life for both our peoples. (Applause)

As we know, in the last two years, South Africa has become one of the biggest foreign direct investor in Uganda with investments in telecommunication, energy, finance services, entertainment, leisure and other sectors. In this next context, we believe that it is important that as South Africa, we should encourage our companies to invest in this country, thereby helping to use the relative strength of the South African economy to contribute towards the achievement of higher rates of investment, growth and development in this sister country. (Applause)
 
Clearly, more investment into Uganda will help many of South African companies to grow, while they also contribute to job creation as well as the further expansion and modernization of the Ugandan economy.  This must also help to correct the large trade imbalance between our countries.

Yesterday, we also signed the agreement on Police co-operation. This agreement will ensure further co-operation between our Police services, enabling exchange of views and sharing of information on a variety of Police matters. These include matters of human, especially child trafficking, narcotics, trafficking in illicit goods and of endangered species, collaborating to defeat crime syndicates, and working together to deal with terrorism. (Applause)

We will also strengthen our trilateral arrangement, which includes the training of Police in Southern Sudan, including the capacity building programme in that country so as to help create a stable Police force.

Honourable members, discussions are continuing on a number of areas in which we have general agreements. We have a memorandum of agreement on diplomatic matters. We believe that this is very important because we need more effective coordination of our activities and better consultations around many continental and global issues that are critical to the realization of our common objectives. This will enable us to cooperate better as we respond to important issues on the international agenda.

This will also help us in our engagements in a number of areas including the Great Lakes Region, Sudan and others. We also share the same perspective on the challenge to strengthen the AU, the need to accelerate the implementation of NEPAD programmes and projects as well as the importance of the urgent reform of the United Nations.

Both South Africans and Ugandans want stronger bilateral relations. In addition, we share the view that regional economic structures are central to the regeneration of our countries and, therefore, it is important that these bodies should be strengthened and made more effective and efficient.

Further, we will soon finalise the agreement on sports and recreation so as to facilitate people contact and allow more interaction among our sporting people. This will also include exchange programmes enabling us to share the expertise that exist in our countries.

It will also be important continuously to evaluate the efficacy of all these and other programmes so as to know whether our partnership is making a difference in our march towards a better life for both our peoples.

Honourable members, I have mentioned the agreements to indicate that it is common determination of the governments, both of Uganda and South Africa to build a whole system of partnership, which must build a difference in terms of health and change the lives of our people for the better. (Applause)

Frantz Fanon wrote in On National Culture that, each generation must out of relative obscurity discover its mission, fulfil it or betray it. I think we all agree that the mission of our generation is the renaissance of the African Continent as expressed in the Constitutive Act of the African Union as well as the development programme of the AU, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). 

This mission is to eradicate poverty, ensure development and prosperity for all our people and promote the goal of African unity. This reflects our determination to extricate ourselves and the continent from the malaise of underdevelopment, as well as marginalisation and exclusion in a globalising world.

Our mission must also include the total emancipation of women –(Applause)- because we know very well that millions of African women are, as we speak today, still trapped in degrading conditions of poverty and gender discrimination. (Applause) To many of these women the taste of the fruit of liberty remains a dream deferred. Accordingly, we must all agree that Africa will never be free until all her women are free! (Applause)

Having discovered the mission of Africa’s renewal, we will not betray it but together we are obliged by circumstances of history to fulfil it. In this regard, the new leadership on our continent and the African masses constituted the Army that must eradicate the legacy of centuries of slavery, colonialism and neo-colonialism.

This is very important because we know very well that the terrible systems of slavery and colonialism were not satisfied merely with enslaving and oppressing people. They went to great lengths to ensure the mental enslavement of the native populations, especially here in Africa. That is why you see President Museveni has just spoken about progressing - on our continent.

Today we see many of the consequences of these processes, which targeted the soul of the African people, among which are the cultural alienation that makes some believe that colonialism was an important instrument to illuminate our advance out of darkness. Indeed, the colonialists sought to drive into the heads of many Africans the idea that without their supposedly divine intervention, our lives would still be defined by degradation and barbarism.

Again, Frantz Fanon said in his On National Culture and Identity that, colonialism therefore did not seek to be considered by the native as a gentle, loving mother who protects her child from a hostile environment, but rather as a mother who unceasingly restrains her fundamentally perverse offspring from managing to commit suicide and from giving free reign to its evil instincts. The colonial mother protects her child from itself, from its ego, and from its physiology, its biology, and its own unhappiness which is its very essence. In other words, the colonial mother sought to discourage the African masses from rebellion against oppression and dehumanisation, seeking to convince us that to seek our emancipation was to act against our own best interests.

Peter M. Gukina writing about the dishonesty of imperialism says: “It was these selfish money-grabbers who self-styled themselves as manufacturers and distributors of ‘civilization.’ They fed the British press all kinds of distorted stories about the African people in order to convince the British people that they had a God-given duty to free, civilise and elevate Africans - the lower races.”

The worst products of British capitalism and imperialism in the nineteenth century were those who filled their mouths with noble phrases, and expression give appearance of a sincere, profound desire to establish good governance, promote Christianity and eradicate slavery. They, at the same time, projected African people, their traditions and institutions as the most primitive, most savage and most cruel and that this justifies their domination in order to extend civilization to the Dark Continent.

In response to this millennium old racist attitude, we need to prioritise the matter of reclaiming our past. We have a duty to engage all sectors of society especially the intelligentsia and the youth to be at the forefront of this battle of taking back our history, our culture and our identity. 

Fanon says that the native intellectual who takes up arms to defend his nation’s legitimacy and who wants to bring troops to bear out that legitimacy, who is willing to strip himself naked to study the history of his body, is obliged to dissect the heart of his people. Such an examination is not specifically national. The native intellectual who decides to give battle to colonial lies fights on the field of the whole continent. The past is given back its value. Culture, extracted from the past to be displayed in all its splendour, is not necessarily that of his country. 

Colonialism, which has not bothered to put too fine a point on its efforts, has never ceased to maintain that the Negro is a savage and for the colonialist, the Negro was neither an Angolan nor a Nigerian, for he simply spoke of “the Negro.”  For Colonialism, this vast continent was the haunt of savages, a country riddled with superstitions and fanaticism, destined for contempt, weighed down by the curse of God, a country of cannibals – in short, the Negro’s country.

Clearly, a lot has been done to reclaim the history of our continent. Today, few will contest the irrefutable fact that Africa is a cradle of humanity. A few will disagree that the ancient civilization of Egypt was a civilization of the black people who imparted their superior knowledge to the Greeks, who in turn laid the basis for modern western civilization. 

No longer can anyone sustain an absurd assertion made famous by the German philosopher, Hegel, in his Philosophy of History that: “Africa is not a historical continent; it shows neither change nor development” and that the black peoples were capable of neither development nor education. As we see them today, so have they always been. 

All of us, as political leaders, as workers, as businesspeople, women and the intelligentsia have a duty to fight against poverty and underdevelopment as well as ensure that as Africans we define ourselves, not in the image of our former colonizers, but in the spirit of our African ancestors, who bequeathed so much to the human race. (Applause) I am certain that through our determined and collective struggles, we shall do overcome.

Once more, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you most sincerely for the privilege you have accorded us to address you, the elected representatives of the sister people of Uganda. I thank you very much. (Applause)
 
Motion for a resolution of parliament to pay tribute to the president of the republic of south africa, h.e. thabo mvuyelwa mbeki 

1.25
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, your excellencies, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda and President Thabo Mbeki, the President of the Republic of South Africa, my colleagues, members of Parliament.

“WHEREAS His Excellency, President Thabo Mbeki, has served as President of African National Congress since December 1997, and President of the Republic of South Africa since June 14th 1999;

AND WHEREAS President Mbeki has for all his life dedicated himself to the liberation struggle for the people of Africa, and in particular for the oppressed Africans in South Africa;

NOTING with appreciation the concerted efforts by President Mbeki to promote African integration through initiatives like the New Partnership for African Development;

NOTING FURTHER his efforts to secure peace in the Great Lakes Region; 

APPRECIATING FURTHER the President’s effort to propagate Africa’s positions in multinational institutions like United Nations, World Trade Organization and G8;

HAVING EXHIBITED great support and maintained strong and committed membership to the Organization of African Unity, now African Union, the Commonwealth and other international organizations; 

NOW THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of Parliament that:

1) His Excellency, President Mbeki, be recognized as an illustrious and state development son and leader of Africa; (Applause)

2) The Parliament of Uganda registers its great admiration for President Mbeki’s statesmanship in peacemaking and in conflict resolution and for the exemplary leadership he has rendered to his nation, and Africa as a whole; (Applause)

3) The Parliament of Uganda wishes the President the best in his service to his nation and Africa in general.” I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, we have just borrowed instruments of words of wisdom from one of Africa’s greatest leaders of this generation. Today is a day for us to recall the history of this Parliament to welcome a great son of Africa, a freedom fighter, people’s liberator with great intellect, correct vision and affectional conceptual skills. I personally feel greatly honoured to be moving this motion to pay tribute to a great and gallant son of Africa. (Applause)
 
Mr Speaker, since he became President of the African National Congress in 1997 and later the President of the Republic of South Africa in 1999, His Excellency has done great things for Africa, which cannot go unnoticed. All this is attributed to his strong revolutionary background, Pan-Africanism and his desire to see a fair and united Africa. 

Born on the 18th June 1942 in Idutywa, Transkei, President Mbeki joined youth movements at an early age of 14 and quickly became active in students politics.

President Mbeki has served African National Congress in very many different offices. After his graduation at the University of Sussex in the United Kingdom, President Mbeki worked closely with Oliver Tambo and several other African National Congress leaders in Botswana, in Swaziland, in Zambia and in Nigeria.  

During the 1980s, President Mbeki rose to head the Department of Information and Publicity and coordinated diplomatic campaigns to involve more white South Africans in the anti-apartheid activities.  

When delegations of sports, business and cultural representatives visited Lusaka for talks, they all expressed surprise to meet a man deeply engaged in the issues they brought to the table.

From 1989, President Mbeki headed the African National Congress Department of International Affairs and was a key figure in all the negotiations with the former government.  

Like Chinua Achebe’s Okonkwo, President Mbeki’s fame rests on his personal achievements.  I want to thank President Mbeki for his efforts to promote integration of Africa not only through the African Union and hosting the Pan- African Parliament, but also promoting the New Partnership for African Development, which is a new hope for Africa.

President Mbeki has also worked relentlessly in a bid to secure peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region, in Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo and presently in Cote D’Ivoire.  

President Mbeki has further worked with devotion to advance African interests in various multinational institutions like the United Nations, the World Trade Organisation and the G8.  

President Mbeki has further strengthened African integration through strategic investments in South Africa and various other African countries, Uganda inclusive, and for this I greatly commend him! 

Mr Speaker, if this august House were a university, I would have asked this House to add to President Mbeki’s list of honorary doctorate degrees already awarded by several universities. 

But I want to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency, President Museveni, for hosting President Mbeki and finding time on his busy schedule to bring him to address this House. We hope this visit further consolidates our bilateral relations.  I beg to move. (Applause)

1.29
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to second this motion.  His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, is the second head of state from a sister country to address the Seventh Parliament of Uganda –(Applause)– and we would like to very happily welcome you to Uganda!

His Excellency’s coming to this Parliament truly indicates that there is due regard to good governance and the rule of the Parliament and parliamentary democracy.

Mr Speaker, permit me to quote from the words of His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, when he opened the Second Session of the Pan-African Parliament on the 16 September 2004, and this is what he had to say and which is applicable to all parliaments in Africa: “You esteemed Members of the Pan- African Parliament have been elected by the masses of the people as their trusted representatives. You carry in your hands the hopes of the people. These masses expect you to be their fearless champions who will refuse to be attracted by petty things inspired to serve the great forces that must lead us to the renaissance of Africa.” These are great words and this Parliament of Uganda is prepared and has continued to bring a renaissance to Africa.  

A true statesman is also true to his words. (Applause) His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, has just indicated that Africa will never be free until all its women are free. As I speak now, in the Republic of South Africa, I think the gender issue is now over 40 percent and I am happy that Uganda is also leading towards that. We started it, and South Africa I think did take from Uganda and we say hands-off to South Africa, which is championing this and I am happy that in African Union it is now at 50-50.

Mr Speaker, permit me to quote, being the person that loves parliamentary democracy. The people of Africa did unanimously agree that the home of the Pan-African Parliament be in South Africa. During the day that His Excellency opened the African Parliament, the second ordinary session and the first in South Africa, this is what he had to say: “As host of this Pan-African Parliament, we have a responsibility to create the best possible conditions for this assembly of the peoples of Africa successfully to discharge its mandate. This we will do to the best of our ability.”

As I talk now, on the 21st of November of this year, the new Chambers of the Pan-African Parliament donated by the people and the Government of the Republic of South Africa was commissioned. (Applause) This is a very industrious building and it is the home of the African Parliament to which we really give you gratitude for what you have done for the people of Africa! (Applause)

In the same vein, His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki had this to say: “For centuries, the masses of the people throughout our continent which is always struggling to free all our countries from the inhuman system of colonialism and apartheid even after most of our countries were free, those who had liberated themselves made the determination that they could only enjoy the fruits of freedom and independence when the rest of the continent was liberated.”  

I am happy, Mr Speaker, that His Excellency Thabo Mbeki today and earlier has recognized the role that was played by our beloved President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and the people of Uganda to free over 4,000 ANC fighters and send them out to ensure that the African country in South Africa was liberated from the regime of apartheid.  

We trust, Mr Speaker, that the championship to ensure that the whole of Africa Continent remains liberated in all aspects of the world will continue to be upheld in the whole continent.

I would like to talk briefly on the issue of economic co-operation. I am happy today that His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, is talking about a joint permanent economic commission of South Africa and Uganda. As far as the economic co-operation is concerned, a number of businesspersons who come from South Africa have been only giving us services rather than industries that can transform the various raw materials that we have here in Uganda into finished products and value addition. We thank you for this great co-operation that is going to exist now between Uganda and South Africa, and we trust that value additions and job creations will result from this very important partnership.

Finally permit me, Mr Speaker, to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for hosting this very illustrious son of Africa. May God bless you! (Applause)

1.37
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to support this motion to thank His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, the President of the Republic of South Africa, upon his good leadership and his visit to Parliament of Uganda. 

President Mbeki as a liberator and leader of National African Congress has stood firm for the value of liberation. I want just to mention these values for purposes of emphasis: We thank him for standing firm for freedom; we thank him for standing firm for peace, security and stability -(Applause)- we thank him for standing firm for equality and equity in his country. We thank him for his democratic values enshrined in his country, for development and a betterment of the African race.

Mr President, in your fight for freedom, you have ensured freedom for all, freedom for the black race, freedom for the marginalized, freedom for the women and you have ensured the well being of everybody and you have uplifted their well being. We commend you!

Your Excellency, President Mbeki, is saluted for the affirmative action and empowerment policies of your government. (Applause) These are being envisaged in many policies, for instance, land access. We salute you for education access; we salute you for employment access in your country, and of course equity for all.  

Your government has acted as role model for all, particularly in the area of the representation of the women. Women in your country occupy key positions. We salute you because your Vice President is a woman -(Applause)- the Speaker of the national Parliament is a woman, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs is a woman.  This is a clear testimony of how far you can stand for the gender sensitivity of the woman gender. Thank you! 

We welcome the First Lady of South Africa amidst us! (Applause) Parliament of South Africa with over 20 per cent of women in Parliament is the second on the African Continent and we commend you for that! (Applause)  

Mr President, Uganda commends and appreciates the concern your government has put in the fight against HIV/AIDS and we thank you, and your government for the continuity sharing of the experience with us. Parliament of Uganda has received our sisters and brothers both from national Parliament and the provisional governments to share experiences on the fight against this scourge.  Together we shall conquer, we shall win.

Uganda and the Parliament of Uganda commend your government and the private sector for the engagement made in various structures of production in this country. We thank you, because in the city of Kampala, which I am privileged to represent in this Parliament, we know and we see beautiful investments which we all feel proud of. We pray that this co-operation is enhanced and we are sure that it will be enhanced under your leadership.  

We salute you for being a friend to Uganda and we salute all the efforts made under your leadership to make sure that Uganda remains in peace. We recommend your initiative and support of the Great Lakes Region initiative and the Great Lakes Region conference, which has made tremendous steps towards peace and stability in this region. And we thank you for all the institutional mechanism put in place to make sure that lasting peace is brought back to this beautiful part of the continent. May the Good Lord bless you, may the Good Lord bless your country and your people! And may the friendship between our two peoples and two presidents continue to thrive for the betterment of our country. I beg to support, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

1.44
MRS CECELIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank you for picking me from among the various anxious Members who want to say something on an occasion like this. Today is a historic day; we have for many years wanted to have this kind of dialogue with the great son of Africa, His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki. So, I really feel so fortunate that today I have to make a comment when he is present with us. I want to thank you very much.  

The last time I talked to His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, was when we had SMART Partnership in Munyonyo. It was a great occasion, and I remember on that day you congratulated your brother His Excellency, Yoweri Museveni, for having so many statesmen and women in the country and I happen to be one of those women. I want to thank you very much!

Mr Speaker, I have two comments to make: First of all, I want to thank South Africa, the ANC and you the President of South Africa for having accorded great honour to the fallen son of Uganda, the late Milton Obote! (Applause)  

The death of Milton Obote has ushered in a new era in this country. I have had occasion to thank the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for having made two historic and great statements in Parliament on that occasion. (Applause) It was a very sad occasion but I did mark the two statements that he made: First he said it was time for us to bury history, and secondly he said the time has come for us to put to practice the policy of reconciliation. 

Mr Speaker, I wonder how South Africa became a winner when it had a long history of folly, violence and hate most especially a country that had institutionalised and legalised violence. I have made this statement before in Parliament that apartheid was a system that was recognized by law and we have come to realise that smart dictators use the law to rule. We must acknowledge that evil thrives when you sleep.  

I want to say that you are a winner despite that folly in your history because despite that, you were able to heal the nation and come out united in the manner that you have. I want to thank you very much –(Applause)- and I believe Uganda which has a shorter history of violence can also become a winner if we are determined. 

I want to beg that during this one day you are going to spend in Uganda, you will not only teach us how to pronounce certain words - I am particularly poor in pronunciations - because I want to have an opportunity of being taught by a great teacher like you. I would also like you to teach us how we can change our paradise, become real statesmen and women, unite this country and make it a vibrant one that we can change. We can at least look at others and know that others can also contribute to making this country what it can be. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I want to thank His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. There are many things that we have in common. I do not know whether he was a mathematician like me but I like figures and he has always reminded me about some statistics. Thank you for reminding me that there are 850 million Africans but what does that mean to us? These 850 million Africans are engaged in destructive tendencies. I think we are heading nowhere. 

I am praying that these 850 million Africans be transformed into a market that we can, as Africans -(Applause)- if we can convert them into a market then definitely we are going to stop this country from being a beggar and instead people will come to beg from us. I want to thank you and I pray that you teach all of us how to be good statesmen and women, how to be fathers and how to nurture the culture of peaceful transfer of powers. (Applause)  

Your Excellency, I was amazed to see the father of the South African democracy as he came from jail. He was very happy to serve for just a short period and to leave in peace when people still loved him and they still do. This is the kind of culture we want to instil in each one of us and not on any particular person. When I say peaceful transfer of powers, I mean we should also transfer from one MP to another, therefore, do not think I have other motives because I don’t.  

Your Excellency and Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. May God bless South Africa, may God bless Your Excellency, Thabo Mbeki and your dear wife and may God bless our President, the host of the day, as well! (Applause) I pray that South Africa will continue to pray for us as we go towards the 2006 general elections. We need your prayers and support. May God bless you all! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members thank you very much. This brings us to the end of this special sitting. We shall have the ordinary plenary in the afternoon. Therefore, we come to the end of this sitting. The House is adjourned to 3.00 p.m.

SOUTH AFRICA NATIONAL ANTHEM

UGANDA NATIONAL ANTHEM

(The House rose at 1.49 p.m. and adjourned to Parliament House.)

(On resumption at 3.31 p.m. _)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pleasure to welcome you. I would like to thank you for whatever you have been able to do in the past. Furthermore, I want to put it on record in a special way that I have been very happy with the way you received our distinguished guests at the special sitting today. I was impressed with what you did, it was dignified and you conducted business maturely so I thought I should thank you. Please continue to conduct yourselves in a similar manner. (Applause)

Over the weekend, I was happy to attend three functions that were connected with us here: One was the marriage of the daughter of the Prime Minister at St Augustine Chapel, Makerere; another was the wedding of one of our members, hon. Nantume at Namirembe Cathedral. I was happy to note that those who were at the high table were honourable members of Parliament who included hon. Nyombi, hon. Nvumetta Kavuma, who I think was the matron and hon. Nankabirwa. It was a happy occasion.

I was also able to attend another function of the daughter of hon. Kabwegyere who got married in Entebbe. I want to congratulate all of you and the parents for their achievements!

Honourable members, I have received communication from the Electoral Commission concerning the work that you did some months ago namely; the Regional Tier Constitution (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill. As you may appreciate, the process was that after we had finished with it, it had to go to the various districts for ratification. I have been advised that 56 districts ratified the amendment while 12 were unable to do so for one reason or another. 

This law will now be sent to the President for assent. As you may appreciate, this law came about as a result of ratification so the question of rejecting it and bringing it back does not arise. I want to also congratulate you for this achievement! (Applause)

However, I think that those districts that did not ratify this amendment did not do so because probably an explanation was not given to them concerning what had been done, and the policy behind this amendment. We just sent it for ratification without explaining to the people and as a result, there are certain reservations because of certain things that are not there. 

Let me add, however, that in a constitutional amendment everything need not be there since the Constitution only sets up the principles. It is not a self-executing document; other laws have to come in to help it be operationalised. Therefore, the matters that have been raised from certain quarters will be taken care of in a Bill we are going to have entitled, “The Regional Tier Bill.” For instance, we have local governments being mentioned in the Constitution. However, what is mentioned in the Constitution is not enough and that is why we have the Local Governments Act, the Presidential Elections Act and the Parliamentary Elections Act.  

In the same way, other details will come to back up what we did in this constitutional amendment. Also it may be necessary in future for us to explain to the people what we have done in order to solve some of the problems that people may find. I thank you.

3.39
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Chair on one issue and also guidance from the Attorney General on another. The first issue is procedural. Why do we hold certain functions in the main hall and not here, especially when receiving a head of state? This place looks more dignified and has an air of Parliament. Can’t we receive them here because in terms of numbers -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we can receive them here. As you may note this year, His Excellency, the President came here after a long time for the Budget, State of the Nation Address and for other functions. Therefore, it is possible although when you have two heads of state coupled with the security involved, sitting them here may become a problem. It is really an issue of convenience rather than anything else. I would have loved to have such functions in the House but because of lack of space we cannot. There isn’t any other reason.

However, let me say that we have already commissioned an architect to draw us a plan for a bigger House and we are in the process of soliciting for funds. Once this is achieved, that problem will not arise.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand now that it is only a matter of room and that there is no other inhibition.

Furthermore, Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification or guidance from the Attorney General or his deputy on a matter of interpretation of the law. As a legislator, I get embarrassed when my two colleagues who belong to the same department give contradictory statements on a similar matter. Could the deputy Attorney General inform this august House what happened concerning the two statements they issued regarding Dr Kiiza Besigye’s petition or nomination? Why is it that you gave one statement and then your senior colleague came up with a different one that seemed contradictory? What is the problem? Can you tell us?

THE SPEAKER: I suppose you are not seeking clarification from me because I am not the Attorney General.

MR AWORI: No, Mr Speaker. I was saying that, through you, I am seeking clarification from the deputy Attorney General. I assume that the two statements that were made were not just off-the-cuff but rather were a result of deliberations on their accounts. Could you tell us what happened and who is right or wrong or perhaps did you go to different schools?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to comment on that? Hon. Awori, I think you are alluding to something that has been in the papers. Furthermore, I think this matter has already been resolved. The Electoral Commission is an independent body. Although it can be advised, it has the right to take or reject that advice. On this particular issue, it has already made the declaration that it intends to proceed with the nomination; so it is no longer an issue. Perhaps for academic purposes, it could be but the Electoral Commission has already made up its mind so there is no longer any problem.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is an academic matter but personally it is embarrassing the august House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is noted.

3.43
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Related to His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki’s visit to Uganda, my party the Forum for Democratic Change had asked its supporters to give a rousing welcome to His Excellency on his way from Entebbe to Kampala. However, yesterday armed men wearing army uniforms and Police besieged our headquarters. Eventually as the press reports today and also for those who had the opportunity to watch television yesterday evening, the senior army commander who was in charge of that operation a certain Lt Col Bugingo slapped one of the senior officials of my party. 

Mr Speaker, this humiliation took place in full view of everybody. We as a party are very angered by this act, and demand an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence. We also demand disciplinary action against this particular officer.

As you may realise, we are going through a transition. This transition should not only be free and fair but should also be seen to be free and fair. For army officers to besiege the headquarters of a political organisation, slap openly and humiliate a senior official of the party is uncouth and uncivilized and we are not going to take it lying low. This is inciting the population into violence against those particular officers and instead they will blame it on the Forum for Democratic Change.

Mr Speaker, we demand an explanation from Government - I do not know whether the Leader of Government Business or whatever it is - and action against this particular officer. Otherwise, we shall also be forced to take the law into our hands because we must defend ourselves. Time for people to just walk into our offices, slap us and walk away scot-free is over. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, what I can say is that your concern has been noted. Secondly, the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here but it is now on record and their attention will be drawn to that so that they can give an explanation.

MR KATUNTU: But, Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business is right here -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not fair to handle it that way –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is not fair to beat up senior members of a party and we just keep quiet.

THE SPEAKER: Let us be not emotional because I do not act on emotions. First of all, when you made the statement you said that you wanted an explanation from Minister of Defence or Internal Affairs. I accepted that and it has gone on record. When they come I will draw their attention to that.

3.46
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, thank you. Before we –(Interruption)
	  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you started the minister was not here. You asked for an explanation and then when the Leader of Government Business entered you demanded that he explains. I want to say that your issue has gone on record and the appropriate persons will have their attention drawn to it for an explanation.

DR OKULO EPAK: Sir, before we adjourned, the honourable Attorney General had promised that on the following Tuesday he would give us a report on the question of elections for chairpersons and woman representatives in those districts which are due to be operational in July 2006. The decision was made here in the House but so far no action has been taken from all quarters. 

Even the various parties are not aware and are not preparing candidates for these positions. The Electoral Commission also says that they are not aware and that they are not going to do anything. The honourable Attorney General promised he was going to give us a statement on this issue the following Tuesday but unfortunately we then adjourned. Can we get this matter clarified because the decision of this august House is not being implemented?

THE SPEAKER: Deputy Attorney General, are you in position to deal with that now?

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I will draw this to the attention of the Attorney General and he will make a statement to this House as soon as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let me be clear. If you want to make a point after Communication from the Chair you have to notify the Chair before hand. As far as I am concerned, the only person who did that according to practice is hon. Mwandha who has a question and I intend to entertain him.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, mine is procedural.

THE SPEAKER: I recognize the new President General of the Conservative Party -(Laughter)- and at an appropriate time I will give you an opportunity to make your maiden speech.

3.50
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern Region): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to express concern about Jinja road. You remember very well that we raised this matter in this House previously and the minister explained that government had hired a contractor and that the contractor had absconded. The minister then promised that by August this year, a new contractor would have been appointed. He further said that in the meantime a sub-contractor was being hired to make the road usable. 

Mr Speaker, as we speak, none of these two things has been done. We do not have a substantive contractor to work on Jinja road and it is dangerous to motorists, cyclists, pedestrians and to the people who have homes on that road. People are inhaling tons of dust despite the fact that the contractor had put some chemical on the road before he absconded. I fear that in time to come many of us who use that road and have to inhale this dust will be found with complications arising from this road.  

Why did the minister tell this House a lie that the road was going to be fixed by August yet up to now the road is not fixed and there is no contractor? Furthermore, the minister has not had the decency to come to this House and explain why nothing is happening on that road yet we continue to suffer. 

Furthermore, because this road is the economic lifeline of the country, even insurers now have to raise their premiums because of its condition. I am concerned as indeed many people who use this road are about the state of this road. The minister must come clean and tell us what is actually going on. Why isn’t there a contractor to complete this road? That is my first point.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we shall do is that, on the date we are going to adjourn to, the Minister of Works should give an explanation concerning that issue. Could the Leader of Government Business take note? We are not going to adjourn to tomorrow because of presidential nominations but on the date that we adjourn to, the Minister of Works should come and give us an explanation.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Sir. The problem is that very often ministers tend to avoid answering questions. I recall that on the day we adjourned, the Minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to make a statement but he has quietly ignored to make it. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have said that the Leader of Government Business should ask the minister on the day that I adjourn to, to give an explanation.

MR MWANDHA: Okay, Sir. I hope this will not be like other cases. My next point is with regard to the disability policy. Again the Minister responsible for Disability promised in broad daylight that by May the disability policy would be tendered to this House. What is the month today – December. Nothing has happened and the minister has not explained why he has not brought this statement. What these ministers do is to quietly avoid making these statements despite your instructions that they come and give explanations because nobody is going to follow them up. This is a very serious matter, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay that ends all matters for which I received notification. Can we go on to the next item?

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I was informed that I was supposed to present papers in respect to –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is not a reading room for newspapers.

MR RUKUTANA: To the Bujagali power project. As I talk –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you want to read newspapers go out. Proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: As I stand here, the agreement and documents that I am supposed to table are being signed. Therefore, I regret that I am not ready to present them today.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue that the honourable minister is unable to address was the subject of a motion of Parliament during the last session before we went into a brief recess. We even successfully supported that motion condemning the attitude of the Cabinet towards the performance of their obligations to the august House.

I am surprised that the minister has not taken note of that resolution of Parliament condemning this kind of misdirection of duty, fear to perform and incapacity to perform their obligations to the House. Mr Speaker, after that resolution of Parliament, why is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, I am handicapped concerning the problem you are putting to me as the Chair. All I can see on the Order Paper is presentation of papers. Therefore, you cannot start that kind of contribution when I do not know what papers these were supposed to be. Are they the same papers you are talking about or are they different? I have to decide; but how can I do that when I do not know what type of papers were supposed to be presented?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the same paper on power that the minister was unable to come with. The minister who presented that particular paper actually came up with a resolution on the matter instead of laying the papers on the Table. We then told her as a matter of fact that when you come to Parliament to present papers, you do not come with a motion for a resolution of Parliament.  Papers are different from a motion for a resolution of Parliament.  

Now, once again the relevant minister has come up to say he is sorry but he is not ready, after four weeks! Mr Speaker, personally this is an insult, contempt and total lack of respect for the colleagues in the august House. We moved a motion and if need be we can move another one.   

3.58
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There have been so many issues that the country had wanted to hear debated and discussed in this august House. The country wants to know when we will complete the Local Government (Amendment) Act to enable LCs or people who are going to get elected to know when they can resign or whether they will not be required to resign. However, the Order Paper keeps on being stuffed with business, which do not seem to have received your clearance. 

A case in point is the papers being talked about. Were they newspapers? Was it waste paper? Which papers were these that did not come to you for clearance? Was it toilet paper? Which papers were these that were supposed to be presented to this House for us to deliberate on?

Mr Speaker, we have continued to cheat this country because work in this House is not processed. For some of us who want to bring motions, which want to be clarified, we are stopped because there is precedence that the government business must take. And government is not ready! It will not even be ready next week yet the country is waiting; it continues to pay tax for us to waste time here.

Mr Speaker, my concern is we wake up every morning, wear the best suits in the land to come and do work here. We do so, we keep decent and do our business and what we find at the Table is that the House has been adjourned without notice! Everyday we cannot plan our lives, we cannot plan our business because of the ad hoc way in which we come and find ourselves here. I am worried because I know, for instance, that there is a lot of work to be done –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable Member, without wasting more time, this item of papers is not here. Why don’t we deal with the business that is ready?  We clear it and if you have motions, you have business, present it and we shall accommodate you instead of debating this issue. I have said I do not know the papers, therefore, I cannot comment on those papers, can we move on the next item.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, can I complete my sentence?  I want to ask once more how you intend to conduct this House, whether I still have the same rights as my colleagues do: to debate, to ask questions and seek clarification? I am such a law-abiding citizen that I would like only to be guided by the rules of this House. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the House will be conducted in accordance with our rules and I expect any Member who wants to make a contribution to do so in the context of the rules. Last time you asked this question about what we are going to do now that we are transiting to a multiparty system, when we transit to a multiparty system, the House will be conducted in accordance with procedures that are followed in the multiparty system. I will be having leaders of various parties and they will be recognised as leaders and, therefore, when there is something to debate I will be liasing or the Chair will be liasing with these leaders. They will even be free to select people who are going to make contribution on important subjects. As of now, it is under a Movement system.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON REPRESENTATION OF SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under section 8 subsection (3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act of 2005, Act 17 for the review of representation of special interest groups under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, as I said, this motion is moved under section 8, subsection (3) of the Act and the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.

In Article 78 of the Constitution, the Constitution provides that Parliament shall among others consist of –
“(b) One woman representative for every district;
(c) Such numbers of representatives of the Army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.”  

In the same Article, Mr Speaker, Parliament is enjoined to review the representation of these groups after the expiration of 10 years. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 made provision for the district women representatives and for the representation of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, the youth, workers and persons with disabilities in Section 11 as follows: one woman representative for every district, 10 representatives of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, five representatives for the youth at least one of whom shall be a woman, five representatives of the workers, five representatives of persons with disabilities at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections Act of 2005 in Section 8 provides for the following amended representation in respect of Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution, in the new Act we have district or city women representatives and the law says that there shall be one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city, special interest groups: Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces 10 representatives at least two of whom shall be women, five representatives of workers at least one of whom shall be a woman, five representatives for the youth at least one of whom shall be a woman, five representatives for persons with disabilities at least one of whom shall be a woman.” 

And in Article 78(2) of the Constitution, as I have stated earlier, we are required after the expiration of 10 years, after the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter every five years to review the above representation for purposes of retaining, increasing, or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it;
 
“AND WHEREAS the period of 10 years after the commencement of the Constitution expired on the 7 October 2005;

NOW THEREFORE, I propose that this House resolves as follows: that in accordance with section 8, sub section (3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and Article 78(2) of the Constitution, the representation in Parliament under Article 78(1)(b) and (C) is reviewed for the purpose of retaining the representation, which shall be as follows:

1.	District or city women representatives: One woman representative in Parliament for every district or city;

2.	Special interest groups: for the UPDF 10 representatives at least two of whom shall be women; Five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman; Five representatives for the youth at least one of whom shall be a woman; Five representatives for persons with disabilities at least one of whom shall be a woman.”  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the motion. As you appreciate, it is a constitutional duty for us after 10 years, which expired on 7 October 2005, that is the day of promulgation of the Constitution in 1995, we have to decide on the issue of special representation to enable the Electoral Commission to conduct their election. If we do not do it, then the Electoral Commission will have a problem of conducting the elections of these special groups. It is now up to you to debate this matter.  They have told you the law: the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 under Section 8 sub section (3), provided the way of operationalising this particular part of the Constitution. So the debate is now open.

DR EPAK: I am seeking clarification from you, Sir.  It is stated somewhere that the ten years expired in October this year and we are only receiving this resolution here today. In fact, I have just seen this resolution, as I am sitting here. 
 
Secondly, this looks like an ambush in the first instance. Because we are dealing with a very serious constitutional matter, it cannot be presented and decided upon in five minutes. It is very serious.

Thirdly, there is a honourable member here who thinks that she can debate with me as I speak, hon. Speaker. Can you really protect me?

THE SPEAKER: From who?

DR EPAK: Well, I think she should stand up and apologise.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are protected. Proceed.

DR EPAK: Mr Speaker, the second point I want to make –(Interruption)- Hon. Nusura, can you stop being childish in the House.

MS TIPERU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.  My senior colleague, hon. Epak, is speaking and I am just perusing this paper and listening carefully to what he is saying. Is he in order to keep referring to me as a child while he speaks, when I actually have children too? I am a mother, a former Youth MP, but now a Woman Member of Parliament who has even just recently passed primary elections with over 90 percent? Is he in order to continue having a problem in his mind? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate why she was behaving childishly, honourable member, or you withdraw and then we proceed?

DR EPAK: First of all “childish” does not mean a “child” as far as I know English. There are two different vocabularies. Before she put me on a point of order, I had already reported that I was being unnecessarily interrupted. This is totally contrary to our rules. But when an honourable member is speaking, he cannot be unduly interrupted and you asked me to disclose who was doing it, I was decent enough not to, but she continued.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to keep peace, honourable members?

DR EPAK: Anyway the point I am raising is: could this not have been appropriate?

THE SPEAKER: No, no. We are still on the other one.  I am appealing to you to keep peace so that we can proceed. I will answer you on the other one, but I have to maintain peace in that corner.    

MS TIPERU: Mr Speaker, actually there is no insecurity here. We are actually very close friends with hon. Epak to the extent that we have a family relationship. So, you do not have to worry but he has also to respect me.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let me explain, because you are asking, if it expired on 7 October 2005, why do we bring it now? The issue is that the command of the Constitution was to the effect that the issue of a special representation should be reviewed after ten years. The reason to give ten years is to give sufficient time for these special groups, which were being represented here, to do some work and for it to assess whether there is need to continue with them; whether there was no need, or whether there is another issue. So, it was on our programme that after ten years, Parliament should review this issue.  

The ten years expired in October, and is now one month ever since.  Because we had other business to deal with, now it has come. It is not affecting the current representation in Parliament. The Members who are here, a special group, will continue.  But we are planning for next elections, for the next Parliament. I have said the commission cannot conduct elections for these special groups unless we have exercised our mandate under that particular Article and that is what we are doing.  

The other thing, we had a problem in that, there was no law to operationalise other than the constitutional provisions. There was no law. Now the law has been passed, the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005. It is the one to guide us as to how to deal with this issue, and for your information, those who are asking about Local Government, it has also received assent, so it is part of the law. So, because we have the law at hand, then we can do what we want. It is up to you, if you are to debate this issue to see whether there is need or there is no need. You will not be hurried, but we have to do it as soon as possible so that the Electoral Commission can prepare for elections of these groups.  

DR EPAK: Sir, you cut me short before I had even completed what I stood for, because of this interruption. That was the first clarification I was seeking.  

The second one was that, since this is an important constitutional matter, was it the best way to present it to the House by resolution? Because I would have imagined that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should have been given the opportunity to hear and solicit opinions from outsiders on this matter. At least on my own part, I have not carried out any consultations on this matter and the only opportunity which should have been given to the public would be through passing this matter through the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. That was I think the most important thing, which is why I am saying, if it comes now, it is rather too short a period to the elections and I do not know whether it was mandatory that it should come by resolution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think the law talks about the resolution. But how will it go to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee without first coming here for us to say: “Oh, I think we need our committee to study it and then report.” If this is your position that you need advice of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, we can do it. But let us see, it could be possible that you can decide without the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, because this is a straightforward matter in that, these groups are there in the Constitution. 

These groups are in Parliament. It is up to you to assess individuals, in order to think that there is need to continue with this group or that group and then we decide. After the entire Act has given us provisions that in order to retain, you need two-thirds of Members of Parliament, which is the law. So, if you want more time, we can debate today and then we adjourn to next week, it is up to you. Let us hear from the Chairman, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

4.18
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This matter is not new, it was subject to the Constitutional Review Commission and they filed a report which was distributed to Members of Parliament. This matter was subject to the Government White Paper. The issue was drawn on this matter. So, the matter came before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, we examined it, held public hearings, listened to over 45 individuals and groups to make submission on these issues. 

In fact, in our report to Parliament, we stated that this matter - yes, it is right that it needs review, but it could not be reviewed then when we were examining those matters because the ten years imposed by Article 78 of the Constitution had not elapsed. Now that it has elapsed - but all the issues were examined and the committee reported all the different views that were brought to it and we put it before Parliament, Sir. So, the matter is substantially before Parliament except for this issue.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Several times I have been reminding you about this provision, not once or twice, but many times. I said it is on our programme; we shall deal with this issue. But I think it is up to you to debate it; if you do not think we can finish the debate today, we can adjourn to next week. But it is necessary that we decide on this issue to give sufficient notice to the Electoral Commission to prepare.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am just seeking your guidance. In the event that we cannot reach a resolution, what will happen?

THE SPEAKER: If you do not reach a resolution, the Electoral Commission will have a problem of arranging elections for these groups for the next Parliament.  

MR AWORI: Which essentially means, Mr Speaker, in your interpretation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Because people or other people who may not be us - but the provision for these special groups was for ten years. We have not made any decision, so how do they exist? 

MR AWORI: So, unless we give them the extension now, it means in the next Parliament there will be no special interest groups.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Masiko, do you have a contrary view?

4.20
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I read the provisions as quoted in this resolution of the Constitution, “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing, or abolishing any such representation and any other matter….” 

Mr Speaker, I do not read in this paragraph any connection of the review to directions of the representation of special interest groups, and even when they say “expiration” is it October? Is it December, January or March? I believe it is not correct to say that if we do not pass this resolution, then there will be no elections for the special interest groups. There are three options: retain, increase or abolish; why are we tying ourselves on only abolishing? It could also be “retaining” and there is no limit in this Constitution to say that, may be the next elections will not be held if there is no review. Or, we must review first before we hold the next elections, it is not written anywhere. If it is there, I would like the Attorney General to advise me. But otherwise we have been asking for this review, yes, it has come. 

Now the timing: I am not so sure, hon. Speaker, you know the political developments that are currently going on. If we cannot do it, we leave it as it is and then review. In any case, we are not going to reduce. Some are asking for the increase of the representation. That one can also be arranged after the general elections.

Mr Speaker, even if you go to the Constitutional Court, I believe that the elections are not barred because we lack the review of the representation of the interest groups.

MR SPEAKER: Learned Attorney General, why did you bring this motion?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the timing, colleagues know and appreciate that we had a tight schedule in October when the ten years expired. We were involved with the electoral laws here; we all participated and had to pass those laws because we had to prepare for the forthcoming elections.  Therefore, we should be spared the blame for the timing. It is not too late for the Attorney General to have introduced this motion to this House today.

Now, Mr Speaker, the reason government has brought this motion is because the Constitution commands this Parliament to consider it. If I had a choice, I would not have brought it, because clearly Members are busy and I am busy too. But the Constitution commands us to consider this motion upon the expiration of ten years after the promulgation of the Constitution. Ten years have expired and I would like to agree with you that the retention, increment or abolition of special interest groups cannot be presumed; it must be done here. 

So, the Electoral Commission while conducting elections next year will not presume that Parliament after all had wished to increase or to retain. This review must be done here and now and if we do not do it, I am afraid we are likely to run into constitutional problems. The Electoral Commission is likely to have problems in conducting elections for special interest groups, which this Parliament has not reviewed in accordance with the Constitution. 

I would like therefore to advise, Sir, that we proceed to consider this motion on its merits. It is within our powers to determine whether to retain, increase or abolish as we deem it fit.  But not anybody can presume increment or retention.

4.27
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I want to start debating this motion. I have looked at the recommendations of the government; I have no problem with other interest groups. I only have a problem with the Army representation.  

Mr Speaker, we are moving into a multiparty system of government where Members of Parliament are going to be elected on party basis, and business of this House is going to be discussed and transacted on that basis. Our continued representation of the Army under those circumstances is problematic, and this can be borne out by the experience we have gone through. 

We know the reasons why the Army was represented in the Constituent Assembly; we know why we thought it necessary to continue with it under the system that existed, which was not supposed to be partisan.  But we are now moving into a situation, which is clearly partisan. Where will the Army representatives be? The reason then was that these people contributed to the liberation of this country, they are involved in the day-today affairs, so they had to know what was going on in order for them to know how the country is being governed. But can that situation be defended under a multiparty system? Is it tenable? 

My experience is that it is not. I had the benefit of being in this House in 1981 to 85, when we had a multiparty system and we had army representatives.  They were here; they were a disaster. It was a total disaster! We had ten of them, but only two of them used to attend Parliament. The others used to come only for ceremonial opening; then, they would come in their army uniforms, sit here and then go away. 

At that time, the reason was that these people had participated in our liberation then in 1979, they had to be here to know what was going on. They did not attend and at the end of the day, two or three of them who had been Members of this House but not attending, participated in the coup which overthrew the government. It was only two young officers who used to debate interminably here and they were partly partisan. So, it did not help at all.  

Now, the experience I have had recently is that you cannot prevent army officers from being partisan.  When you bring them here, they will invariably want to look like they support government and the government will expect it to be so. But the experience we have is that officers are not supposed to say certain things in this House. So, in a way, they are Members of Parliament with limitations. So, of what purpose then are they?  The experience we had of one army officer who just dared to abstain from making a vote, the kind of thing he went through is an experience we do not want to express anywhere.  

And two, I have another additional personal experience with the Army. I happen to have a barracks in my own constituency. So, the soldiers there vote in all the elections including local government elections. After that, they come here and are again represented as a special interest group. It could have not been a problem if they do not appear to be influenced, even in the way they vote in a constituency, because in that area, I am invariably not allowed to go and speak to that constituency. Invariably, my opponent is allowed and given access to that area and he is the only one who campaigns there and invariably gets all the votes and I get zero.  

So, I always start my election by counting how many soldiers will vote for my opponent and then I start getting to be able to recover from the other areas.  The soldiers are badly partisan! I think in the CA I got 28 votes and the people who voted for me had problems. They are both known. 

So, in light of that, let us not pretend. Let us not involve our soldiers in partisan politics. It is better we keep them out. If we can keep all the other forces out, I see no reason at this stage to involve army officers in this Parliament. So, I would suggest that in the case of soldiers, they should be left out. About the others I have no problem, Mr Speaker.

4.32
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make my contribution, I was asked by Kagoma people to convey congratulations to NRM colleagues who went through in the primaries and to send their sympathies to those who failed.  

Mr Speaker, the Sempebwa Commission did a very good job. It visited a number of areas in Busoga and I attended one of the sessions. The commission wrote a very lengthy, comprehensive report on most of these issues. Unfortunately, the government in its White Paper ignored them. 

The commission said, among other things, that we have too many Members of Parliament in this House and that if you take our emoluments and all facilities given to us, it is too much of a financial burden to the people of Uganda. But recently, we have even increased the number of districts from 56 to 78, and it means that we might even go up to 100 because now days, it is disowned. I have even seen papers, which suggest that some districts may be created.  

Now, we cannot eat our cake and have it. We have to be rational to rationalize expenditures of this country. The Sempebwa Commission recommended that Parliament should have only 120 Members; each Member representing about 100,000 people, and the commission did not think it wise for us to continue with these special interest groups in Parliament.  Rightly from women representatives, districts –(Interjections)- yes, I am saying what the commission stated. And we have a number of parliaments where we do not have these special interest groups. 

MR MWANDHA: Actually for purposes of record, the Sempebwa Commission had a lengthy argument on this question of special interest groups and at the end of the day, they recommended only two; women representation and representation of disabled persons.

DR NABWISO: That recommendation still supports my case. The commission recommended only 120 seats in Parliament. It wanted to reduce the number of seats. 

So, what we are having now is a situation, which is not very good for some Members of Parliament. Some constituencies have seven sub-counties or more than 100,000 people, when some others have less than 1,000 voters. Mr Speaker, the point that I would like –(Interjections)– yes, if you take the whole of Kalangala District or Kapchorwa District, Kagoma County alone has more voters than those in Kapchorwa in total –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you are talking about size, you are talking about 220, but you have not reduced the 214, are you trying to say that these should be the victims? Is this the reasoning or on their merits?

DR NABWISO: I want to conclude by saying that three groups should get out: the first one is the Army because of the reasons which have been given; two, the workers, yes, I have not seen a very productive worker here and three, the youth –(Interjections)– yes that is my statement –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: That is his opinion; he is entitled to it.

DR NABWISO: The only time I saw a serious motion from the workers was when we were talking about AGOA girls, but I have not seen a motion from the workers to promote worker’s interests –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The representatives of the special interest groups have been here for ten years and if you evaluate that period in the 6th Parliament, for instance, out of about five private members bills, two came from the workers and if you look at the reason why it was so, the workers were initially three and they had to be increased to five. There was a lot of reasoning for that.  

So I, therefore, find it difficult for my colleague to give certain sentiments without any objective analysis. Is he therefore in order to just give views without objectively analysing the whole period these interest groups have been in Parliament?  

THE SPEAKER: I have to say this many times, that personal assessment differs. So, I cannot rule somebody out of order simply because his assessment is different from yours. You just listen to his opinion, and then you may take it or leave it.  

DR NABWISO: I was winding up that if we want to reverse these special interest groups, they should wake up and tell us what they are going to do in Parliament. But generally speaking, we have not seen serious motions from special interest groups seeking to empower the constituencies, which they represent and it is on that condition that I will not vote for the Army, the Workers and the Youth.

4.41
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to retain all the interest groups.  

Mr Speaker, I find hon. Wilberforce Nabwiso’s argument intriguing and rather unrealistic and actually very self-defeating. Because, just as you were guiding, Mr Speaker, if we have a Parliament of 307 Members and you support the argument to reduce to 126, then you say that you should remove the five Members of Parliament representing the Youth, actually only 20 Members of Parliament cannot substantively reduce the number of Members of Parliament to what the commission represented.  

So, Mr Speaker, I just want to inform my honourable colleague that the youth in this country have played a key role in the democratisation process and they should, therefore, be represented at all levels. When the NRM revolution was coming in place, it was young people fighting in the bushes to liberate this country. So, there is no way you can deny the kadogos of today that right because today they might not come with guns, but they must come with their voices, their voices must be heard.  

According to the recently concluded census, out of the 24.4 million Ugandans, the youth between the ages of 18 and 30 constitute 5.4 millions. So, there is no way you can deny such a big proportion of Ugandans a chance to be heard.  

Mr Speaker, the representation of youth has groomed a number of people here. Hon. Mike Sebalu was a youth representative, hon. Namuyangu Jenipher, the Minister, was a youth representative, hon. Jalia Bintu was a youth representative, hon. Nusura Tiperu was a youth representative, hon. Juliet Kabonesa is a candidate for women representation, the speaker is a candidate for women representation in Nakaseke and hon. Kidega Dan, the candidate for Kulak County. And this is a source of inspiration for so many young people out there and, therefore, I really believe that if they are pulled out, it is injustice and Martin Luther King said that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.  

So, Mr Speaker, in this new political dispensation as we go into multipartism, I must say that the youth between the ages of 18 and 30 have never seen multiparty politics at play and at the time when multipartism was here, the youth were guillotined to party wings and brigades that I believe at this time we need their participation in the decision making process. They should not be seen as mere supporters but they should participate in directing the thinking of these political parties.

Mr Speaker, we want to put it on record as the national youth leadership that we condemn any political party that creates brigades both at Parliament and the national youth council, be it DP, UPC or NRM. We do not want youths to be used as brigades for reactionary purposes. We are calling for meaningful representation and I believe that will help this country so much.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of whether the youth have ever made any substantive motion here, the youth participated very actively in amending the national youth council statute. Before I became a Member of Parliament, I was a district youth chairperson and whenever I took a budget to my district chairman or the CAO, they would tell me that your budget is in the Ministry of Gender. I would drive to Kampala to the Ministry of Gender and they would say, “Who are you, where have you been not to know that everything was decentralized to the districts?”  

There was a contradiction between the National Youth Council Statute and the Local Government Act. So, the role that we played in amending the National Youth Council Statute has enabled the youth councils today to receive direct funding as conditional grants to the districts. So, that is why I said I find this argument very intriguing and unrehearsed and youth-unfriendly.

On women, I do not represent them, but I am a candidate. The constitutional requirement is that we should have at least a third for local councils. Parliament would be an example but today as we sit here, women in this House constitute just 24 per cent. In Rwanda, women constitute 49 per cent in Parliament. In South Africa, it is beyond 40 per cent. So, I believe we have not reached where we want to go.

Secondly, the Constitution provides for an Equal Opportunities Commission. Ten years down the road, the commission is not yet in place. Even the Committee on Equal Opportunities in this House has never presented any report to Parliament. So, what parameter are we using really for us to say that we have reached where we want and, therefore, they should not be represented.

I want to conclude by supporting this motion in the strongest terms that we should maintain representation of interest groups. I thank you so much.

4.49
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak as somebody who is not coming in the Eighth Parliament and somebody looking for a job, but also a potential employer. Now I think people should, as we are debating this motion, look at the mood of the country. It is because the last elections have shown us much as they revealed winners and losers, but in actual fact they also reflected the mood of the country.  

Generally speaking, the mood tended to be against incumbency and every time I go out and talk they say, “You MPs are very selfish, the only thing you can agree on is your salaries, your pensions, your benefits” and that is heard right across. So, anything that we can do to reduce the size of the budget so that the peasants have something left over which can then trickle down to them would be very welcome.  Any attempt to reduce the size of public administration would be really welcome.

You have heard of a child who was caught fishing in Lake Victoria and when he was asked he said, “Every little bit helps.” Even if we reduce the number of MPs by five, it is a bit of help.   

I would like everybody to move together with the government position. I see the Prime Minister has written to us. He says: “In accordance with Article 78(2) of the Constitution, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article and may by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament retain, increase or abolish any such a representation.”

I agree with hon. Kawanga that a lot of us would have no problem with these other special interest groups because they are helping our democratisation process. They are bringing many people in the main stream and once we think that the general population has understood that women can make a good contribution and they have an equal chance as men then we can remove that restriction, but I think the time has not come.

But generally speaking, I would have no problem with the women representation, the youth representation and the workers representation. But I am trying to think in my mind how the Army will function in a multiparty system. Because if you expect them to always vote for the government - we say in management that if two chief executives always agree then there is no point for the second one because they know the position. If you think the position of the Army needs to be articulated then you could have one person to do it. But I do not even see that because you have a Minister of Defence.  

The main part of African’s problem is that the Army has become partisan and the Army has always been used to manipulate the political process. So, I think we should really continue this experiment that we have been carrying on of building democracy slowly however imperfectly it may be, but every five years we are leading somewhere. In my view, the representation of the Army would have no place under a multiparty system otherwise the other groups have no problem at all.

Now I have heard arguments about the youth. It is like a football club, if a football club does not have a youth wing that football club is going nowhere. So, the youth, this is a training ground for you and for me that is why in fact I volunteered after two terms to say I get out then the others can come, may be a young person can come. 

I am not a youth but somebody younger than me is likely to come. So, we should learn this culture of handing over from one generation to the other so that we reduce the political tension. But we all want to die on the job like “ekalaya”.  You know a jerrycan is used to carry water from day one to day two to day three. Are we all going to die here in Parliament? We should have some sort of exit strategy. So, in that case, I support very strongly the retention of the youth.

The view to remove the Army, not that we do not like the Army, everybody likes the Army but really how can they function in a multiparty system because they are going to be partisan. There is going to be government side, opposition side and the Army is one of those sensitive organs that should be out of partisan politics.

Finally, I would like to support that the motion be amended to say we retain all other interest groups except the Army. I thank you very much.

4.55
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand up to support the motion. I start by supporting the retention of the soldiers as Members of the Parliament because when they are here we sort out many problems. Since these soldiers have been with us we have not heard instances where they have tried to do otherwise, because they do follow what we do inside here. So, by being here, they see how the business of government is transacted in Parliament and they do not plan other evil activities. So on that basis, I strongly support the idea that the soldiers be retained as Members of Parliament. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you. I want to ask hon. Tibarimbasa to tell the House because more of those supporting the soldiers to stay in the House are not addressing the new House which will be partisan. How are they going to fit into a partisan Parliament? I think it will help us if whoever supports this can actually explain this to us.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Tibarimbasa for giving way. I have listened to my colleagues who have raised the question of: “How will they participate in a partisan House?” As I sat there I thought that each House, each session, each Parliament makes its own Rules of Procedure to cater for whatever resolutions you have passed. And I know that we will sit - those of us who will come back will be lucky to come back - here and look for the Rules of Procedure for the Eighth Parliament that will allow us transact business in the House.

Another information I wanted to give –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to expand on this question, under multiparty system, even the sitting arrangement will have to change, opposition will be on this side. I think what he was asking was: “Now where will these army people sit?”  

MS NANKABIRWA: That is what I was talking about. Where is it written that we are supposed to have only two sides, government and the opposition? If I come as an independent, am I not supposed to sit in this House? We have been talking about people coming as independent candidates; don’t we have that provision? We must look for a place for such people. 

There were times when people looked at soldiers in uniforms and took off. It is reducing because we interact with soldiers. Even at this level people used to fear army officers in uniform; they used to take off. But the fact is that we have allowed army officers to interact at various levels, even at Parliament, you meet them in uniforms, you table your problem if you have a problem concerning the institution. So, the more we interact with them the more we improve on the civil military relations.

The Minister of Defence was mentioned that is there and is enough; the ministers we have are purely civilian. What we intended in Constituent Assembly is to make sure that these people know this exact Constitution we are talking about and the three Arms of Government. So, I stood up to give information and I want to thank, hon. Tibarimbasa, for giving way.

MR MWANDHA: Honourable Speaker, I hope hon. Tibarimbasa will answer my question because the minister has been totally irrelevant and has not answered my question.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would not be seeking this clarification if I was satisfied by the response of the honourable minister. The question of where the Army will belong in partisan politics is very crucial and if it is not properly defined now, it will be a rasp for chaos.  We are already having a lot of troubles associated with the Army getting partisan. 

Even the last few weeks we have witnessed a number of those scenarios in this country happening. [Ms Nankabirwa: “Like what?”]. When the minister says like what, it is because I have dissatisfaction with her answer. Like the mambas going to the judiciary, because they were defending a partisan position; like army men slapping political opponents, that is in defence of partisan positions.

What I would like to ask is not how they will participate, but how they will sit. We could even define and say they will sit right in front where we put caskets when people pass away. We could put a few chairs there; I do not know whether that place is cold, I am sorry to sound so insensitive.  

But how are we going to source them? Is the Forum for Democratic Change, for instance, going to source these army officers from the barracks and recruit them? Who will define the political home of these? When they come in here, we have party positions, which party positions will they be towing? I would like to have that clarified and I am so sure that at the end of the day, no matter what we do, if we decide to retain the Army in partisan politics, we will have done this country injustice. I hope the minister will satisfy me.  Thank you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: I will go straight to my point, but before I continue let me answer hon. Mwandha’s question. When we are in the House or when the House becomes partisan or multiparty, every time you are in the House you will not be talking about the UPC, DP, CP, FDC you will be discussing matters developmental to the country. So this man, the soldier, will be seated behind you as they have been sitting behind you, and they will be contributing on the issues affecting the country.  So, I think that is not a fear as to how the soldiers will behave in a multiparty Parliament.  

Going to number two, that is the Workers. I would like to oppose my friend from Kagoma, hon. Nabwiso, that Workers have not moved motions here. To the best of my knowledge, Workers have been very effective in contributing to the debates in the House. Hon. Teopista Ssentongo moved a motion to resolve on the taking away of National Social Security Fund from Gender and Social Development to Ministry of Finance.  We debated it and passed it.

Hon. Wandera as a Worker brought in a motion, actually a resolution about the workers in URA. It was hot motion, it was debated, he lost it narrowly but it was heavily debated in this House. So to say that Workers have not been contributing seriously on the Floor of this House, I think was out of lack of research by the speaker.

Thirdly, I agree with hon. Nkuuhe that we need to retain the youths because this is a training ground. As we grow old, we are going to hand over to the youths for the deliberations in this House and when they are trained, when they have been in the House, it means that we shall be handing over to a highly trained group and the affairs of Parliament and the country at large will be followed accordingly.

Lastly, the disabled group has been contributing greatly. You know very well that before this group was allowed to have representatives in the House, our society did not care about the disabled people in our society. However, when you go to some of the recently constructed buildings, some arrangements have been made for the wheel chairs to roll up the stairs. This was never the case before. 

Recently, they also assisted the Committee of Social Services to draft and pass a statute to guide the affairs of the disabled people in the country. Therefore, I recommend that all these special groups, including the election of a woman per district, be retained. Their presence in the House has yielded positive results. Thank you very much.

5.07
DR YEFUSA OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question of special representation is very important. I have several concerns: All the other groups can have partisan participations. In other words, you could have the youth elected according to their parties. They could come here and sit on the side of the government, assuming they were elected from a government party or on the opposition if they came from non-government parties.  

My major concern is the Army. The Army may have sympathy for a political organisation but they are not supposed to show it openly. Therefore, parties cannot say colonel X is a UPC or NRM-O candidate. That secret way of operating and lack of identity is very dangerous. It is against the entire principle of transparency and openness.  

The second concern, Mr Speaker, is that the election of special representation violates one of the democratic principles of one person, one vote.  We end up with a situation where some persons have more votes than the others do. It should be made possible for us at this stage to think of how these people are actually brought to the House rather than by votes. Why should any other citizen in this country have more votes than others? 

I think one-person, one-vote principle is violated in all these processes and I would wish that we spent some time discussing and finding out how other parliaments obtain these representations. I think in other parliaments, these groups come into the House through a very different arrangement, not by votes.

My third point, Mr Speaker, is about persons with disabilities. The word “disabilities” speaks for itself. We have five of them representing five regions. These people are hardly available to the people they represent. In fact, even we ordinary Members of Parliament have the difficulties in constituencies –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank, you Mr Speaker. I represent persons with disabilities in Northern Uganda. I have been regularly paying visits to my constituency including Oyam South in Apac District.  Is my colleague in order to say that we are not available to the people we represent? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have been informed that hon. Baba Diri has been visiting Oyam South. (Laughter)

DR EPAK: It is unfortunate that she is informing me about something that I would definitely know if it was true. I am not aware of any visits. Therefore, I do not know who is going to be the judge. I was really trying to support her case. I do not know why she wants to spoil it.  

Mr Speaker, I want to suggest that because these people have these difficulties, which we must acknowledge, we should increase their number. This will make them accessible to their members. (Laughter) You see we must be very sympathetic to this group. Restricting them to five regions is very unfortunate. 

In addition to that, we may have to define the constituencies and that is why I am saying this matter could have been subjected to the committee. We cannot even talk about how they will be represented if we are going to increase the numbers by debating in the resolution. Although the chairman of the committee thought he had enough representation, I have obvious reasons to ask for this. I would wish that their number be doubled from five to ten. I am very sincere on this and sympathetic to the persons with disabilities representatives and to people who would like to access their representatives. They are always calling on us to take on some of these people’s responsibility.

Mr Speaker, I will talk briefly about women representation, which is similar to the above problem. Women may be very happy with this affirmative action. However, the actual area of operation consists of 21 sub counties while that of an ordinary Member of Parliament has only five sub counties. 

Taking my Apac case, for instance, I would have to move to 21 sub counties to look for votes. Previously it was a college issue, which had its own problem. NRM-0 members who have just been through these college things with primaries can agree with me. This college thing is not good at all! Imagine a woman representative going to access people in all the villages. We have had people here who even get involved in night kakuyege. How are these women representatives going to be involved in night kakuyege? It is worse with monetarisation of elections. They will be stretched beyond imagination. 

Therefore, this is why I suggest that we should define the number of women representation. It is not just a question of a woman getting votes and representing every person. Let us define another way of bringing them to the House, which makes it convenient for them. If I am a member of a constituency and I do not put so much effort, why shouldn’t a woman representative? We are paid the same allowance and yet the poor woman is expected to access the entire district. I think this is rather unfair to women. I am very sympathetic to this. Either we increase the number or we design another method of bringing them to the House, which is more convenient and cost effective for them. Now – [Hon. Members: “Double their allowance”] - even if you double the allowance I doubt that it will work.

Mr Speaker, I am also very sympathetic to the youth, who in addition to the women form the majority of the population of this country. When it comes to elections, obviously you do not expect youth to struggle with me or with hon. Prof. Kamuntu, who has even been ambassador. Therefore, giving youth special representation will be a great recognition of the fact that we are proud of our young men and women. 

Although I suggest that we increase their number, I am also concerned about inflating the cost of parliamentary representation. I insist that we keep the youth representation for a better apprenticeship. We should increase their representation in local councils so that they are trained to take up constituency seats on their own, in future.  

As I said, let us not be simplistic about the issue of the Army. We may have many sentiments for the Army and for the present systems but things will be different in a multiparty system. We are likely to have a rigid side where different parties will sit. The obvious thing is that, as hon. Nankabirwa suggested, if the independents happen to be of such a big number that they are the majority in this House, you would not be surprised that they constitute the other side of the House and the rest of the parties who contested would be on the other side. 

The only exception is that there may not be an independent president who should be the president of these independents sitting on the other side of the House. What is presumed is that most independents will definitely sit on the opposition side because immediately they sit on the wrong side, they become partisan and by-elections must take place. It does need any explanation which side the independents will sit. They will sit on the opposition.

Therefore, where will the Army sit in this time?  You have to define which side of the House they are going to sit. There will be a Leader of the Opposition and a Leader of Government Business. As soon as the Army sits on the government side, they have become partisan, which is unconstitutional. They are supposed to be non-partisan. They can only sit on the other side where there may be 20 odd parties sitting on the other side. Here, nobody can tell whether they belong to JEMA, CP or any other party.

Therefore, we are not dealing with a simple issue. We must be transparent and allow people to be identifiable ideologically and politically. You cannot come here and be a silent observer. The only victim of this review, in my opinion, is the Army. I have also known how difficult it is to deal with their case in the Public Accounts Committee. The Army claim they are on deployment for they can be deployed anywhere and any time, regardless of whether or not the Speaker is informed in writing.  They are a very difficult group to deal with and we should relieve ourselves the burden of trying to deal with them, by excluding them from this category of special representation. I thank you.

5.20
MR AMON REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened very carefully especially when hon. Kawanga gave his submission about the UPDF.  However, we are looking at the UPDF outside this House. I propose that we look at the UPDF’s representation in the House and not their character in the field. The UPDF are here because of the unique history of this country. Ignoring them when all is okay and looking for them when we need them is not proper. It would be better to have the UPDF around because this is a government institution, which becomes interested because they have the instruments to handle a political situation when it runs fragile. It became a special interest group simply because they were also marginalized.

When these other interest groups were marginalized, they were only saved by the government, which brought them in as proposals before the Constitution was made. They were brought in because they were marginalized, just like the Army. This even explains why they would take over the state. Therefore, it is better you bring them here so that they witness what has transpired in Parliament.  (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, hon. Kabareebe, for giving way. In my opinion, I think the Members of the House appreciate your submission, but the central issue is that the posts for the other special interest groups are competitive. In other words, UPC, DP, NRM and others will compete for those posts to come here in the House. You being the chairperson of that very important committee you should be coming out with a proposal stating how we proceed. We should not simply get a legal representation for the UPDF in the House but also a legitimate representation, where all the players involved agree about the method. That is the central issue now. If you could clarify that, there will be no problem.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask hon. Kabareebe to explain a little bit more how the Army is marginalized.

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in 1969, one important Member in the House on the government side said that the Army was consuming government’s money. They were buying arms when there was no preparation for war. He said the only salary they deserved was five strokes on their buttocks and two shillings per month. Do you remember that quotation in 1969? Having said that, would you prevent the coup 1971? 

Mr Speaker, our major interest is to agree that the UPDF shall be represented. The sitting arrangement can be left to experts. Our major interest is to bring them in as a marginalized group, which has the structures. You are imagining that when we go for multiparty, we shall have political accuracy as if once we go for multiparty we shall look like United Kingdom. I do not want you to have that illusion. You must know that we are still going –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson has continuously said “the Army” but somebody from the Ministry of Defence should clarify to me why they always talk of the Army and not the Police and the prisons. If we are to have representation of these bodies, it should not only be the Army. We should talk of the Police and the prisons so that it is well understood. (Applause) 

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think hon. Alisemera is reading my notes. I am coming to that. However, I had wanted us to conclude by agreeing that the Army shall be represented. Another institution, which I am going to talk about is the Police but not prisons. Prisons are to keep the prisoners and let me tell you, they are not marginalized because they are catered for. As civil servants, they are doing their work. 

I am interested in institutions, which have the instruments because when they are represented here they know what is happening and they know the position of the House. When they go out, they tell their colleagues what is supposed to be done. Therefore, the moment you push them out and bring in your illusion about the Army then you get problems. Let them be here, because we are going for transition, which is not politically accurate.  We need to be taken care of. The institutions that are responsible for this are the Army and the Police.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, later on I will beg to move that the youth number be increased. The representation by region is simply too big for this young man or woman. Although we have a problem of increasing the House, I pray that at least a member represents two or three districts, not a region.

Finally, I would like to move an amendment that this business of revisiting every five years is a threat to this representation –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the procedure is different. What we are doing now is not to amend the Constitution, but to fulfil a constitutional programme enshrined in the Constitution. When you change that spacing of five or ten years, you will have amended the Constitution, which requires a different procedure. Your suggestion of increasing the number contradicts Article 93 of the Constitution.

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Finally, I would like to convince honourable members - you know, in one of the western languages, there is an adage, I do not know whether hon. Kamuntu will help me to translate it: “Ebibagamba nibataha, tibyo bagamba nibanyuka.” I do not know how hon. Kamuntu would change it in English for me. [Hon. Members: “No, do it yourself”]. It means what they say when – Excuse me, hon. Kamuntu, could you help me?

PROF KAMUNTU: The equivalent in English is, when you are brewing -(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, according to our rules, you can use a local language and interpret it yourself. You never request another honourable member to do it on your behalf. Is the honourable member for Rwampara in order to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He is not in order. You state it in your vernacular then –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker, if it is procedurally wrong, I must apologise. The interpretation in English is that, what they say in the process of brewing is not what they say when they have the beer ready. Therefore, having had the participation of the Army all along and having put us in this order, time has now come for us to throw them out.  You see! Honourable members, it is not fair. Let us have these members around until we complete the transition. Since we have an opportunity of another five years to review, then I think it can be done.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.30
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the issue of one woman per district. I am a beneficiary and women have performed, compared to the men. When I compare constituency members of Parliament and the district members of Parliament, I notice that the women have really performed. It is not because I am one of them, but this is a reality on the ground. [Mr. Ahabwe: “You are abusing us”]. The English say, facts are bitter but let my colleagues accept it as it is. The results of the primaries in our party can say it all.

Mr Speaker, when we talk of one woman representative for a district, is this person representing women or all people? The work is too much for a woman Member of Parliament. When the constituency Member of Parliament is not active, that burden goes to the woman. I suggest that we refer to them as district Members of Parliament. Referring to them as district woman representative seems to imply that this woman represents only women and yet she has to represent everybody. The burden of the whole district is most of the times lifted to this one woman. As my colleague already said, the facilitation is the same and the woman is overstretched  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you are a district woman Member of Parliament representing a district. The policy behind was to accord opportunity to each district to expose the prejudices against women that were there at the time. This is created by the women themselves, and prejudices by the men against the women. Therefore, in order to clear those prejudices, each district is given an opportunity to bring a woman. For instance, hon. Namaggwa does not represent only women. She represents me as well because the district has brought her as a capable woman. This is what we are trying to do. So, you are not representing women, you are representing everybody in the district.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that guidance. But what I am driving at is this stereotype, the language.

When I look at (b) about the 10 representatives of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, this raises questions like, where will they belong in the House? And when we talk of Uganda People’s Defence Forces, as my colleague has said, let us include Police, prisons, the Army and LDUs because all these are concerned with the security in this country. Somebody may say no to the inclusion of LDUs, but they have played a very big role to make sure there is security in Busoga.  

Mr Speaker, when we talk of ten representatives and the Attorney General suggests at least two women, our Constitution talks of one-third and so three must be women not two. I suggest that the representatives of the defence forces in this country or security forces be ex-officials and this means they have to be appointed and they do not vote. That would be a much better option than having them here to take sides when it comes to voting on crucial issues. 

Mr Speaker, I want to support hon. Okulo Epak on the issue of increasing the number of representatives of people with disabilities. I suggest we increase them to ten so that we cater for the major disabilities; we have the blind, those who are physically handicapped, we have even some invisible ones, maybe some can have certificates from doctors which may not be mentioned in public. This will help the disabled people because people who are not blind do not really know the problems of the blind. So, the blind will have their seat and their representative will take the interests of that particular group.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, one colleague said that we should retain the youth simply because this is a training ground. Parliament should not be a training ground but a place for people who know what they are supposed to do. Let us retain the youth not as people who are on training; they should be here to cater for the interests of the youth. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Baba Diri first. This debate will continue as I see and we cannot exhaust the debate today.

5.36
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. We started discussing the issue of affirmative action right from the beginning of the Constitution Review Commission. It was one of the items to be discussed and in the report, it showed very clearly that women should remain there, people with disabilities will remain there, but the Army, the youth and the workers should be removed. But when we came to the White Paper, we again debated it thoroughly when each interest group defended their positions and I believe this resolution would just be a go ahead of what we have already discussed. We would not really waste a lot of time here. 

For the benefit of those who feel that the interest groups should be removed, let me tell you why they should be there. Mr Speaker, the interest groups were put here for two purposes: One is to ensure that they articulate the peculiar needs of the people they represent. For example, a person who is not blind can hardly talk about blindness and their problems, the same with the physically handicapped and the deaf. Therefore, we need to talk for ourselves for the nation to see so that our issues are also considered. 

When we talk about disability here, the Members of Parliament pointed out me, they pointed out hon. Mwandha, and hon. Ndeezi instead of raising the issues themselves. And even those who are disabled prominently they hardly talk about disability. Therefore, it is very important that we remain there to represent our people including women. The issues of women, the marginalization of women has not ended. We should consider the issue of negative attitude towards women, persons with disability and the youth, which hinders favourable competition in the ordinary constituencies. They will say, “How can we be led by a blind person?” 

And then also with politics, you must have a sound financial base. If you do not have money you cannot call people for meetings to talk to them. You know that women and persons with disabilities are the poorest of the poor, so they cannot favourably compete with other persons. That is why we want the representation to continue; we cannot change the attitude of people overnight. People are very poor; we cannot change the people of disability to be too rich to compete with other people. Unless the situations are rectified, affirmative action should remain there.

Mr Speaker, I am perturbed when you say, we should not change the issue of revision of five years later. I remember when we were discussing the Constitution, when we raised the issue, you told us that this affirmative action will be debated in resolution of Parliament and I reserved all these amendments for this period. Now, you are telling me it is a constitutional matter, five years will have to remain. The view of people with disabilities is that this affirmative action should be reviewed every after ten years, not only every five because it will keep us also at rest. We are not sure of our position every five years. I do not know if there is an opportunity to bring that one in the Constitution so that we can change it also?  

Mr Speaker, regarding the number of representation, for the women, at least they have increased from 56 to 78 now, for the soldiers they are 10, but for persons with disabilities, the youth and workers, we have remained only five. Dr Okulo Epak mentioned something that indeed we are not always on the ground because of the numbers. If I want to make a round trip to visit all the persons with disabilities in the 18 districts of Northern Uganda, it will take me one and a half years before I make the second round. That is why we are not effective on the ground.

Therefore, we are urging this Parliament to consider the peculiar issues of the persons with disability to increase the number from five to eight. The addition is only three Members of Parliament. Definitely, this will not really increase the number in Parliament so much that it will drain our economy.

The issue of the number of Members of Parliament should not be looked at from the interest groups’ view only because we are very few. We are around 100 if you take the women, the persons with disability, and the workers. But if you think people with disabilities, workers and women should be removed, I think that is very unfair. It is just like David taking away the only wife of Uriah despite all the many wives he had. You see that? So, you want to take away the only few special interest groups who are there for a reason. 

Members of Parliament, disability has come to stay and many of us are becoming disabled with time. Let us combine effort to increase this number to eight so that we can represent you effectively.

Mr Speaker, regarding building capacity, with our 10 years here in Parliament, we have been building capacity; we are trying to move gradually. You can see that hon. Florence Naiga, the Minister of State for Disability, has moved to the women seat. We consider this one an improvement on our side. This also applies to Baba Diri who is going for Koboko Member of Parliament. But this one does not mean all of us will go there. Give us time to build so that gradually, maybe after 50 years, people with disabilities will be able to compete with able-bodied persons.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the UPDF. I support the idea, but my concern is their debate in Parliament here. They should be left free; the immunity of Parliament should affect them. For example, in the last few months when we debated on the Constitution issue, when UPDF kept quiet, it was questioned, “Why did you keep quiet?” And then another one decided and they said, “Why did you decide against the Army law?” So, they are really in a dilemma on whether they should follow the rules of Parliament or whether they should follow the rules of UPDF. Please, I want this one to be clarified so that they can debate here.  Thank you.

5.45
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few points to make. I will start from where my sister stopped with the Army. I do not know why Members do not want to wake up to the realities of multiparty politics. The issue of debating here by and large personal views and opinions will cease and we will have to debate along party lines. I will no longer say, “I am saying this”, I will say, “My party, NRM, has this position”. And for the Army, I thought they are supposed to defend this nation. 

You are aware their electoral college is the Army Council for UPDF; they will be the ones to elect if we so agree and I do agree those people should come to Parliament. Where they sit, I do not mind, but whether you want it or not, if they are going to stand up and debate, they will definitely support government position because that is the duty they have. I do not see any soldier or Army Member of Parliament standing up to say, “DP is saying this or that”. They will debate national issues, but where it needs a vote, I tell you and you prove me right, they will have to vote for the government. 

For exposure, they will be here and for numbers they will vote with government. Do not hide your heads in the sand honourable members when the whole body is exposed. You know we are debating in abstract as if we do not know what is going on and what is going to happen. 

But about the representation, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate and hon. Baba Diri hinted on it because you are saying we must retain ten. If we want to amend this resolution, how do we do it and what will be the effect? I suggest for the armed forces, let UPDF have five representatives, Police get three, and then prisons also gets two so that all the armed forces are represented. The problems of this country are not basically from the Army itself, but even other armed forces including Police, which need to be treated with a similar exposure as UPDF.

Mr Speaker, about the women representation, the way you are portraying the women in these special interest groups is not fair. That is why I was asking at what point we should amend this resolution. We are moving to the era of parity 50-50 representation.  Now - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to assist you on what you stated earlier. This Article 78, first of all says, “Parliament shall consist of- (a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies;
(b) One woman representative for every district;” That number is determined by the constitution.  “(c) Such numbers of representatives of the Army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.” 

So, what you can do now, maybe under this resolution using this last part is to suggest another group on its own. You are to make an amendment to the motion moved by the minister to create this other group. But the problem we face is Article 93, because once you introduce in another group, that will be a charge on a consolidated fund and the law will not allow you to do it unless you market your proposal so that it is adopted. But you will not be able to bring it as your amendment to that resolution. That is the problem. It may have merits, but the problem is the technical hurdle.
 
MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  But I thought once a resolution or a bill or something is before this House, it becomes the property of the House because this one has been moved by government.

THE SPEAKER: It becomes a property of the House, but there are certain things, which you may not do with it. You may pass it, you may reject it, but there are certain things that you may not add.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance, but I will still insist that at an appropriate time, I will discuss with the Attorney General to see if he can buy my idea and we slot it in because we are not changing the numbers really. We are just adjusting the numbers including the number of women. This one out of five is less than – I think that is a twentieth. One out of five, really the women are getting a raw deal.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would request your House, especially the PRO to design a programme to teach this nation the role of a Member of Parliament. If we only increase persons with disabilities from five to eight for effective representation, I will tell you I have two sub counties in Bujenje County, and I have been really moving almost village to village. But when I went for the campaigns people were saying, “You have never come back, we have never seen you, what have you done for us?” I asked how they interpret the thing because I really moved almost village to village. So, even if we increase the persons with disabilities to equal the number of Members of Parliament that is 214, still they will never be seen as effective unless the role of a Member of Parliament is clearly defined to these people. 

Parliament would be in the best position to do it because when I explained that I was supposed to go to Kampala to legislate for this country they said, “You are supposed to be with us burying people, attending weddings” and it seemed I was absconding my duties. So, somebody like Parliament should come and assist us to sensitise this nation about the role of Members of Parliament. Then we can think of reducing even the number of Members of Parliament at constituency level. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this debate will have to continue. It is an important motion dealing with a very important subject. My problem is to which date I should adjourn. I am conscious of the fact that tomorrow there is a programme going on at Namboole; it is a constitutional very important programme where maybe some of you will be presenting yourselves as presidential candidates. This will also be the case on Thursday. For me to adjourn to tomorrow will not be realistic but actually this debate should be completed on Monday or Tuesday.

MEMBERS: Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday. We come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday to continue with this debate. Can we start in the morning so that I cover as many as possible? [Hon. Members: “Yes”]. So, it is adjourned to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. 

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 December 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


