Wednesday, 13 December 1995

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT) BILL, 1995

DR LUYOMBYA (Nominated):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to allow me to contribute on this important Bill.  I stand to support the Bill mainly because of the principles involved.  This Bill besides collection of more revenue for government to run its activities, it is intended also to loosen the noose around the neck of manufacturers and direct importers.  Because currently the burden of sales tax has been mainly around those two groups, but with the introduction of VAT this is going to be loosened because it is going to be shared out by many other people.  However, the good intentions of the Bill will depend on some other factors; some of these factors involve the people, the business community, others involve government and others involve the Revenue Authority itself.  Let me comment briefly on the Revenue Authority; this Bill gives too much power to the Director General of the Uganda Revenue Authority.  If we are not careful this power may be abused, especially, by the lieutenants of the Director General.  Some examples were cited yesterday and I will just add a few.  

Mr Chairman, it has been the practice of Uganda Revenue Authority to be more concerned with revenue collection, sometimes which tantamount to harassing rather than intending to collect the revenue.  You will find that somebody who has a small kiosk has been badly assessed, somebody has stock equivalent to UShs l00,000 in that kiosk, but he is assessed to pay UShs 4,000,000.  In such cases the man just abandons the business and says if the Revenue Authority wants let them sell my stock and get the UShs 4 million.  This discourages the small and would be upcoming businessmen.  I would rather see the Revenue Authority educate and do proper assessment.  

I would suggest to the Director General that he should draw up a code of operational conduct for his department, so that businessmen are handled properly and both the Revenue Authority and business community feel that they are partners in the revenue collection.

There is the provision for confiscation property of somebody who has failed to pay.  I would rather say that this is a last resort, but it has been the practice to be the first line of attack.  This VAT collection and this tax we are told there will be an incentive and this incentive of reclaiming is intended to attract people to collect VAT.  But if the cost of reclaiming this VAT will exceed the cost of VAT itself, people will rather forfeit the VAT and not collect it.  What I mean here is that if somebody goes to the Director General to reclaim VAT and interest which has accrued, but the bureaucracy swings him too much in terms of time, transport and other expenses, somebody may just forfeit VAT and they will not collect it for the Director General.  A lot has been said about the threshold and taxation rate.  I will just reiterate that these are important and they will need constant monitoring by the Director General to make sure that they do not over-burden the VAT collector at the same time the Director General does lose out.  

Briefly let me talk about the government.  Government will need to put enabling policies in places if success of collection of this tax is to succeed.  It is not enough just looking at the micro-economic side but it will also need to look into the micro-economic side of taxes.  

I will cite an example of the police liberalisation as a micro-economic policy.  It is common knowledge now that 50 per cent of the recurrent revenue is contributed by the tobacco and the beverage industry.  But if government policies strangle this sector, then the government will end up the loser.  It is now common knowledge that with beer industry government is intending to allow a South African brewer to set up a can beer industry in this country.  It is not because the two breweries which are existing in this country fear competition, but while they intend - it is good that there will be another investor to bring in money, but what is wrong with - it is that they also intend to allow that investor to import can beer as to test the market whether he will have success if he eventually decides to invest.  

I think this is wrong because we know what happened when Kenyan beer was allowed, the government collected less revenue.  What government should do is to encourage this brewer to invest into setting up the industry rather than allow importation first to taste the market.  The two breweries are now engaged in expansion programmes -(Interruption).

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Whereas, perhaps, I share the concern of the hon. Member about the importation flooding the market, I do not quite understand how he things an investor can decide to put in money where he has not done any research; where he has not tested the market to ensure that the product he wants to manufacture will sell.  I think what we should be concerned here is that if there going to be a lot to import, they should import sufficient quantity to test the market and not to top it completely; otherwise, how are they going to know that their kind of beer may sell here before they invest.  Can the Member clarify how his proposed investor is going to decide whether his beer is going to be sold here or not?

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, there is adequate capacity from the two breweries, and there are projected increased capacities.  I have already told you that currently the two breweries are engaged -(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that while I do appreciate his problem of protecting Madhvani, I would like to tell him that the prices of beer in the country are moving up, and by insisting on monopoly that means the consumer will continue to be subjected to high prices; and I think the government policy of liberalisation is really welcome and we need competition so as prices to go down.  

I would like also to inform you, for example, Mukwano Soap Factory they are given some raw materials from the American USAID, government has even given them guarantee; but you imagine the price of soap has remained high and the man in the village cannot afford.  This thing came up to our committee and, in fact, we are even recommending to government that Mukwano should try to spread; he is not allowing other people to come in!  So, the monopoly of Mukwano on soap is not really good for this country.  

So, really, Mr Chairman, we in this House we should adopt a policy of allowing competition, not to close soap.  It is very dangerous.

MR SIBO: I think the hon. Member really should realise that the problem is not so much the question of taxation; the problem is in packing.  You see, it is extremely expensive to pack beer in bottles; it is much cheaper to pack beer in cans, and both Uganda Breweries and Madhvani Breweries have not tried to pack into can, it would have been much cheaper.  Secondly, for purposes of expedience a number of consumers like Airlines are importing beer from outside when they could have taken Uganda beers, just because the two breweries have refused to pack in cans. 

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would have answered each individual in detail.  For example, hon. Kabuubi is probably exhibiting ignorance of what is happening.  There are about six manufacturers of soap in this country today.  So, Mukwano has no monopoly of manufacturing, and you should also know that at the time, when -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I hope when the hon. Member holding the Floor talks of six industries manufacturing soap, he also includes a young industrialist in Lira by the name of Lwaben participating in soap manufacturing.  Before he could take off, although he is now making high quality soap, Mukwano goes in, pours his soap in Lira area, killing the entire thing, from this man who is not aided in any way.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, in winding up, what I am saying is that while government engages in micro-economic policies, they should also look up in micro-economic side of it.  In 1994 I was on the Conbell in the United States, the American government was paying out farmers who normally grow up to a thousand acres of maize a season, they were asking them to cut down their production to say six hundred acres, and they were paying them out not to grow more; just because they wanted those farmers to have a certain price, and if they over flooded the one market the United State would loose out.  Therefore, this protection should not be just taken as a blanket cover.  

In conclusion let me say that the people will also have to - the Director General will have to continue to educate the population about this VAT if it is to succeed, rather than just harassing them.  Thank you very much. 
 
MR SIBO (Nominated):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to add my voice to those who support –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  But try to be very brief.

MR SIBO:  Yes, Mr Chairman, I will; with that threat I will skip many points I will have made.  We are actually moving from the primitive way of taxation into the more civilised system of taxation.  Introduction of VAT is very, very welcome.  Mr Chairman, you heard yesterday, I think, someone suggesting that there were three criteria, which test the suitability of a tax law.  One, is that it should be easy and cheap to administer, secondly it should be fair, thirdly it should be well known both to the tax man and the tax payer.  If we apply these three criteria to the proposed VAT Bill, we may satisfy ourselves then that the law is suitable.  It is first of all replacing the two easy taxes namely, the sales tax and the CTL, both of which were relatively cheap to manage, but also very easy to evade.  

We have heard of very Indians for instance who have paid tax men to avoid heave sales taxes, and as a result prices of goods have become very, very variously markedly different from shop to shop.  We have also seen traders who collect CTL but do not pass it on to the tax authorities.  VAT cannot be evaded because it is collectable at various level, but the paper work involved is much more than in both sales tax and CTL.  The taxman collects at source and burden at subsequent levels is automatic, it falls on the businessman.  He will do it because he has to collect his refund, and if he does not do it he then loses his refund.  The price of the good or the service for which VAT is being paid, unfortunately, may have to rise because the businessman has not claimed.  If he does not claim he retains the tax, he also charges the consumers and retains both, and as a result the prices go up; and also, of course, the Revenue Authority, because at every step the Revenue Authority gets a bit more.  Now, if it does not get from the retailer, for instance, that bit more is lost to the Authority.  Now, as to being fair, it is, I think, very fair because it is not being aimed at any specific individual; it is aimed at everyone who wants to and is capable of consuming the good or the service.  

However, my problem lies with the third criteria.  The tax payer is not well sensitised; to begin with VAT is highly technical, even the Members themselves here in this House, Mr Chairman, you have heard have found it difficult to debate the law, because it is highly technical, and we shall see when we get into clause by clause, you will find that it becomes very difficult for even Members to understand these clauses.  In any case, I would say even rabble rousers can very easily use the ignorance of the masses to cause problems. You have heard riots because of taxes; it is so easy to rouse masses into riots because they have not understood this thing.  

Mr Chairman, you have heard, for instance, the Prime Minister of France who is in trouble with his economic policies because people do not understand.  It would be much more worse here where the intelligence of taxation is much lower.  

My second point here is in respect of drafting.  The Bill is too detailed and, therefore, susceptible to frequent Amendments.  For instance, if you look at part 7 of the Bill that is in respect of the calculation of the tax payable, the whole of this part could easily be put in a Schedule.  The reason why it is put in there, I think the draftsman has tried to be very detailed to make people understand it, but I think as a results it makes it top heavy and, of course, very difficult to apply.  In any case the formula provided is very complicated for any businessman to do the calculation and to apply these formulas for his own refund.  Why we can we not use a simple method, for instance, we say ten per cent is added on each price as you got it from the previous tax payers; then the previous middleman and retailer adds ten per cent, then we know perfectly well that it becomes much easier to collect and to calculate.  With respect to part 8 on returns and assessment, there is so much paper work involved that it will be very difficult for anybody really, any ordinary businessman to provide these returns as asked for by the Commissioner General.  

For instance, in article 89 of the Bill, the Commissioner General says he may refuse to register an applicant, if he has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant cannot keep proper records of accounts.  This obviously, Mr Chairman, you will definitely agree that it puts most of our businessmen out of the sphere of registration.  The Commissioner General would then appropriate to himself powers to assess the tax payer when it comes to payment of the tax, and that is what is provided for in part 8, and when the Commissioner General appropriates himself power to assess, because he is not satisfied with the records and the returns being given to him; how then could he be satisfied with the application?  Because the same businessman is the same one who is unable to offer the necessary information as required by the Commissioner General.  Clause 33 is also most unfair.  It should be related to the shortcomings of the businessman referred to in clause 8 and 9; in one way clause 89 is in respect of regulation - where the Commissioner General can refuse registration; in clause 33 the Commissioner General take upon himself to decide on the assessment of the tax to be paid because the records provided are inadequate.  

My third point, Mr Chairman, is in respect of -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 33 says that where a person has failed to lodge his return, the Commissioner General may make an assessment.  This clause is already provided for in the Finance Statute we have passed before; it is just a transfer.  So, unless the hon. Member is saying that we actually remove this and what entails removing it from, the Finance Statute, which we have already passed for this Financial Year.  So, really it is just a transfer of the same clause.

MR SIBO:  Yes, that is true and indeed he brings up the point I was going to bring up, and that is the point on the Commissioner of appeals; the Commissioner of Appeals is also provided for in the Finance Act.  Now, that commissioner of appeals, indeed as much as this specific provision, are merits of the traditions we have had in the taxation system.  All I am saying is that now we have come to a stage when we can make the necessary Amendments to provide fair hearing to anybody who wants to make an appeal, and for that reason I am also suggesting that instead of the commissioner of appeals, we should have a tribunal who is outside the taxation system.  

So, that refers me to a third point I was coming to which was in connection of the revenue collection; and we do not expect this commissioner of appeals to as impartial as we would like him to be if he is going to be an appeal point.  The second point in respect of these appeals system, an appeal to a High Court is an expensive affair; you have got to pay costs and the businessman may find it very difficult to meet these appeal costs in the High Court.  That is why I am suggesting that we should consider introducing an independent tribunal outside the taxation system.  

With respect to clause 45, namely; the collection of tax by distress.  Here again, my Friend hon. Tumubweine may say this is already provided for in the existing Finance Act, but in fact, it is a very, very cruel system to collect tax by distress is the extreme point when you are, actually, making the man destitute more destitute.  I think that is a method that should be very sparingly used, but in this particular case, it is the Commissioner General who assesses; it is the Commissioner General who collects; it is the same Commissioner General who decides how to collect and it is the same Commissioner General who is going to collect by distress.  Distress means he will take anything that you have in your possession; he may even leave you naked.  So, that is as bad as it is provided in law, and I think we should rather seriously consider whether we should not make Amendment in respect of the use of distress provision in collection of taxes.  

I would like to say that this Bill, Mr Chairman - this is my last point; is highly technical.  The drafting of it is extremely technical, it is also very detailed; I believe that to provide Amendments on the Floor of this House is going to be tedious, and I think it may also be difficult; I notice that you have provided that we should complete the Bill today, I think it is going to be very difficult -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House to the effect that taxation should be agreed on principle, on knowing what is taxation.  Taxation is a process, in case of a government, to procure, to get the necessary revenue income to administer the country effectively, happily and harmoniously, to run the services of the nation.  Now, we in Parliament we can only suggest or in our best wisdom, propose Amendments to the Bill in question - but we cannot always be crying, you see, the minister, for example, of law are not there, although I see on my left-hand side my hon. Friend Tumwesigye Jonathan who is an advisor to the NRM Government -(Laughter)- yet, when duty calls us to Parliament we must be honest to discharge honourably our duty to the country.  But in our case now, we can only suggest seriously that the law ought to be good law so that whatever taxation - I am going to speak later on - I know, my hon. Uma, I am giving the information.  I am only coming at this point that let us not relate the principle of effecting good law making to the people who draft it.  The Cabinet has already put to us, and this is how we can judge the Cabinet, whether it is intelligent -(Laughter)- yes, law making is very serious; we cannot play with it because our duty here is to produce a good for administration of our country; and taxation for example, I am pro-taxation because the government cannot run without taxation.  By March this year, I paid my, both income tax to the Central Government and my local government in Soroti.  Thank you (Applause)

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I am not quite sure whether I am wiser than I was before I got the information.  Never mind, I was trying to suggest, to appeal to the Minister that we should, perhaps, request a small committee to look at this - I have particularly referred to clauses 8 and 9, 33, 35, 45, the whole of part 8, all these require a certain substantial Amendments.  So, I do not know whether we can do it on the Floor of this House.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are free to bring up your Amendments, if you have. 

MR SIBO:  I am quite prepared to bring up my Amendment, Mr Chairman, if you give me time, I would then appeal to you that instead of finishing this Bill this afternoon, give us another day, and we shall bring Amendments tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Have you finished?

MR SIBO:  Yes, I have finished, Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Mr Chairman, the idea of having VAT taxation is not a bad idea; it is not a bad idea because it is an easier tax to use.  My only area of concern is the area of administering it.  First, it has complications of being a regressive tax; by that I mean it affects those people in proportion to their income, because it is a tax on their consumption.  So, proportionately a poor person compared to a rich person gets penalised because the tax is a one percentage; his proportion of tax on his disposable income has a bigger impact than to a richer person, and that is where the problem starts from.  That problem has caused problems elsewhere; wherever a consumption tax in form a VAT has been introduced it has caused mostly riots, and I do not need to go through the case history of what has happened.  So, what do we need to do?

Mr Chairman, we need to avoid a possibility, although I know the Uganda population is a bit different, we do not have a culture of civil disobedience, except maybe, in the early 40s the number munaana and all these, but we do not have that culture, and I would like to try and avoid that possibility happening.  Mr Chairman, then what do we do given that the impact of this tax is regressive?  First, we have got to introduce this tax, very, very gradually, and starting with known informal sectors.  

So, I am saying we start it very gradually and press it on most informal sectors which can absorb it easily without creating the turmoil that has happen elsewhere in other countries.  What do I mean by that, we extend the area of exemptions, avoid as many products which will touch the common person of that tax range; and as we move on we should be able to -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on two things.  One, if you could clarify to us or this House where on earth an indirect tax ever been progressive, because an indirect tax is generally on what you have spent on indirectly.  If you can clarify to us where an indirect tax can be progressive.  Secondly, if you charge a tax and then you distinguish it between commodities to be consumed by the poor and the rich, how will you tell which sugar shall be consumed by the rich and which sugar shall be consumed by the poor.  Because by nature of commodities, the commodities which are consumed by the majority or which have got a wider range of effective demand are the commodities that are, actually, consumed by the poor.  It is luxurious commodities that are consumed by the rich.  Now, how can we, actually, make a situation where the poor are exempted from tax when we know that they are the ones who consume the good on which the majority consume?

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the explanation hon. Manzi has been going through, and the remarks hon. Kanyomozi gave which caused the explanation, are enough to show the confusion between VAT and income tax; I will add more, Mr Chairman, when I debate.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that to alleviate the fears of the incidents of this tax on the poor, I would wish to refer him to Schedule 3, so that at an appropriate time if he thinks that among the goods zero rated he will need to add on, then we could add on.  Otherwise, this has been taken care of by this Bill.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, the little we have been told about VAT is that VAT is a tax where you avoid paying tax on tax, as it could happen in case of CTL and sales tax.  If that be true, and assuming that the other factors of production remain as they are, in other words you do not have increases in power, increases in raw materials, increases in this.  The VAT tax should have effect of, actually, even reducing the price of the goods.  Because you avoiding the possibility of actually paying a tax on top of another tax, which has been happening in some of the cases of the goods, because of the CTL and sales tax.  Therefore, I would like him to clarify whether really this kind of situation is not going to allay the fears which he is trying to put forward.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the hon. Members of the House understood the main thrust of my argument and presentation.  I said I welcome the tax as long as we avoid certain pitfalls; that is what I said in the introductory presentation; and I do agree that, and I have argued elsewhere, in actual fact, in writing that it is not easy to separate luxuries and what have you, I have taken that into account.  I have only said that Schedule 3, we identify more commodities as the minister has said to avoide the incidence of that tax on the incomes of the poor.  That one, I am not in conflict with any one, I am sure.  I think all of us are on the same wavelength, Mr Chairman.  

Secondly, I only suggested that we should introduce gradually so that it is understood in order to avoid the pitfalls other countries have gone through; and that gradual nature is to start with the formal sector which is easily identifiable and easy to implement.  That is all I have said!  I have not even said whether you distinquish Sukari sugar from the other sugar, but if the rich are the ones who take Sukari sugar, we can definitely impose a VAT on it, but let us avoid the ordinary Sukari gulu, as they call it, out of the taxation range.  Mr Chairman that is what I have said.  

The other aspect which I would like to touch on is the aspect of application of tax.  Well, VAT - I am sure one of the reasons why the Minister of Finance has brought it is to increase the tax base and get more revenue.  My main concern here, is if we give the Ministry of Finance more money, how it going to use it?  That is an issue, because it is important and I have said it before, the tax rate of Zaire compared to Uganda,- I am sorry, but I should be diplomatic and say a neighbouring country, is higher than that of Uganda, proportion to GDP, but what has been the impact of that tax with the collection?  

Two, the welfare of people in that neighbouring country; my concern is we are everyday getting statistics, statistics showing the drop in the social sector financing.  School drop-outs are increasing, the medical services are not getting any better, infrastructure despite our emphasis on it, really proportionately has gone down!  We would like an assurance that the Minister of Finance when he gets this money in larger quantity which he is going to do, he is going to use it to apply on those areas which are sensitive to the ordinary person in the street and in the countryside.  Unless that is done, government will be getting more resources to itself and spend it more but without having the impact that it intended to have.  

As I said, I am not opposed to VAT, but I am opposed to certain instances of it, it is not applied to the benefit of the country.  

Let us look at another aspect, Mr Chairman.  Is this tax easily understandable by the people?  And this is where another problem is going to arise.  In the sector, and I am pleased that the Uganda Revenue Authority has actually done its best - you see the small rabbit on TV and in places, they have done their best; I do not know before July whether that impact will have been felt everywhere, and I also go in Kikuubo and if you people whether they are able to keep records and give them returns, because the penalties in the Act are very severe.  

For example, if you give misinformation to the officers of the Uganda Revenue Authority, you look at the clause here, the penalties are heavy, and I am saying, are the people in Kikuubo, those in Rwashamaire, the small traders, are they going to be able to keep records and understand and not give information to Uganda Revenue Authority which will end up putting them in trouble?  I am very concerned, and I want the sensitisation of URA to continue so that people understand this tax fully.  Secondly, in record keeping and giving receipts, the customers themselves also are concerned, if they have got to help the tax administration to do its work.  Our people, normally when most of us go in the shops you go in, you do not ask for receipt!  And that is one way these guys are going to evade paying the tax, they may tax us, the consumers, because it is an expenditure tax, but not remit it to Uganda Revenue Authority.  

Now, the supervision of Uganda Revenue Authority has got to be intensified if the thing has got to get the impact it is intended to.  I will give you an example, Mr Chairman.  If I import Televisions and bring them, there are three things that can happen to those televisions, they can be sold, they can be in the store, or they can be stolen - yes, they can be taken away by some crooked fellows.  Now, if I sell those televisions I should have a receipt, because me as a consumer I will have paid the tax, the VAT, but the trader could not have any record anywhere.  How is Uganda Revenue Authority going to ensure that, actually, those televisions were sold?  It is a problem which I think the Revenue Authority and the administration of the tax people have got to take into account.  Because this tax is not easily understood; it may cause problems.  

There is another aspect, Mr Chairman, which I would like to touch on.  The problem of VAT and its impact on price and inflation.  Now, I have talked about the businessmen not being able to keep record; the other problem which may arise in this tax and which the administration needs to address is the problem of compounding the price, and it has an effect.  Instead of the tax being on top of value added, it is on the total part, and that is what caused - I am sure we are lucky the Commissioner General comes from a friendly country, that is what caused problems in his country; and that is what caused problem in Guyana when I was still a student.  I am saying, for the benefit of the Minister that traders are likely to be imposing the tax and cooping a large portion that what the tax rate is, and then it becomes very difficult, they do not remit it; secondly we pay more and the revenue is not received, and the impact of why we are taxing these people is not felt.  How are we going to ensure that this problem is avoided; what have we put in place in name of equity and equal treatment of these individuals so as to avoid a problem of this nature?  I am concerned because I can see a problem, which may make this tax unpopular and lead us to have inflation in the economy because the prices are pushed up unnecessarily to the consumer.

There are some advantages, let me not dwell on the bad things; there are some advantages of VAT, the consumption tax.  One, is that if you do not want to consume, you can avoid that tax, if you can avoid it, and maybe it would encourage us to save more money, because if we can avoid consumption then I assume the money will be saved and our savings increase, and the investment ratio will also increase, if that can be done.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform my hon. Colleague hon. Kanyomozi as he debate the sense of taxation through the tax law, the idea of anti consumption is contrary to economic sense he as a student of economics.  Why?  Because in economics is concerned with production, distribution and distribution of wealth to consume and in our case in Uganda since we are undeveloped country or developing country our essence seen in this august House is of course our wisdom, is to ensure the increasing of social welfare in the rural areas through production.  To me any economist in Uganda who says anti-consumption people should consume to because these are lies, Mr Chairman because, I am not against - anything to say that there is no consumption is just to keep people in misery.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.


THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.


MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, let me wind up.  When I am talking about the positive part of consumption and savings I am not saying that once you do not consume what you save is invested and an investment function is also a consumption function by the way.  So, I am not killing consumption no, except that I am directing that consumption to investment which is also part of consumption function, so I am not killing it at all and let me assure my elder brother that this is what could also help because our saving rate in this country has been substantially very low.  Investible funds are not there and if we can avoid certain consumption and money is re-directed given that Government when it gets it spends is re-directed in savings and that saving is turned into investment then we would have a plus.  Some saying people can actually avoid literary legally avoid part of -(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor on the point that our savings are low is it because our disposal income are so lower that we are even unable to get essential commodities or we have been very luxurious in our consumptions?

MR KANYOMOZI: Of course depending on what level you are on -(Laughter)- it is both at the lower level it is because may be, disposal by income is not enough, at a higher level it is because there is extensive consumption so it’s both.

Let me, Mr Chairman, as you have asked me to wind up.  I want to wind up saying that if VAT is introduced if the anomalies which I have outlined are look at, if certain steps are taken to adjust this tax so that it does not eat the ordinary people because of it’s - nature then I can see something positive out of it provided Government uses the resources that collected for development purposes and for increasing the welfare of our society. 

Lastly, I am suggesting let us introduce this tax, but introduce it gradually starting with the formal sector. 

Two in order to avoid taxes and what have you as we suggested let us go for a single rate of tax applied to those areas which are easy to administer.

Three which is what the hon. Sibo was pointing our, I think we need an appeals tribunal which will help us to ensure that justice and equity is done.  I thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill in that as the Member have pointed out that now the Ugandans are taking over the responsibility of collecting this tax in that from the wholesaler it will be his responsibility to pass over this tax to a retailer and then he can clean a refund other than has been the system present when you are paying CTL, with due respect to the Minister what is happening is that half of the CTL, Sales tax is not collected.  You go to any shop to day, the own of the shop inclusive of what Government organisations like hotels if you move in they say, do you want a receipt? The moment you say yes, they charge you the CTL, if you say, no, no, you give me the goods I go away then you are lucky you escape the 15 percent.  Now, if the Minister wants us to approve and he is ready to implement this Bill he has to assure this House that he has the capacity to monitor is officers who are going to collect this tax otherwise we are creating another den of thieves where they are going to benefit.  

It is so hurting to the tax payer to see what is happening in Uganda Revenue Authority, he knows his officers, he knows he has been chasing them, firing and recruiting everyday, but what is happening?  All the houses around here half of them are belonging to his boys now, a man works for two three months he has a house, he has five kamunyes when people who have been here they have nothing.  

There have been a lot of loopholes in the administration of taxes in Uganda Revenue Authority.  You go to Entebbe Airport, now his boys are just on errands, okay, they can be both, now they on errands actually serving those big, big, importers.  It is so disheartening you find officers who are there to collect money instead of collecting the revenue they know that Mr X is on this freight the moment he lands the officer picks his papers and runs around the consignment is not checked, you come in when it is your first time as hon. Sserunjogi was saying yesterday your items will arrive they will stay there for some time when the man is busy has already disposed off what has come in when may be, he is coming for the second helping that is when they will think of you who is not in the group. 

I think the Minister has to address that matter because actually we will be let down by all these loopholes.  We are giving him the cheque, but he has to control the expenditure we do not want yet a case where Ugandans will live to regret.  

The other point the computation Members have said, if the tax has to succeed we should have simple computations.  I recall when I was a little boy we used to have buyers it coffee, cotton, the Government went out of it’s way had tables ready worked out, he would say with 15 pounds we used to have pounds at that time, the buyer should say so much even a poor man from the village would know how much he is going to receive.  I am requesting the Minister that the Uganda Revenue Authority should come out with tables already worked out and say if you have taxable income of so much you have to pay so much, but they should not give us these complicated formula which you have put in from 22, 25, X minus B, minus U, what do you expect of a Ugandan business man in Masaka to sit down and say, A times B I see R over R plus 100, this is what?  This Latin to a poor importer, to a poor consumer you account the table let it be clear and say if the taxable income is 1000 you are paying 50 shillings why do you want us to get involved in the in this language we do not understand.  You make it simple the principles we will accept Ugandans will know, but, may be, the seller is not cheated nor the consumer he make the tax simple to understand and to administer.  

The Members have requested the Minister that before he implement this he should teach there should be enough tax education for the payer, the man who is going to pay this tax.  Now when you say, you rabbits on the T.V. then I just wonder whom are you addressing a man in the village to pay the tax or a consumer in the town.  How many people who are seeing rabbits on this T.V?  They are only in town, would you please leave the towns alone you go to the villages so that we know the consumer and then may be, instead of saying rabbits we can use goats which are every where -(Laughter)

Now can you go to the village and then, I am requesting that before this Bill becomes a law, can we experiment to see how this VAT can be put in practice, can we take off a few commodities, for example soda at least it is distributed everywhere, then we see how it can work, but if one morning you say from today VAT either we will succeed or will fail, now, once we have failed re-introducing this tax may not be feasible.  Now, I request that the Minister through Uganda Revenue Authority; let him experiment, may be, we have said soda, beer, cigarette and see how the thing is working then we see whether actually we understand it, the collection -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, Government has a budget, Government has a programme and Government has to raise a certain amount of money to implement that programme.  I do not know where hon. Nkalubo expect Government to get the money while they are experimenting on VAT.  When, in fact, VAT will be replacing CTL and the Sales Tax in other words there will be no more charges of CTL and Sales Tax which means that the amount of money that is required by Government will have now to be provided through VAT.  Now, where will Government get the money to run its programmes while it is experimenting on VAT?

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  I am surprised that hon. Mwandha is raising that point, I said you are experimenting on only three items and well if he cared to know the source of income for the Government revenue is not only three, then what will be the purpose of saying okay, let us go there and then you find the things cannot work you have to withdraw it, as they did in Ghana what happened?  You see it would be easier to go slowly and you succeed than going full burst you fail and you have to retreat.  Now what will happen while you are experimenting you continue collecting from other products, you do not repeal the chances that you continue experimenting and you continue with collecting of CTL and Sales Tax.  

I would like to turn to the Bill under section 38; sub-section 2; the Minister has proposed that an appeal to the High Court may be made on the question of law only. That if I am not satisfied I can only appeal to the High Court on the question of law, but then when you go to section 39; the Minister is saying, the burden of proving that an assessment is excessive is on the person objective.  Now, I do not know what he wants to tell us one side he is saying, you can appeal on the question, but then he says, you can also appeal if you find that you are wrongly assessed.  Now, I do not know how the Minister intends to harmonize the two whether I can appeal to the high court if I find that he has over assessed the amount.  But then he is saying I can only appeal on the case that was on the point of law.  Now, I want him to clarify that issue because I am not very clear.

Now, the other point is under section 44; seizer of goods.  I know and I appreciate that the Commissioner should be given at least some powers to seize some of these goods he has to get some teeth to bit, but the teeth should not be mis-used.  Because, what do we see today, now the Commissioner when we say the Commissioner can seize, I know the Commissioner will be in Nakawa, he has to depend on their lieutenants up country.  There has been out cry over the misbehaviour of some of these officials, I am worried where these people are given powers to go on seizing other people’s properties under this section unless the Minister has a system which is at least a bit tight where people will not come in to seize the properties, where claiming the same property may be, impossible.  

Now, we are looking at a case where we have perishable goods, this is true we have cases people dealing in fish, you find a vehicle is taken to police from morning until the following day, now what do you do with that fish?  You are carrying milk it is the vehicle is taken to police the following day they say you take your milk away.  Now, I think where the Minister says, that it would be about 21 days we should look at perishable goods, what do we mean by perishable goods?  Mr Chairman, when these people of perishable goods  -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  On page 65; schedule 2; exempt supplies.  I see 1(a) as reading that the supply of unprocessed food stuffs including agricultural livestock.  I do not know whether this is not exempted the issues being raised of perishable goods is not covered under this particular item.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA: I am saying that, where we have perishable goods they should not be under 21 days, we should deal with the commodity depending on how perishable the commodity is.  Mr Chairman, even this question of seizing I am a little bit worried, that the lieutenants of the commissioner general may mis-use this clause and then affect the traders.  I would request that the Commissioner should control these boys; they have not been performing to well of late with these importers.  

The other point is under section 48; clause 48; what is refund of tax.  Now, the Minister has proposed that if there is any tax refund it should be done within two months.  But, then when you check under section 49, sub-section 3; it is stating that where the commissioner general finds after conducting an investigation of any amount shown as an excess in terms of section 48 (1); that excess amount of input tax is greater than the two amounts due no interest shall be payable in terms of sub-section 2.  Now, this is giving the Commissioner General to take his time, I am suggesting that if the Commissioner General has not paid within two months as stipulated under one that amount outstanding should bear interest not just saying he will take his own time and pay when he wants.  

We have seen people have done contract with the Government and people have run bankrupt because the Government has failed to pay the invoices once they are raised, now they say they are arrears and some people are coming they are declared bankrupt because the Minister of Finance has refused to pay them. Now if he fails to pay he should be interest on the outstanding amount -(Applause)- yes, not saying getting free loans from wanainchi. 

The other point I would like to look at is under section 5; under clause 51.  The Minister is saying that documents should be in English accepted.  Now, when I am buying from Mr X he has to give me an invoice he may say, mabati, mabati is not English, but then - now I find some of these where we buy from they write in their own vernacular I think we should accept so long as we understand what is all about, what is English for? In this House under our Rules of Procedure we have two languages either you can debate in English or in Swahili.  Now, I am requesting that we should be  -(Interruption)- being restrictive only for English because most of these traders you will be forcing them to bring in the youngsters who are not actually trustworthy for the seek of writing in English the youngsters will swindle these fellows who have made their own money we should accept, but so longer as you can understand what has been written.  Now the other point is that the Minister is saying that, under section 54; that where they interpret somebody has translate this into English from vernacular the man who is affected should meet the bill.  The man is not interest in the translation, if you are interested in translating you meet the bill and get the information, why should the man who has made his own sells, you say when they are interpreting he should meet the bill.  

Now, I have been looking at the penalties, the Minister has put out penalties which a man who fails or a business man who fails to adhere to this will have to pay one of these is making returns.  We appreciate, the Minister of Finance brought here a bill establishing the Accountants.  Now we know, we hear in the corridors that that institution has been put in place, but that thing is on paper.  I know our Chairman on Finance is among those occupying the top, but if we are to succeed - he is in the top management of the counts organisation, but I am appealing to the Minister that tomorrow can you check and make sure that the statute is implement and we have Accounts who can assist the business men to make proper returns you are going to victimize the poor business men only because you have not assisted them.  

I am seeing the other point where I need the Minister to tell me is under section 58, sub-section 2; I need him to tell me what he wants.  He says, if a person is convicted of an offence under sub-section one fail to present the return or document within period specified by the commissioner general that person is guilty of an offence and reliable on conviction to a fine of 50,000 shillings for each day during which the failure continues and to imprisonment for three months without the option of a fine instead of imprisonment.  Now that one has confused me a bit, he want to say that once I am convicted and I do not adhere I have no option I have to go to jail or I have to pay both the fine and then I go to jail.  I need that one because I may have a good reason because here I was not given - and say, well if you have an excuse you can appeal.  Mr Chairman, I think all in whole  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Okay, Sir, what is actually I would like to look at is section 66, while winding up.  Mr chairman, these are offenses by officers, Mr Chairman, the Minister is saying if an officer of Uganda Revenue Authority is directly or indirectly asked for or takes in connection with any of the outside duty any payment or reward or whatsoever, whether pecuniary or otherwise I do not know whether it was necessary to put it here in this statute, but I think this is well come step and I think it is a - one I think I must salute you if you are going to implement it.  

But, then I am saying if an officer is guilty other than being fined he should also refund the amount he has take he should bring it to the treasury he should not keep it there should be a provision here requiring him that you take whatever, he has consumed because of late what has been happening, they assess you, you pay your taxes there is another one who comes and checks and said you have under paid now they make you to pay additional amount, but the officers who assessed is left to go free whether he eat or not.  But if an officer - if I come in and I am under assessed by a revenue officer he should also be held responsible for this other than saying okay, now you pay additional amount, but where the assessment was done by revenue officer he should be disciplined for under assessing otherwise you will not end this corruption in Uganda Revenue Authority.  

I am praying that the Minister will have the guts to implement this section it should not be only for the statute purposes.  I think let us implement this statute when it comes in, let us experiment before we put it in a statute and see whether it will work so that once we move forward if you are not ready we can wait otherwise I support the Bill, Mr Chairman. (Applause) Thank you very much.

MR MAYENGO: On point of procedure I notice that the House is under quorum, Mr Chairman.  Could the Clerk check the quorum.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in order to proceed when the quorum is not there and, therefore, I adjourn the Council until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 14 December 1995.)

