Wednesday, 14 December 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.


THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, before I move the Motion, permit me on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Kyadondo to extend their warm congratulations to you, Mr Chairman, for having been -(Applause)- elevated to be in high office of Senior Presidential Advisor and having been designated as Deputy Chairman of the NRC.  

As you heard from the reaction from the House, I am sure the entire House is congratulating you on that noble achievement and in wishing you well in the service of our mother country, a job you have dedicated yourself to do and you have done so exemplary.

Having said that, I beg to move that Rule 55(1), be suspended to enable me and this House to proceed with the Second Reading of the Bill seeking to extend administration of the NRM, the interim administration of the NRC and the NRC.  

As Members will recall, this Bill was read a First Time on the 5th of this month.  It is, therefore, not yet mature for debate in accordance with our rules.  That prudence and management of public affairs now demands that we proceed to debate this Bill so that the country knows what is going to happen to the governance of this country after the 26th of January, 1995 when the interim administration period of the NRM expires.  

Feelings were also expressed and validly too, in this House when we were debating the Bill that extended the life of the CA that there was need to resolve the issue of what happens after 26th January, 1995.  It is for this reason that I am applying for your permission and the permission of the House so that we can suspend Rule 55(1) and proceed with the Second Reading, this application is being made in accordance with Rule 85 of our Rules of Procedure.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 Amendment No. 2(b) of 1994, be read a Second Time.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, the Bill before us this afternoon seeks to extend the interim period of administration of the National Resistance Movement and that of the National Resistance Government and that of the National Resistance Council beyond the 26th of January 1995.  

I must confess, it is with reluctance that I move this Bill on behalf of the government because it was not the intention of government that the NRM interim administration should be extended beyond the 26th of January 1995.  But as we realise last week when we were debating the Bill extending the life of the CA, a situation has arisen where we have very little to do both as government and as NRC, and I believe as the population but to accommodate the situation where the Constituent Assembly has not been in a position to complete its work within the time prescribed by law originally under the Constituent Assembly Statute as passed by this august House.  

That extension of 6 moths which was granted by this hon. House necessarily takes the interim administration of the NRM which is supposed to expire on the 26th of January next year, to the requirement of enlarging that time in order to accommodate the CA to complete its work.  

Members of this House will recall that when we extended the life span of the interim NRM Administration and that of the NRC in 1990, one, the most if not the most important reason was to enable the process of writing a new Constitution for our country to have sufficient time to be completed.  

It is a fact today that, that process much as it has progressed, has not been completed.  It therefore, requires Sir, that in order to achieve that virtue in the management of our affairs of ensuring an orderly and smooth transfer of power from one state of leaders to others, this House should consider extending the period of administration of the NRM Government and that of the National Resistance Council.  

I am emphasising to the National Resistance Council, because this House has already provided that the new Constitution shall be promulgated in the presence of the President, the CA delegates and the National Resistance Council.  Government has no intention whatsoever of assigning another National Resistance Council duty of participating in the promulgation of the new Constitution.  It, therefore, seeks to extend the life of the present National Resistance Council to concede with the extension of the NRM Administration so that, that function of participating in the promulgation of our Constitution shall be carried out together with all the parties that have been entrusted with the preliminary steps and of course the whole process of developing the idea right from the word go.  

I do not consider this a day for giving - for stock taking or for giving a balance sheet of what has been achieved by the NRM Administration during this time because, I think the only relevant issue before us as leaders of this nation is the question of the completion of the Constitution which has not yet been accomplished, and where we have already committed ourselves by allowing an extension of the life span of the CA.  

I, therefore, Mr Chairman, with your permission, beg to move that and request hon. Members to look at this realistically, to consider the provisions there really and to eventually pass it, preferably without much interference. Mr Chairman.  With those remarks, I beg to move.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you on your appointment as Deputy Vice Chairman -(Applause)- you very well know that we are all very happy to see you here, and that the experience that you have had as a Prime Minister will assist you to guide us to this House which if course, makes laws and very important for this country.  So, you can be assured personally from me, and I do hope from everybody here.  

Coming to the matter now before us, I am pleased that I was caught by your eye although somebody here was saying, it is a bit of sectarianism but -(Laughter)- I do not believe - but charity definitely begins at home, and I do hope they will always remember that one.  I consider this a very important Bill, it might appear short in words but to me, it is very deep in content and, therefore, I will handle it with the objectivity and the importance it deserves.  We are sort of caught up, caught up in the sense of a traveler with his sailor in the middle of the sea, and in the middle of the sea, the traveler is told by the sailor that you will have to pay a little bit more for us to cross the ocean and that if the traveler does not pay that money, possibly he has got to get out and walk.  

This is where because of the extension of the CA, we are caught up and we are being asked to consequently or consequentially also to extend our life.  I want to say that this is a second time this House is being asked to extend its life.  We extended our life in 1989 and it received mixed reactions from the people of Uganda, and I do recall at that time I am one of those who requested this House to go back and consult the people and come and extend its life.  

Last week, we also extended the life of the CA for the further period of 6 months excluding the recess period.  We did not consult the people either.  The life of this House and the life of the NRM Government is due to expire on the 26th of January, and we have over a month to go.  I personally do believe that it would in the interest of this House, in the interest of the Movement and in the interest of us individually for our future politics.  If we were to debate this Legal Notice today and tomorrow, and if we can adjourn and go back to the people and consult them, and come back in the new year before the 25th and pass or decide on this Legal Notice.  I am saying this because we are trying to carry the people with us in the job of the extension of this House, the job making of a new Constitution, and the preparation of the people to extend; extending the life of a House.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the hon. Member holding the Floor to clarify to this House whether it was not necessary for the CA to adjourn to go and consult the people, because -(Applause)- at least, if you have to adjourn and go and seek the people’s view, we should have started with the CA.  That is the clarification I want.  Thank you.

MR ELYAU:  Additional point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I get a bit disturbed.  The other week when we were discussing the extension of the CA, it appears to me that the intention for extension has generated from the CA, and the CA is full of representatives of the people apart from may be UPC and UPM is not there but everybody is there.  

Now, if the people have failed to consult and the matter has arrived to this House, now should we go back and start afresh because now everybody has been consulting his people, and people say, they want a Constitution and they want elections to be held and they want to see that there will be a free and fair hand over of government. (Applause)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the two hon. Members for the clarifications they have raised.  But, Mr Chairman, in responding to those clarifications, let me say this, that the CA is a creating of this House, it is a baby of this House.  The CA has no legislative authority, and if the CA did not finish its work within 7 months and it came back to you and it is you who without much questioning extending it, you are politically accountable and not the CA. (Applause)  

MR PETER AKURE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to know from hon. Omara Atubo if the CA as scheduled to have finished its work on 11th and they never came for extension here, what would have happened?  Would we have closed the CA and gone home or what?  I would like to know.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, considering clarification or information, but all I am saying, that the extension of the CA is one of the issues that you see in consulting and explaining to the people why you want to extend your life, and I am telling you that if during the campaign even the campaign for the CA, you were put under fire and questioning why you extended your life without consulting the people like one of the reasons always in the front line of the CA campaign what embarrassed some of us, what made some people lose, then I think in terms of politics, some of us still have a long way to go.  

Let me say that I have read this Bill of Legal Notice, and I am looking at it that in one of the two or three amendments, one of the questions, there are three questions, which this Legal Notice raises in my mind.  

The first question is this, the Legal Notice says, NRM/NRC shall continue in existence until the holding of general elections.  The first question that anyone will ask you is, how long will the Constitution-making process take?  Two; how soon after?  These are questions, which this Legal Notice is begging.  How soon after the Constitution is made when the general elections should be held, and third question, if the Constitution is never made which is a possibility, what will happen?  

You cannot rule this point out and I am urging you as legislatures that you should never leave unnecessary loopholes, mark you!  As legislatures, you should never leave unnecessary loopholes in legislation, in a law, which can be subject to an abuse.  In an attempt to clad these holes, I have come with some amendments.  The first amendment attempts to answer the question of how soon after the Constitution is promulgated should the elections be made.  I have proposed four months.  

The second amendment which seeks to answer a situation where the country finds itself in a total dead lock, and we cannot make a Constitution.  You are not going to continue in power supply because a Constitution cannot be made, a country must go into an election and that stalemate will be answered by a general elections whether a new Constitution is made or not.  

The NRM/NRC was due to expire on the 25th of January next year, for circumstances which the Minister responsible has explained to us, this House is being kind enough to extend the life of Government for an indefinite period.  Mr Chairman, to me, this is a serious legislative weakness.  If a Legal Notice No. 1 in 1986 when NRM came to power it could give itself four (4) years and when this House extended the life of NRM/NRC, it gave government five (5) years. I do not see any reason why this House experienced and wise as it is, cannot give the upper limit when the government must by all means ensure a Constitution in place, and an election in place.  

That is my third amendment which shall make the government work that whatever the situation the 31st of December next year is the deadline, and I ask to look at my amendment seriously, go back, tell it to the people and come back to this House and see how best you can decide on it.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS (Dodoth County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The extension we are talking today, I think it is being discussed here as a matter of legislative procedure.  Otherwise, I would have said as we have passed the other Bill, it is obvious that the parent’s life has to be extended further than the child’s life.  Because we gave the child 6 months, so the father must have extra months to bring up this child.  We have been forced to come to this day because the wise ladies and men shall remain in the CA, have not finished their duty at the time we gave them and therefore, they are asking for extra time, that is the basis of this Bill.  

Therefore, allow me to request the Members of the CA both who are here and out to take this into consideration.  The mirror in the CA as explained but the circumstances arising from Committee Five, are not very good.  May I ask these hon. ladies and gentlemen to consider who Uganda, who the is.  Unless they know what the is, they are not going to move any further because before I get the suit, I must go to the tailor, he must be my daily tailor, and measure a coat according to my size, and I think we are here to make a Constitution befitting the statehood of Uganda.  But what are the circumstances of telling in Committee 

Five; there is war between two people; there are those who are in power and want to go back, there are those who are in power and they want to go out.  So, you find there is that war.  The multiparties have tested this power.  They are fighting hard enough to jump back to the place and you find people who support the movement type of government where we are now, at times also are carried by emotions, you see even where multiparty from another side.  What I suggest we would put all that aside and make a Constitution for this country.  So, I beg the Members of the CA to take this into account.  

Secondly, I am speaking of a Ugandan, I am standing here as a Ugandan.  So, I am saying, that is disturbing my head.  If you read the history of Nkaraga sometime back, there is something that is coming out of the CA not pleasing me.  So, I am asking Members of the CA to take this note.  When we talk of the separation of powers and somebody is coming up with a concession that is going to employ in the Parliament as a Committee, an advisory committee, I think we should take care because this is a government of ladies and men who are living today.  So, let us take care, you cannot get an amorphous session and say you are going to execute the document of separation of powers or else we shall be doomed.  

Lastly, I beg the extremist in committee five to stop that for the sake of us the other 16 millions.  Let us stop fearing when things have not yet been said.  Secondly, when this Bill was circulated, I did a bit of research up to the Commission, the Akabwayi’s Commission, and also some members of the United Nations Development Programme who assisted the Akabwayi’s Commission in coming out in their terms that operated under that Commission.  

My overview is that the administrative set up of an Electoral Commission can be done in a record of four months.  I think they are even further privileged because in the President’s Office there is a Standing Electoral Desk which I suppose should be doing some good work now.  So, at the end of the - when we come to discuss this Bill, I am saying, since you pass the law giving the CA six months, although there is a loophole that these six months are the calendar months, are they the working days in a week, what is it?  So, there is that loophole. 

So I am saying, let us give the CA their time and they come up with all the things - we do not want to be - I think tomorrow - I am asking the Members of Parliament, let us not allow the Members of the CA to come again and accuse is tomorrow that we are pushing them, when they come up with a bad law.  

So, we give them time and let them use that time profitably.  I, therefore, now want to say when they have finished their work, when we sit here or wherever we sit and promulgate the Constitution, let us give ourselves a time frame from the promulgation day to - to merely take a government in place.  So, after considering the administrative part of it, which is about four months, I have also consulted some Members of the CA and I think we can stand six months from the day of the promulgation of the Constitution and a day of the next elections.  

When I was also talking to the Minister, he said he does not divert from my arguments, he wants to give us time framework; but I want to ask you to put that time framework within the six calendar months; I am trying to propose, Mr Chairman.  I think even - and Members are of the view that I have not interfered with their time, and I ask them to consider my amendment of six months from the promulgation to the next elections. Otherwise, it is a very good amendment -(Applause)- and I am asking the hon. Minister, and I know of that Committee where his Ministry falls and we have always been on a working atmosphere; I hope this time he is not going to divert from me so much.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR F. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole):  I support the Motion or the Bill which is seeking to extend the life of the National Resistance Movement Government and the life of the House.  I support this Motion, Mr Chairman, mainly because the government has put us in a situation where we find we do not have an alternative.  

I am saying so because when the hon. Members sat here in 1989 and extended the life of this House and government by five years, they should have ensured that a mechanism was put in place to ensure that by the end of this period, all would be ready for a change - all would be ready for elections, because when you look at the way this amendment has been introduced, we in the CA have, actually, been made the scapegoat.  Because the main reason we are giving is that the Constitution is not ready and, therefore, we cannot go for elections; yet even by the time we started work in the CA, it was already very clear that we could have the time in which to finish the Constitution and then hold the elections.  The Odoki Commission, Mr Chairman, which was supposed to -(Interruption)

MR NDEGE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman and congratulations.  I would like to inform my dear brother that as far as - I am also a delegate there, but I did not envisage at any time when I started deliberation of the Constitution that we were not going to finish the work; and we are there to do our best to finish the work in the shortest possible time.  I do not want to stay there one more day; I want democracy to take place.  So, I think, let him speak for himself and not for the rest of us.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you for the information, but what I was trying to say is that, even if by this date, this 11th of this month, the Constitution was being promulgated on that very day; the time left would not even had been enough for organising Constitutional Commission who came out with the draft - they were supposed to take two years but they ended up taking four years.  The people who organised the CA elections could have caused these elections to be held in December, but they ended holding them at the end of March!  All indications were there that we would not be in time for handing over an elected government by the 25th of January 1986.  

Therefore, I would wish to depart from what hon. Atubo has told us that there is need that we go into recess and go and consult the population.  Instead, I am requesting the government to apologise to the people of Uganda and to come out clearly as a government and explain to the people why it has become necessary for the life of the NRM Government to be extended, because some of us get embarrassed, we have been out moving from village to village -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  I wanted to inform the Member holding the Floor that this time we should be very clear when we are correcting our words.  The other day here, the government has brought one thing only.  Now for us here, people wanted to see there has been suspension of the Legal Notice.  It was our wish as Members of this House who wanted to see that we are there to see and promulgate the Constitution.  It is true, people here were arguing so.  Do not say that the government was the one forcing.  We also wanted it. (Laughter)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Many of us have addressed several meetings where we informed people why it has been necessary for the government to extend itself from 1989 to 1995.  Recently in the CA campaigns, we were telling people that we are going to make a Constitution to ensure that - to enable the government, the present government to hand over to an elected government by the 25th of January, 1995.  Now, when we pass this Amendment, we are supposed to go back and eat our words and tell the people that it has not been possible; now the NRM Administration has been extended indefinitely.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, could you please kindly wind up?

DR BYARUHANGA:  So, as I said, Mr Chairman, right from the beginning, we have no alternative but to extend the life of this government, but I would wish that this amendment comes out clearly to spell out the period by this interim NRM Administration has been extended; and therefore, I am proposing that the life of the interim period of the NRM Administration should not be pegged against the completion of the new Constitution; because as one hon. Member here has said, we cannot even be sure whether we are going to have - whether we shall come out with a new Constitution.  There is no guarantee, whatsoever -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, this government with all the blame that they might have, it did not have any control over the CA; the time table of the CA is made by the Business Committee in conjunction with the Chairman of the CA, and therefore, the government will find itself embarrassed if they try to apologise for the CA.  

It is, therefore, very important that we make the point very clear that the time table for the debate of the CA is made by the CA Members themselves on the Business Committee and the Business Committee is represented by the people from the district and from different groups.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, could you kindly wind up?

DR BYARUHANGA:  Yes, thank you for the information you have given me, but this information really fortifies my position.  We are actually, saying we have no power of the constitutional making process!  Since we do not have power over this process, we should not peg our life to this process over which we have no control; and therefore, I was coming out a proposition that we extend the life of the interim period of the NRM administration by one year.  

Now, if by the end of January, 1996 the Constitution is not ready, then we should hold the elections under the 1967 Constitution; because we have a Constitution, and if Parliament - even when the CA has made the Constitution, this Parliament will retain the powers of amending the Constitution; it, therefore, means that Parliament, actually, has powers to make the Constitution.  If the CA as to the period we have given them fail to come up with a document, we can dissolve that CA and come here and finish up the Constitution and ensure that a general election is held before the 25th of January 1996.  Otherwise, as this Amendment stands, it just gives a blank cheque to us who are here in power.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand here to support the Bill to amend Statutory Instrument No.1 of 1986.  I do that with some qualification.  When set out to make a new Constitution, we are meant to lay down rules by which the people of Uganda we are going to be governed; a covenant between the ruled and the rulers.  But what I see here is a tug of war, by and large. I may be misunderstanding of what is going on, but there is a tag of war between or among the people, largely on power.  

In other words, I do not see a lot being done - a lot of effect being put in to make a Constitution for the people of Uganda; people are spending too much time thinking about what will happen to them as leaders after the new Constitution has been made; and one wonders whether the effort is very well directed.  

I would like, therefore, those of us in this House who are Members of the CA to raise and become leaders of the 16 or 17 million people someone has talked about.  Personally, I see a lot of disregard of what the people’s interests in this country are.  The people are interested in peace, and the people of Uganda want to be in peace.  Those of you who will be in power it is absolutely secondary and sometimes even immaterial, the people want peace, the people want unity; and those of you who are delegates, and take note, you are delegates but no representative.  The people are behaving as if they are representative, they are delegates and they are supposed to do what the people have asked them to do.  So, I think, we should not spare for Members of the CA to prioritise their business in terms of who will be in power and who will not be.  I say this without shame.  

Sometimes I see that the pre-occupation of some people is to see certain people out of power and to see others in power, which should not be the case.  Quite often we are told that we should make a Constitution that will stand the test of time.  It does not matter what Constitution we are going to write if you people do not give it a chance to stand the test of time, it will not exist for even a day.  So, the willingness to accommodate one another within this country, and unless you do that, this country is doomed.  That is why I would like you people in the CA, those of you who are here and those who are outside, to address the issues that have come clearly as possible causes of division among the people of this country, and I would like to name them; they have already been named and I want to name for emphasis.  I think it is important to focus on what some people have called federal, we must address it, there is no question, it is no use - I would not call it that but I think that at times when we hide our heads in the sand.  

The second one you must address is the question of - well, federal and decentralisation go together.  The other question I think that has come out very clearly, is the question of multipartyism versus Movement.  Now, if the people in the CA can address those two issues, I do not even see why you cannot finish your business in one month -(Applause)- and once you have sorted out those, I think Mr Chairman, we shall be wasting a lot of time -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform my hon. brother on this Floor that, it will take a number of hard thinking; the rhythm over here is that we are Members of CA and NRC and indeed government itself is interested in a new Constitution, and these double roles, we who are in government may want to extend ourselves, whereas, when we were in the jungle, we said within four years, we will hold free and fair elections.  

I want to say this; we said so and then we agreed in good faith that we would extend for another five years, and now we want to extend more!  What are the people of Uganda going to think?  Let me say this; in India, when they were making a Constitution, it is only those people who had India’s best interest at heart, but not in government are the ones who wrote the Indian Constitution; and maybe, we should learn a lesson from that.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the hon. Members for his contribution to the debate, but I conclude my contribution by making one observation.  The first one is what hon. Wanendeya has confirmed, that there are some people whose only objectives is being in power, and this I blame on everybody in the body politic of this country, I do not want to be misunderstood that I am pointing fingers at any one person or group.  I think, I have discovered over the process that in politics one of the major things is about competing for power, irrespective of whether your opponent is doing the right thing or not; all you want to do is to replace him.  

But as far as I am concerned, there ought to be a good number of politicians in this country whose major interest is the interest of the people of Uganda.  It is not enough to hold elections without establishing whether the results or subsequent to that elections you are going to have peace in this country.  The elections will be worthless if only the day after the elections you saw the elections in Nigeria, what use did they serve?  More people died after the elections than may be, they were dying before.  I would like to see something like we have seen in South Africa; and it is because these people sat down away from the Constitutional conflicts and mapped the future of South Africa; that is what I want to see from you leaders of this country.

Now, the last statement I want to make is that, I think you should entirely - we leaders rather, should encourage the contribution of people who are not directly in this position of decision-making; I am talking about the CA, I am talking about Parliament.  Sometimes when we are in the middle of this thing we look at it at a nearer point than our near point; our near point is about 30 centimetres away, but we intend to look at the things nearer than there.  Therefore, we see bright black picture, but if we listen more to the people, may be, at a distance way, we must find a solution.  That is why I want to encourage what happened yesterday in Sheraton.  I would like to see more of that, and I would like the leaders to take this from contributions that are made at such foras.  I support the Motion, Mr Chairman.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think it is inevitable that the life of this House and of the government is extended, because I remember in 1989 when the first extension took effect, the explanation then was that we are extending because we are in the process of making a new Constitution; the same explanation is true today.  We are extending because we are making a - we are in the process of making a new Constitution.  I am rather worried myself by this extension because the phrase says, we shall continue in existence until the holding of general elections under any Constitution.  Holding of a general election is a condition to the end of this House and of the administration.  Therefore, I want to be in agreement with the Amendment which was moved and which will be moved later on, to limit the time so that we put a time frame after promulgation of the new Constitution.  

I am also worried - may be it is a coincidence but it is a very unfortunate coincidence, that at the time when we are debating the extension of this House and of the government a new salary scale is issued.  I do not know what message will be received by the public.  They may think that we are extending the House because we want to have a bigger salary.  I hope that will not be the case, and I hope that this was just a coincidence but it is a coincidence which came at a time when we are extending -(Interruption)

MR MORO:  Point of information.  I would like, Mr Chairman, to inform the speaker on the Floor that, as far as NRC is concerned, the amount indicated in the recent circular was decided on in July and was only waiting implementation.  So, it is not a result of this Motion here.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Exactly, I would like the public to understand it so, and that is why I brought it back so that they do not misunderstand it.  Regarding the process making the Constitution, I must say that a lot of work has been played by Members of this House who are not Members of the Constituency Assembly, to the effect there is a lot of delay or seemingly that there is a lot of delay in this Constitutional making process.  I want to say that Members of the Constituency Assembly are doing everything possible to see that they take their job seriously. (Applause)  

As a matter of fact, it was for the concern of the Members that they divide themselves into select committees so that they can speed up the job of making the Constitution.  If there was any walk out in Committee 5, it was because some members of that Committee had a point to make and they made it that way; but that was not to prevent the work of this Committee to go ahead.  Committee 5 is sitting as if nobody walked out of it.  Therefore, do not be misled by the fact that there was a walk out.  

I want to conclude by saying that let us promise the public, the people of Uganda that this is the last time we are going to extend the House of this Parliament; let us give them the assurance that the Constituent Assembly will sit down and finish the job in a short time, let us give them assurance that when we are making a Constitution, it is not a political exercise, it is an exercise where we Ugandans of different ideas, of different ways of thinking we come down and sit together and discuss regardless of the numbers because some people have been boosting of being in the majority and, therefore, thinking that because are in the majority they will be able to carry day today and tomorrow and the day after the Constitution making is not like that, it is a matter of give and take.  That is what we told them that Uganda is making a Constitution which will allow people of all sort of opinion to live together peacefully to build a nation that is why we came together, let us not take the issue of being in the majority to far because it is not -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that Ugandans generally are found of respecting their leaders and what has made the Constitution process difficult especially on the matters the hon. Member is raising is that the Head of State of this country has taken very firm and legend position on these issues and out of respect people do not want to move from those positions especially with regard to Federal and Multi-parties.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you for the information -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do not know where hon. Tiberondwa gets his information from, I am also a Member of this House, I am a CA delegate and in those capacities, Sir, I want to correct the impression hon. Tiberondwa has created that the Head of State is literally directing the Assembly to make sure that his own personal ideas are those which have written the Constitution that is erroneous it is wrong and uncalled for, in both my capacities as a Member of this House and a Member of the CA, I know in fact even one of the reasons why we had to accept as government to come and ask you hon. Members to extend the House was because Government does not interfere with the work of the CA; the CA is independent of government and is independent of the Head of State. That impression I want it to have it cleared, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up hon. Sebaana Kizito.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Yes, I am winding up, I want to thank the Members for the information.  But I want to say that every Ugandan being a Member of State or a citizen, he is entitled to directing or to discuss any issue with his delegate and delegates can take the ideas to the Assembly.  

We should approach the remaining period of making a Constitution in the spirit which has been pro-pounded by my friend hon. Mondo Kagonyera that let us settle as if we know - because we know we are going to live here forever, we know that this country belong to everybody, Uganda is not composed of people who are homogeneous people are different but all those people who are different must be living together for now and forever, therefore, let us approach the six months which were given by this House to CA, let those months be approached more methodically, let us approach them with a spirit of give and take, let us approach the issue as far as possible so that we make the Constitution within the six months and so that there is no more excuse for extending the life of this House and of the Government.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Mr Chairman, first of all, I would like to congratulate you upon achieving that Office, this is a true reflection of what contribution you have made because may be, some people were thinking that when you are dropped from the Cabinet post, that was the end of it, but because you are sincere in your work and you are transparent, it has earned you that big Chair. (Applause)
  
I would like to start on this Bill by saying, I do support this Bill.  I support this Bill not because I want to extend myself here, but I support this Bill on reasons which I am going to give you.  I support this Bill because the Constitution has not been made and I want everyone to know from today that this Bill here, it is not NRC which is extending itself, it is because CA has not done it’s work in a stipulated time, so it is not out of the interest of the House, it is because the CA has not conducted itself in a manner which would have exposed all that was on its table so that the people would have - got another government by January 25th.  

So, the point is not on NRC because I know the Papers like Monitor they have been attacking NRC let and right saying that the NRC wants always to extend itself, it is not NRC this time, all of us here are interested to go for elections even if it comes tomorrow, we are ready for it but we are saying, we cannot go for elections when we are not properly - the law of this country is not properly done, why do you hurry?  Let us finish the Constitution then we go in for elections. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Whoever is interested to come in should come in after the Constitution has been made.  Now, with that view, Mr Chairman, I would like to turn to the CA. (Laughter) 

I would like to say like this, the CA can do its - we have given it six months but they can even do it within two months and finish and then the elections can take place maybe, within six months.  So, that is why I do not agree with some people who are coming up with time - saying that we should go up to December, what if the CA can do it’s work within a short time?  So, the law should be left like that so that it can accommodate. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, if we try to limit to December, that means if we reach December and the Constitution is not yet made, then we shall again come back here for extension.  So, we should leave the law open so that if the CA people can do their work within a shortest possible time, then the general elections can take place maybe within four or five months.  (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much and I wish to thank the hon. Member on the Floor.  However, I wish to inform him that with the politics of self-preservation, it is safer to take the upper limit of the time given to the CA.  Thank you very much indeed.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  In the same vein when we were debating the CA Statute, we said six months that is when the Constitution should be in place, but after six months before even the six months expired the government was asking us to extend CA.  So, I do not see the reason why you should be specific.  On the independence, I would like to talk about the independence of the CA, 

Some Members have advanced the view that the Government had nothing to do with the CA, whatever the CA’s business is CA’s business including the Minister.  So, I disagree with this, Government is supposed to ensure that the CA does its work within the stipulated time, that is why it is there, it is the executive, it is one of the arm of government.  So, the government must not relinquish its role because if we are going to say that the government is not responsible, then the CA can go on for even ten years, yes, the government is not coming in, when the government is supposed to be the supervisor -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in actual fact after the Constitution has been promulgated, it will be this House which will sit to determine on the roles which will implement that Constitution electoral matters so that even that day the date of election will actually be determined here after the Constitution has been concluded.  So, Members should not be worried about the day they will be the ones still to determine it.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  But, Mr Chairman, as I was still expounding on this point, I would like to say that I disagree with some views of those who think that it is - the Government has no responsibility to check on the CA even when Members do not meet, even when there is lack of quorum, even when people come late even some committees do not meet at all, the government has got the responsibility, because these people who are in the CA are paid from the consolidated funds, this is public money -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do not want to interrupt the speaker, but when we made the Statute setting up the Constituent Assembly we made sure that and it is in very clear in the Statute that government will not interfere in the process of the Constituent Assembly directly their job will be to facilitate the Constituent Assembly and when we reached the end of the period you had given us, we came back to you, Mr Chairman.  We came back to this very House that gave Government mandate to finance the Constituent Assembly and when the time they had given us came to the end, we came back to the House and requested for an extension and that extension now is going to be put on the consolidated fund.  We cannot go beyond what you have instructed us as a government. This House is supreme and this House must be respected and therefore, the Government cannot interfere in making the timetable for the Constituent Assembly.  Thank you very much.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to wind up by, since I have already talked about what I had in mind, first of all the CA must be disciplined, they must do the work and the second point which I was saying it should not be NRC to be blamed for this extension of today, it is purely because CA has failed to discharge it to work within the stipulated time.  

So, the third point which I am saying, government has got an obligation to ensure that the Constitution is made people must debate it, must pass it so that the country can go for general election, people must elect their leaders.  You see some of us are tired of saying that we are extending ourselves, that is, therefore, a job a government to ensure that the people who sit in the CA do their work, they should not earn money for nothing, this is public money people are paying taxes for it and therefore, they must ensure if they have failed to do the work, they should resign and people who are capable are put in their places. (Laughter)  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ADOKO NEKYON (Maruzi County, Apac):  Mr Chairman, thank you very much for the opportunity given to me to express my feelings on this crucial matter of extending the life of the NRM Government for the second time.

Sir, there are many ways of running a government; I have seen many may be, I will see some more.  This time, I think we have got - caught into a situation where we can be described as people who try to run a government by making a Constitution endlessly.  Sir, when we were debating a statute establishing the Constituent Assembly, I propose on the floor of the House that because our country is so poor, we should have only one election of a Constituent Assembly, which would ultimately change into Parliament, I did say on that occasion that this has been practised in many countries of the world.  But at that time nobody was prepared to listen if we had listened and adopted that method and went to the election to the people and got a mandate for one election to a Constituent Assembly which would also function as a Parliament, we would not now be debating the question of an extension.  But we know what the country is going through, therefore -(Interruption)

MRS KALEMA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I beg for forgiveness for acting as if I was in the Constituent Assembly.  I would like hon. Nekyon to clarify to this House how he feels the NRC and the CA could do the two duties simultaneously for this country debating the constitution and at the same time legislating for the country in this House.

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, the only proposal was that the Constitution should be made by NRC and that had been up held then the hon. Member would have know-how that could be done, at that time she was a Minister but now she is forgotten. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  You see, hon. Nekyon has described hon. Rhoda Kalema has having been forgotten, she is not, she is waiting to be re-cycled. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order for an hon. Member of this House to describe on. Kalema as a person who is waiting to be re-cycled by this Government, is it in order, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think it is a matter of substantiation, if he can substantiate what he means maybe he had some meaning which you might not have understood and failure to do that, then the point of order can arise.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I can substantiate this way.  Mr Chairman, I am congratulating you on the Chair. (Laughter)  It is only few days back -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please can you substantiate? (Laughter)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, there many Members who have been re-cycled not long time ago, they have been removed from the posts of Ministers, they are back, so she is waiting.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Butagira was called upon to substantiate the question of re-cycling a human being and I wish to be told that he has successfully discharged his duty or he has failed.  My view is that he has failed, human beings are not recycled, recyclement is associated with raw materials and other things.  Can I ask you that in view of the fact that he has failed, he should withdraw this word of recyclement formerly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Butagira, to the best of my knowledge, I think the word re-cycling is snot very fair; it is not Parliamentary to use to your colleagues in this respect. I would ask you to withdraw that statement.  (Applause) 

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I do not want to make things difficult especially when you have just got the important Chair. (Laughter) I therefore, withdraw.

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, what I actually say was that, Mrs Kalema had forgotten what has been agreed not that he has been forgotten.  Sir, originally, some of us had the view that if we accept a lot of time eating instead of appointing a Constitution Commission to take so much time and money going around the country, we could have used the 1962 and 1967 Constitutions as a draft out of it the new Constitution could have been written, we would by now finish and we would have saved tremendous a lot of money.  Sir, that was a waste of money, secondly, election of two Houses of legislature which are now going to run paralyze for a whole year, will go into analysis of our history as the best organised system of the wasted public funds.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor in respect of the fact that the 1962 Constitution was made in London, the 1967 was made by few maybe including him.  What does he think that the population of Uganda is to always be around and wait for a few individuals given the Constitution and yet this government is making every effort to ensure that everybody in the country is consulted to see how they can be governed because I think it is a right of everybody in this country to know and actually choose how he should be governed, what does he really mean that we wasted money to consult the people, who is he representing not the people?

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  Before the 1962 Constitution was written, a Commission under Road Master was appointed and it went throughout the country from Gombolola to Gombolola taking the views of the people of Uganda and that formed the basis of the Constitution -(Interjection)- Sir, I want to say, even after the writing of the Draft Constitution -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Nekyon, would you to be clarified?

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  How?  I will finish; I want to know the timeframe during which I can deliver my speech with all these interferences.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Take only the last one.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification that how can two failure teachers who have failed to qualify when they are going to teach you combine them and get some one to pass?  The 1962 Constitution and the 1967, which failed and you combine them to get the new Constitution to make us continue to make our Uganda stand as it is.  Thank you.

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  I would like to thank my daughter -(Laughter)- I want to tell her this, the 1962 Constitution did not fail it was the one which was amended to form the 1967 Constitution and the 1967 Constitution is under which we are working now, as she is standing here, she is under 1967 Constitution so it did not fail maybe, herself is failing. (Laughter)  

We agreed that I will take the last information from that lady, so let me continue.  Sir, when we got the draft Constitution, we were supposed to have gone for election immediately, but the elections were postponed twice on the ground that we are not ready and when we came to hold elections ultimately, there were no voters registers - as provided by law up to now in my constituency we do not know who were actually registered because the register has never been produced.  So, we held the election when we were not ready in the end everybody who had a voters card from whatever source was allowed to vote.  

Sir, when the election was held, we had to produce 284 people representing counties and interest groups that number is large from the very number itself we should have been aware that if we were going to allow each Member to speak freely representing his or her constituency, there was no way we were going to help the Constitution ready at the time.  What makes Constitution-making easy is that we have only nine groups representing as they have done to South Africa, as they have done to Namibia.  If the original states that constituted Uganda were the bodies - representing to the CA, the Constitution would have been completed by now.  But as it is, we have these people speaking their different languages -(Laughter)- it is understandable that this process is going to be very, very long, this must be clear to us.  There is no way we are going to contract it as if they were speaking on behalf of their groups when they are speaking on their own behalf as individuals.  Sir, we have got now the problem of none payment -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up hon. Member?

MR ADOKO NEKYON:  Yes, I am trying but you understand how I was interrupted continuously.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We have given you more time actually.

MR NEKYON:  Sir, when we passed the Statute here, the Statute provided that, the payment or the cost for running CA would be charged to the Consolidate Fund.  But the truth is that, for almost five months.  The money was being controlled by the Office of the Solicitor General against the law.  I am a Member of the Welfare Committee, and one time, I had to go with the Chairman to the Solicitor General’s Office to find out how it came about then.  Members were not being paid regularly.  And we found the confusion that, those people were deciding on a different arrangement altogether.  It was only a month ago that this matter was corrected.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  

MR NEKYON:  Inform me again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But we had said that it was the last information from them.

MR NEKYON:  You will excuse me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I will let you continue.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member from Maruzi that, the problem was brought about not because of Solicitor General who was properly the Accounting Officer for this Constituent Assembly, but it was brought about by the Auditor General who at one time did not think and did not agree that, the payments for Members of CA should be charged on the Consolidate Fund, because, there had not been a distinction between salaries and what goes to drivers and that kind of thing.  The problem was not with the Solicitor General, the problem was elsewhere in the auditor General’s Chambers.  

MR NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, let me finish.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up, hon. Nekyon?

MR NEKYON:  If it is agreed that the procedure was not followed and that is all I wanted to say.  This has caused a lot of discontent among the Members.  One Member from Busoga to be thrown out of a hotel and now lives in Iganga, and comes every morning from Iganga to make the Constitution.  This must be known.  Then, there is a feeling now among Members.  I think Members should be interested in hearing this because things are developing in a bad way.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you please wind up, hon. Member?  Summarise.

MR NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, there is now a feeling in the Constituent Assembly that, certain people have got their Constitution already made in their heads, and they are trying to force it through this country.  And this has caused apathy.  That is why you are here with attendance like - first of all, because of wrong payment, and now there is apathy.  And it if continues, the Constitution may not ever be made.  Yes, I am telling you the truth, because this is what I am here for.  Then I want to say that you waited until the last moment then you brought the two Bills when you knew the time was ending.  And the way the other Bill was passed was pathetic, because Members were willing to speak, to give their views, but the Chairman was bent on closing the debate, and he did it.  That is the discretion of a democracy for Banana Republic.  Sir, I want to say, although this Bill has come now, when many of us had just gone through elections, let us be careful not -(interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have followed the arguments put forwards by the hon. Member on the Floor.  And I could see his trend of argument.  But, Mr Chairman is he in order to refer to Uganda as a Banana Republic? 

MR NEKYON:  It is a Banana Republic in the world, because it is full of bananas, and I do not see anything wrong with bananas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Members it is very difficult to rule on this terminology, because at one time, I think a Ugandan described it so and also in the National Theatre; they repeated it many times.  And I think it was described as 30 years of bananas. (Laughter)  But I think that one was a description of the Artists.  But as a matter of fact, the Parliamentarians should not take their dear country Uganda as being bananas. 

MR NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, a Banana Republic is a republic full of bananas.  And a large area of Uganda has bananas -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please wind up.

MR NEKYON:  Sir, I have a banana plantation myself.  Let me finish.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you, therefore, wind up please.

MR NEKYON:  Let me wind up.  Sir, therefore, I want to say that, although many of us have just gone through the grill of election, and we have been tempted to fear going back to election now, knowing what it means; I propose that we move carefully and we support the amendment to be moved limiting the time of the extension.  Because what we passed last week get an open and saying that, the period given excludes period of recess which gives power to the Chairman just to give any kind of recess continuously ending up in five years’ time. (Laughter)  Yes, there is nothing to stop it.  So, that must be done, and I want to say finally -(Interruption)

MR WAPAKABULO:  Point of information.  I must apologise to the hon. Member on the Floor and I am speaking not as Chairman, but as a knowledgeable person on the affairs of the Constituent Assembly.  I am advised that - it is not correct that the Chairman unilaterally grants recess in the Constituent Assembly.  This matter is normally made subject of a recommendation from a small committee of the business committee and the business committee considers whether to accept - I mean at the degree of the recess.  And this is normally done by the business committee in which every district of Uganda has a delegate plus all the interest groups.  So that is not a capricious decision of the Chairman.  And the Chairman understands a reasonably sensitive person to the affairs of Uganda, is not likely to grant five years or five months of recess in order to sabotage the constitutional development of this country.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR NEKYON:  Mr Chairman, the Chairman wants to exalt himself in advance. (Laughter)  But I want to say that, even the business committee can commit the same kind of crime; by proposing recess after recess.  That is the co - of the matter.  The emphasis was not on the person who will practice that kind of thing.  But we have seen the thing extension after extension.  

So, the CA may adopt the same method of remaining in power.  Sir, I propose finally that, since the CA’s got stuck as hon. Kagonyera has just said, with major issues we can possibly even break up the stay.  Instead of us sitting here and assuming that those things are going to be solved automatically, we should now be thinking of a round table conference to deal with major issues which are turning into a crisis for this country.  And such a round table conference must ably present this of the former states that formed the nation of Uganda.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I also want to add my voice to thank you for your new achievement to the Chair.  I am raising to support this Motion not because it is a very interesting one.  This country is waiting seriously.  The country is waiting the day in which we shall hand over power to the people themselves.  So, the process although is long, but it is very interesting and it is important.  As I said earlier when I was informing that the CA today is well composed of every people.  Now that we are talking about people, some of us go for weekends and we discuss with people this kind of extension and so on, and we have told them why it is necessary.  

Now, it would have been wrong for us to depend on somebody.  This time, government did not actually propose to extend; we have seen the difficulty in the CA making itself.  And the people who have been disturbing us as having been rubber stamp here extending our period here, are the ones now say it is really possible that, it must be extended.  They have seen the trouble and the problem as it is.  We thought the making of the Constitution was very easy.  My brothers and sisters who were there; some people, took four years to just collect information only.  We are now considering - we are now amending a very serious technical work.  That is why the process cannot be achieved.  

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my Colleague holding the Floor of the House that, the Constituent Assembly Members have not read wholly the report of the Uganda Constitutional Commission which was reduced under statute 5 of 1988.  And then, by a commission, by law again Statute 6 of 1993, implemented by this hon. House because is the same.  Giving them, under Section 8 of the Statute 6 of 1993; to go under Section 8; what it would mean to make a Constitution in 314 proposals.  Now, if I am to read these old reports and I submit as students writing constitutions of five different Constitutions for different countries.  Three weeks or 21 days will be just enough if we had cleverly put right men there; and we would not.  Three weeks for 314 articles -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, can you restrict yourself to the information rather than a contribution?

MR OBWANGOR:  The information I am asking, Mr Chairman, the Commission took four years, because ours was elaborate, we had to sit and get information from the people, you are either to enter libraries and all laws, Constitution for the whole world in the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs for 1987.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, it is very unfortunate for my father hon. Obwangor to say that we do not have those things since we have all sorts of report including the Constitution of 1962, 1967 and what have you for comparison.  We have everything and we read it.  We know those articles, and we know why we are getting on with problems.  Because the country is first interested in seeing who did what at what time.  The country wants to see that, the mechanism of governance now is reduced from its present capacity back to people democratically.  And the process is very painful and long enough I have.  Because why?  

One, who else does not know that people were told that next year by January 25th, the NRM Government will end up its power.  And people were keen that is why there has been peace so that the CA has to regenerate the idea of extending it is because the CA is composed of all the people.  And it is the people of Uganda who are asking to extend the period so that we finish the job.  The intention of finishing the job is to make sure that nobody again comes around to hijack power.  We want to make sure that the power is delivered correctly to the people.  Supposing we would finish the work two months and then we go to hell again, what will it be now?  Let us be very, very significant people by saying, allow the time to go with its merit.  

In giving CA six months, I do not want the NRM or NRC to go more than 9 months, because 3 months is enough for any arrangement to be done.  Because if 6 months is done well, the challenge now lies with us the people in the CA.  It is the Members of the CA now, to knock the challenge, because we have been challenged that we are not working.  But I think we are working.  So, it is only CA which will give the answer.  The answer which will save the government, save the NRC.  

So, I also equally appeal to Members of the CA to work sincerely to save money, to save time and save Uganda.  There is nothing wrong in extending the period so long as the period has its historical objective.  Why should we be in a hurry?  That we are gona say, ‘Bugubugu sakoola’ (Laughter).  No, ‘bugubugu simulilo.’  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, our intention is not as people think that, there is something we are eating there.  We just want to see that Uganda is peaceful and we shall continue with the process peacefully until we end it peacefully.  That is what we are all after.  And I am sure in 6 months time, we are going to work as citizens of Uganda to ensure that we arrive at a destination and we deliver the good called Constitution.  It is therefore for the people to elect their own government.  So, I do not see why we should waste time quarrelling here.  Let us proceed and allow CA to continue, we allow NRC also to do at a loss.  

We want to see that, there is Electoral commission in place quickly.  And this is why we shall have the work done very well.  It is true in some areas, registers were not properly compiled as hon. Adoko was saying.  Some areas did not have their registers well done because time was not there for typing them.  So, I think the earlier we do the update register, we shall not even go to election most peacefully.  So, I do not see why we should really knock our heads here.  After all, there is nobody who can do better than Ugandans themselves.  

Yesterday, we had a message in the seminar that we must put our heads together.  It is true, Mr Chairman.  Let us put our heads together; let us avoid quarrelling.  I support the Motion, let us urge ourselves to work hard.  I thank you very much.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical Member):  I thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to give my opinion to this Bill.  I have listened to a number of Members who have given their contribution either in support or against and I have this to say.  I am getting rather worried as to the way some Members including myself are interpreting some issues which are related to the nation.  I am further getting worried as to the way we are interpreting these laws which we pass here and the enactment of a Constitution whose articles have been collected from the public and these must be discussed, crystallised and then passed.  

I am further getting worried and this one, I am also warning my fellow citizens that, we shall have a collective responsibility of being negligent to ourselves and the citizens of this country when we cause and flange ourselves into further chaos by not understanding the incense of a Constitution making.  

We are apportioning blames to the Executive, to NRC and CA.  Whoever stand up to speak, assumes she has the best to offer.  Even those who have not had chances to come to this House, the citizens; have got a responsibility towards this Constitution and they could offer better services and materials in as far as discussion of this Constitution is concerned.   Now, we have a mission, Members of NRC have a mission, Members of the Constituent Assembly have a mission.  And all these missions must be accomplished.  Ours we who are elected here towards the extension, when this House was extended, we were brought in this House as an expanded House.  

One of the reasons when we extended ourselves was to have the Constitution in place and this Constitution is not in place.  The CA’s when they were elected, they were given a mandate and a mission to fulfill that, they must discuss, promulgate a Constitution; which will finally be brought here for your ratification.  So, you are both.  Both of us are going to be held responsible for the making of this Constitution.  

Now, when hon. Kagonyera tells us that we are peacemakers, it is true and I implore you hon. Members that, we must be sober within our minds, avoid accusing one another of inefficiency.  Both of us with me inclusive; I can say we are all inefficient because there are all sorts of Bills which were tabled in this House and we have never passed them.  Similarly, there are a lot of articles in this Draft Constitution which we have not completed.  There are various reasons why we are not succeeding.  And, therefore, I pray to this House to react soberly, the country is ours.  Whatever Constitution we are talking about, if it is not passed by sober minds, by sober recipients, the constitution will be useless.  The Constitution is equated to a Bible and a Koran.  A Bible is a Holy Book written by noble and innocent people.  But the people and the followers of this Bible continue sinning.  

Similarly, if we pass a Constitution which is not properly understood by ourselves and the people, we shall continue to have problems.  So, I pray that when we are passing pre-judgement to Members of the CA, to Members of NRC, we should consider and question ourselves, what I have done?  Have I done very well in the Ca, have I done very well in the NRC?  Both of us the public and the population is asking us those questions.  

So, I further want to appeal to all of us to forget even what we have spoken here before.  Because if the Hansards were to be played again, many of us would be voted out of this House, because many members when the extensions were made and unfortunately one of my elder colleague is not here, I would have quoted him.  He said, I will not tolerate an extension for even a day.  Now, today is a same Member in the NRC, is the same Member here and he is the same Member blaming us for an effective implementation of this Constitution making.  It is unfortunate -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please, proceed.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  That one, the Member is not present.  If he was aggrieved, he would have asked me, but if he wants, you can refer to the Hansard; they are there.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to give him additional information that as a Member of the CA, I do sit there in various committees and a number of times, many Members in the CA do attack the NRC Members as out of habit.  What is even more astonishing is that now, Members of the NRC who are Members of the CA, some of them are the ones who go to CA and start attacking the NRC.  It was interesting to hear now another round of talk of some of the Members in NRC attacking the CA.  I think this is just a - for me, I sit there and look at them and I am really surprised.  Why can we not be honest and I think that hon. Kyaligonza is right to name them.  But I think as a way of cautioning leaders, this type of football is not really interesting.  Thank you.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I thank you very much for that exposition.  Mr Chairman, I further want to inform the hon. Members that, this draft as you look at it, it is in your own mind where you can interpret that a certain article is non contentious.  But experience has shown even those articles which you thought were not contentious, have become contentious.  And, therefore, when we are discussing this draft, we are not simply going to discuss for the sake of passing a Constitution for future governments to use and subject the citizens to follow these Constitutions.  

I would further say that, even if this Constitution was passed and people are not happy about it and the implementers are not clear, what would happen?  We have a 1967 Constitution as hon. Nekyon is putting it, we have this 1967 Constitution which you hon. Members describe as a pigeonhole Constitution.  All of us have sworn by this Constitution.  We are still following it.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Uganda Republican Constitution of 1967 which was debated in this hon. House from June to September the 8th of 1964 when it became a Constitution.  It was debated by Members of Parliament about that time 102; debated in this House for over three weeks.  I was the only man and person who debated against it and everybody else here; these of Ssemwogerere and what not, kept quiet. (Laughter)  So, what has become our history, we cannot literally say, it is nonsense; of saying that, it was a pigeonhole.  Which pigeon?

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I thank that confused information.

MRS MPANGA:  Point of information.  The pigeonhole Constitution is the one of 1966.  The one of 1967 is the Republican Constitution, which we sometimes call, a one man Constitution, because it was brought after the expiry of the life of that Parliament.  

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In 1967, they took three weeks to debate that Constitution, and there was only one Member who opposed and that is hon. Obwangor; while the Ssemwogereres’ were keeping quiet.  You can see that only one person opposed the constitution and it took him three weeks. (Laughter)  Now does he really think it is too much to ask if Ugandans now want to feel that they want to belong to this document and own it?  To think that the six months that they are being asked is too much, when he alone took only 3 months to move his amendments?  

MR OLUM:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform this House that hon. Ssemogerere was not in this House.  Only that, Obote, but Ssemwogerere never voted.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I thank all Members who have given various information; some of which are questionable because the memories seem to be getting rather tired.  Now, I wanted to express my feelings as to the interpretation of these articles which some Members are looking at as ordinary and therefore, are assumed to be non-contentious and the interpretation varies from an interested group.  

For instance, we are blaming hon. Members who have walked out of the Constituent Assembly as a wastage of time.  But to me, as a revolutionary, I am looking at it as a culture which culture is positive because at least, we have got opportunity for people to express their negative opinion and they walk out, they are tolerated and at the same time, there is a law that would have otherwise disqualified them.  Because when you are continuously absent from attending the House for seven consecutive days without reason, you are disqualified.  But because of the good culture that we are trying to inculcate into the minds of our future politicians, is that there is room for tolerance and to listen to one another.  

Similarly, the discussion of this constitution is there is the argument which argument one must win and out of the winning, there will be a vote which vote will be determined by the majority and, therefore, it is not a question of saying that it should have been passed within three weeks and then you expect to pass a good document.  Now, we are talking about federal, decentralisation, pluralism as matters which some of you assume are the most contentious.  Yes, to you, they sound contentious.  What about those who look at land, those who look at separation of power, those who look at the executive and so on?  Where do you put them?  There must be room to argue and cause everybody to agree to one another and then there is a consensus agreement for the passing of this Bill.  Now, I am only appealing to hon. Members that flunkeism is very dangerous in all types of discussion and sycophancy is worse than flunkeism.  I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Francis Babu):  Mr Chairman, Sir, thank you very much.  If I were to be given a choice, I would oppose the extension.  Why?  Because when we went to ask the people to give us a vote to go in the CA, we told them that we would be coming back for the election before 25th of January, 1995.  Unfortunately, when we were in this House debating the Statute, we never imagined that it was going to be a tremendously difficult task to finish or to be able to estimate the time it would take to debate this Constitution.  

After going to the CA and seeing how we have started from practically a very difficult point and how we have tried so hard to get the people together to create confidence, to remove the insecurity that some people came with, to try and work together with others, I am now convinced that it is only one way to go to get that Constitution; that is to extend not only the CA but also to extend this august Body which made the laws that set up that Constitution.  One of the articles in the Statute is that during the promulgation of this Constitution, the Constituent Assembly will be here to do that job.  It will be the same House that if they feel they would like to mandate the CA to do something else, they need to mandate government for that matter.  If they would like government to sort of set a timetable, I think this is the time.  They should give us in that Statute and give government powers to give or make a timetable for the CA and it should be this House because this is the only House that can do that.  

During the debate of the CA, one of the move that I saw and I think hon. Butagira is here, he tried very hard to talk about experience.  That we should give this document to an experienced group of people to reduce the time and somebody stood up and said, what do you mean by experience?  I remember that question being asked very well here.  Hon. Butagira and a few others were very few here.  They could not convince us because we had been moved into a stream of wanting elections.  Therefore, it is our own fault as the NRC for having not estimated that timetable.  We should not blame ourselves and I sometimes wish that we could be honest, that we should not bring personalities here.  

In the CA, I have fought tooth and nail that the NRC should be respected for the job they have done.  They are the ones who set up the CA and, therefore, the people in the CA including myself should respect this Body.  I, therefore, request this House which is the original body that set up the CA to respect itself and tell the CA that the language they are using is not correct.  But I wanted us to improve the relationship between ourselves and many others.  There are people whose motives are different in the CA.  A few minutes ago, you heard an hon. Member stood up here and said the Constitution might not be made.  Why should it not be made?  You elected Capt. Babu, hon. Karuhanga and the Vice President and everybody to be there and we want to produce a Constitution.  They must be joking!  We are going to produce a Constitution. (Applause)  

Somebody was talking about the majority in democracy.  I think I want to take this opportunity today. What measure do we have in democracy to say this is right or wrong?  What measure can we use?  Give me a new measure, give me a new system and we get away from the majority.  When we were elected the other day, some of you NRC Members stood.  Those people who got more votes went to the CA.  Those who did not get more votes did not go to the CA, the ones who get less should be the ones on the CA.  Sometimes when people are talking, I sometimes wonder.  The new line now is majority, majority.  Of course, majority is the measure of democracy.  If you have a better measure, you give it to us.  

So, when people are talking, I would like us to be a little bit more sensitive.  When we come to this House and we have a contentious issue, we are divided into the lobby and then we count numbers, the majority wins.  In the CA you must have two thirds.  Now, I am sorry if the majority of people in the CA are supporters of the Movement, that, I am not apologising.  I am feeling sorry for those who do not want majority.  I am really sorry because I do not know.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I clarify to hon. Babu that he depends on majority and who considers it to be majority.  May I clarify that in 1967 those who were here were the majority in promulgating that Constitution and Ugandans know who are really –(Interruption)

MR OPIO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that in this country, we know that from statistics that the Christians are more but because of the fundamental respect for some other faiths like Moslems, it has been decided that they are the people to slaughter the cows and therefore, we should respect sometimes fundamentals which change.  Thank you. (Laughter)

MR MARWAS:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Babu was asking for the fact that I am not a Member of the Constituent Assembly, but if it is the way I see the tolerance which is being talked down there, the Constitution we are making - first of all, we should know Uganda is composed of very different and divergent ethnic grouping.  The composition of Uganda is a political thing otherwise they have different nationalities within this country.  

So, we are saying to make a law for all of us, we should take into account the aspirations of every minorities in this country because that law is to make all of us exist.  It is different from making a government by the majority.  But this one is a law that must preserve the existence of every grouping.  But if you talk of the majority in Constitutional making, we shall be making a fundamental mistake because nobody will accept that and therefore to make a law, we should all be accommodated in this country, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like just to reflect on what hon. Marwas has just said.  He did indicate that under normal circumstances, in ideal situation, we should always reach a consensus.  That is the ideal situation.  Now in our own situation, supposing we do not reach a consensus, what is the ideal method to use to reach an agreement?  The only law which we made here is very clear.  The majority two thirds will prevail.  Hon. Marwas is saying that we should not adhere to that law which we made here, that we should always reach a consensus.  It may not be possible to reach a consensus.  I will give you an example.  

Supposing I decide that I am going to eat beans and my friend Wanendeya says he is going to eat pork and I am a Moslem and I do not agree to eat pork, I am going to eat beans.  Wanendeya can continue and eat his pork.  There is no way that we can ever agree on that issue because my faith is that, I am not going to eat pork but I will eat beans.  Wanendeya may eat pork without any problem.  So, how do we reach a consensus on such an issue like that?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform this House that a few months ago, His Excellency came here and advised this NRC to keep out of CA.  He was one, we were many, so we defeated him.  And those of us who did not go to CA, we thank God we did not because, the work is a lot.  So sometimes the majority is right and therefore, I would like to request hon. Babu that if he is going to debate CA in the manner and the spirit he exhibits here, then he is the cause of the delay. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, even when you are right, you need to present your case in a humble manner.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give is that democracy is actually expensive and democracy as Ester said, the majority may be right but as long as they are in the minority, they can keep their rightful position in the minority and they must respect the majority to prevail.  But what the principles say is that, once the majority prevails, they must respect the rights of the minority.  Therefore, we must clearly keep these principles if we are striving to get what we think will lead us forward.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank all the hon. Members for their information.  I would like to assure them that I am a student and a very strong student of majoritarianism as it is known.  In fact, I respect the minorities more than anybody.  After all, I belong to the minority.  But, I do not think the minority should impose and which is the most unfortunate bit.  Now, whilst the hon. Member found it very difficult that she did not go to the CA and she thinks there is too much, to some of us, the more work you, the better.  But I just wanted to make this point very clear that some of us who have been to the CA, we have done the job.  I mean, that is the way I debate.  That is why I went to the CA because people like the way I debate.  So, when you judge me when I am standing here, I would like to say that that is the reason why Kampala people elected me and not anybody else.  

So, when you are talking about my debates, it is appreciated in the CA and it is appreciated here and I just want to make one point very clear, as I end, that the 1962 Constitution - and we have to be very historical here - within four years, it was put in the dustbin.  In 1966, there was a Constitution put in the pigeonholes here.  In 1967 another one was made, it had been amended several times and when the NRM came into power, it made ten points.  

The first point says, you must have democracy, you must have rules and those rules are the present Constitution.  You had the 1962 group, and you had the 1967 group, you have to put them together.  To get a consensus, you never get it in three days or three months.  You get it over a period of time.  Consensus comes with time and you must give everybody a chance to speak.  You must try and convince.  It is only when you have people who take rigid positions and who feel bitterness, who have got hate and people who walk out of meetings that you begin to realise that you are having a problem.  But even those who walk out of meetings, with time they come back to the meetings.  So, it is important to have time, it is important to be conducive, it is important to talk to all the other Members.  We must respect each other here and that is the point I was trying to make.  

I would like to end, therefore, by requesting hon. Members that this time has helped us.  For example, if you take the federal, we are getting closer and closer.  At one time, we were very far apart.  Today, we are getting closer and closer to each other.  We are getting situations where people were worried about the Kabaka.  We are getting closer and closer to that one.  We had problems with the multiparties; we had problems with the Movement, and we are still having a little bit of problems with multi-parties and Movement.  I have got a very strong belief and I believe it very strongly now that they are going to close that gap.  I do not agree that we cannot close that gap.  

After yesterday’s debate in the Sheraton, I thought that I could see the light at the end of the time and I would like to ask those who are bitter and unfortunate hatred that is not the way we are going to debate.  We are going to debate by being open and we are going to be clear and we are going to like each other and respect each other.  Mr Chairman, I expect peace, tranquility and respect.  Thank you very much.

MRS KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  In supporting the Bill, I have a few words to say.  I would like all Ugandans to know that this is the second time when NRC being requested to extend NRM and NRC.  It has never been our intention to extend ourselves but we have found ourselves in such a situation that there is no way but to extend ourselves.  

I would like to request Ugandan politicians to have an ordinary Ugandan at heart.  Because when we come here, sometimes we debate Bills or Motions when we are thinking about ourselves and we forget the ordinary Ugandan who is deep in the village, who does not have a passport and does not even know the road and even the door to that office which issues passports.  Because when we talk, we do not think about now, we do not remember the turmoil we have gone through.  If we remember, most of us would not be speaking the way we are speaking now.  What we are trying to do is to keep this peace, which every Ugandan is enjoying.  Today, whether you oppose the Movement, or whether you support it, you have the platform to criticise it. (Applause)  And you walk away peacefully.  Even if you are arrested, the law will take course.  You will go to court and if you are found not guilty, you are set free and you move freely.  I had taken long to see that in Uganda.  But now some of us have forgotten that.  We are just looking at ourselves because I was elected to come to NRC and those people elected me to come here and represent them.  They did not say Kirayapawo, you are going there, we want you to be a Minister and just because I came here personally thinking about myself becoming a Minister, one I am not made a Minister, then that is bad and I start quarrelling.  I am not quarrelling on behalf of those people.  I am quarrelling on my own behalf and yet I did not come here on my own behalf.  

So, I am asking every Ugandan politician to have those people at heart.  We have seen those people who come back from exile.  What have we not seen?  They are booked in Nile Hotel, in Sheraton.  What about those who were neglected?  Either their ears or noses or the mouths were cut off.  Have they been brought to Nile Hotel?  But it is because of the bad policies. (Applause)  And those people who were behind this are the people who are coming back and they are booked in Sheraton.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, Sir, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order when talking about people who have caused problems in this country to go on pointing at me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the hon. Member was really expressing here views and I think she is in order.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Actually, hon. Tiberondwa is sitting in may be a bad position because when I do this, I point at him. (Laughter)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to inform the hon. speaker that, while she may be immediately neighbouring hon. Tiberondwa, she should be advised that hon. Tiberondwa is pointed at of all things in the past. (Laughter)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May be I say Allelluhia!  When I say such I mean nothing.  Now, if we have that in mind, let us be more serious.  Let us stop accusing one another and I do not see because here, people are now talking about a round table where somebody said people were ruling out the young generation.  And I appeal to our old politicians that please, tolerate us as we should also tolerate you.  We want your experience but we also want you to work with us.  The law we are making is not for you and it may not even be for us.  But it is for our children.  So, we should not always be taken back that, if I am not there, then the round table is not complete.  Yet the round table is there.  What round table do we want?  Here in NRC and we call it round table because everybody who represents all opinions of Ugandans was elected here and it applies to CA.  So what round table do we need?  Somebody is just failing to articulate the views of the people he represents.  Now, if we have that round table, why are we again going in those groups?  We are going in those groups because somebody thinks if this group goes through, I will eat more.  So we should not be taken back by those people.  Let us go forward.  

Now, I would like both the CA and the NRC to be - we are very serious, but to be more serious than before.  Because I see there is a fear that while we say that the NRM government and the NRC will be in place until the new Constitution is in place or until we hold general elections; without defending the period and that gives some people fear.  

So, I would request the Minister to come up and give a time limit of this new extension as they did with the CA and we work very hard so that time limit, to see that we complete everything within that time framework.  And those people in CA, allow me please to propose to you and I am glad when hon. Babu mentioned that thing, I think now they have started being more serious than before.  Because you have to beat that deadline.  It would look very awkward again to come here the third time that we are extending the last time of any group.  

So, the CA Members, hon. Members as you are honourables, be honoured practically not only with that word that we hear honourable and see that you finish the work you are supposed to do within that framework of six months and let us also decide our extension so that Ugandans are aware when they are going for general elections.  And I propose a year - okay, six months for the CA and then you add on another six months for NRM and NRC to finish any other business which is still pending.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  With that, we come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at...p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 15th December, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

