Thursday, 18 December 2008

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. As earlier indicated, this is our last day before we go for the Christmas recess. At the end of the proceedings, I will announce how long the Christmas recess will be and when we shall come back.

I understand that a number of committees would wish to continue working to prepare for us work when we come back. I will definitely encourage those committees to do that so that when we come back we have ready reports to handle. 

I have also just received bad news through communication from our colleague, hon. Edward Kasole Bwerere. The message is as follows:

“I am regrettably writing to inform you of the untimely death of my dear wife, Mrs Gertrude Kasole, who passed away last night, at midnight. 

The body is now in Mulago waiting for the arrival of our son who lives in Sweden. The body will be at our home at Kasubi, Lubya, on Friday afternoon. 

There will be a requiem service at Kasubi, Lubya on Saturday, 20 December at noon and thereafter burial will take place at Gyeza, Kamuli, 27 miles on Kampala-Mityana Road at 3 p.m.” 

That is the sad news we have just received. Let us observe a minute of silence.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.) 

2.52
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. The issue is to do with our boys and girls who serve in Iraq as security guards.

I want to start by thanking government for finding work for our young people. Given the fact that the rate of unemployment in this country is high, like in many other third world countries, the fact that Government went out and looked for those contacts - and we have a lot of young people who are working there - should be commended and recognised. However, I would like to request Government to look into the affairs of those young people who are employed there because there are lots of loopholes. There is a lot that deserves to be corrected.

I will give an example of the salary scale. Originally, the contractual agreement was offering them US $1,000 but it kept coming down. It went to US $700, then to US $600 and now as I talk, there are companies which are paying US $400. From the research that I have done, the American companies, which are sub-contracting to the Ugandan companies, have not revised the salary scale and this means that the Ugandan companies are reaping very highly from these young people who are risking their lives. This issue has come to the Floor of Parliament before but nothing has been done.

Secondly, according to the contractual agreement, the money that they are paid is supposed to be deposited on their accounts on a monthly basis while these people are serving in Iraq. However, you have many of these people coming home to find that there is no money on their accounts and then they start running up and down following their payments. 

As Members of Parliament, we continue to get many calls from Iraq. I actually get them perhaps every other day if not even daily. These boys and girls - mainly boys - complain about the risk that they take, the fact that the money is not paid in time, the fact that they have to go up and down chasing after that money and the fact that the original contracts are not tallying with the contracts that they are now being offered. Even the companies that were paying well, and I have a list of companies that are sending boys to Iraq, have all been reducing. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development looks into this matter so that we do not deal with issues on hearsay but instead we have a situation that is thoroughly studied and we have a report. Most importantly, I would like to ask Government to intervene and to seriously look into this issue. There are different ministries that should have an interest in what is happening to our people working abroad. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I did not give you notice on an issue of national importance that I wanted to raise. I am begging for your indulgence, if you would allow me to place it before you -(Interjection)- I did not give notice to the Speaker prior to my coming here and I am begging the Speaker to give me a short slot so that I can put forward this matter, which is extremely critical to this nation.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then let us clear what hon. Mugyenyi has said. She wants an investigation by our Social Services Committee. Is there an objection? 

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Sulaimani Madada): Mr Speaker, the concern raised by the member is very pertinent and I am in agreement that we need to have deeper scrutiny of the subject matter. Therefore, we will take up this concern as a ministry and give an appropriate report.  

2.56
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken a lot of concern in the reaction from the minister. We would request that since this matter is very important and it concerns Ugandans outside Uganda, Parliament should constitute a committee that will look into this matter. I thank you.

2.57
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I think the matter raised by our colleague, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, is very important and very fundamental in two aspects: the employment aspect and how these Ugandans are being treated, and we have met so many of them who have raised similar concerns.  

You remember this matter was raised here but the ministry has not done anything. I, therefore, do not think at this stage the ministry has any moral authority to stand on the Floor of Parliament to even ask for time to be given to them. I think this matter should be taken up by Parliament.

Secondly, there is concern that these people’s continuous employment in Iraq may not even go on. There is concern by the Iraqi Parliament and the Iraqi Government because of the changes. As Government, what are we preparing because there are so many Ugandans employed outside there? How shall we absorb them? We should have them ready because their nature of employment is extremely unique and unless we have them held somewhere, it could be a big problem for this country.

2.58
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I filed a question to the honourable Minister of Labour on this matter but it has been pending for a very long time. Last week, I received somebody in my office from Iraq and he was trying to go back. He had lost his wife and he said he had been given a one-way ticket and he wanted US$ 20 from me to top up his return ticket. He told me that he was given a deadline which if he missed, he should not go back. 

There are so many issues about this matter, including the Ugandan companies that are sending these people to Iraq. I think we need to expose these people. Who are these people? They have turned our children into their slaves. I think the sooner we investigate this matter as Parliament, the better for the country. I thank you.

2.59
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate what colleagues have said but I have noted that this matter has already been on the Floor for some time. I think what has caused a delay in handling it is the leadership - who should really handle it? For the Minister of Labour to stand up and say that he is going to take the lead role in handling this matter is not good for our record. I would like to appeal to Government or to the House to record that actually the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is responsible for foreigners abroad, should take the lead so that the Ministry of Labour does not depend on hearsay. I thank.

THE SPEAKER: We have a committee handling these matters and we have no doubt that the minister is also interested in solving the problem. Let the committee and the minister work on this and give us a report -(Mr Amuriat rose_)- No, I think your matter, hon. Amuriat, is going to be addressed by the minister. A statement is going to be made on that. I am not aware of a different matter unless –(Laughter)

3.01
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you most sincerely, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to raise a matter of national concern that has been developing away in Somalia. As you are all aware, we have our troops over there and our colleagues who had promised to join them have not made much progress. As a consequence, they may have also had problems. This Parliament needs to be briefed comprehensively on what is supposed to be going on. There are four critical areas on which I want the government’s response:
1. 	Recently, we got reports from the United Nations to the effect that Ugandan forces were involved in the sale of arms to the enemies they went to fight.  

2. 	We have consistently been receiving reports from Somalia that the Islamic Courts Union is gathering more territory surrounding both Mogadishu and Baidoa where the Government of Somalia has its major seat.

3. 	Mr Speaker and hon. Members, for all the time it has been in Somalia, Ethiopia has been regarded as a force of occupation and has offered a deadline for the end of this year, which is too close to withdraw from Somalia.  

4. 	Lastly, and even more critical, part of the terms of reference for the UPDF in Somalia was to help give security to the transitional government over there. Now this same government has found itself in a difficult position because there are two governments already. Two days ago, the President of that government, Abdullah Yusuf, dismissed the Prime Minister pending the approval of Parliament. When Parliament sat, it only gave a vote of confidence to the Prime Minister.  Probably out of anger, the President went ahead and insisted on appointing a new prime minister. So, there were two governments instantly. 

This morning, the Parliament in Somalia has sat and is working on an arrangement to impeach the President. Where is the position of Ugandans serving in Somalia now? This is where I would like Government to give us an explanation and a way forward so that we do not cry to nobody in Somalia. Thank you, Sir.

3.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence in allowing me to raise this matter in this august House. I am a Member of Parliament for Kumi but at the moment under a lot of threat. My fear arises from the fact that there is an organisation that has been operating in my constituency for sometime now. This organisation has been collecting money from depositors in the region of Teso and promising them abnormal interests. The organisation has kept changing its name. At one time it was called COWE, it then transformed itself to TEAM, and today it is a limited liability company in the name of NUA WATATA. NUA WATATA is an Ateso word to literally mean “grandmothers”. Apparently, it seems this organisation is almost closing books and it is going to go away with the deposits of very poor Ugandans. 

I understand that this is not the first time this situation is arising in this country. It has happened in several other districts and this matter was brought to this House more than one month ago –(Interruption)

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, dear colleague, for giving way. In Kumi, or let me say in Teso generally, it is not only TEAM that has done that kind of mischief. There are a number of organisations. One is called Microfin Ltd and the other is AFCAF. Actually with Microfin, they say immediately you register as a member – and that is how they lure people into becoming members - you get an instant loan. The minimum deposit is Shs 600,000 and the minimum loan that they say they can give is Shs 1.5 million. All those who deposited have never reaped anything. 

I think we should provide a long list of organisations that have gone into the Teso sub-region and Kumi in particular, to both the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Internal Affairs to help us flush out these people from the unsuspecting public. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: First, I would like to thank hon. Balyejusa who was one of the first members to bring this issue to our attention because TEAM had been operating in Busoga. It started from Jinja before going to Kamuli. So, when hon. Balyejusa was in Teso, he linked up with us and informed us about this fraudulent group. We took it up and we even raised it in this House about a month ago. We also took it to the authorities but nothing has been done yet. Now we are getting damning information that they are about to take off with people’s deposits. 

We are wondering why the authorities have done nothing, including the Executive whom we gave information about these people. I remember the Deputy Speaker directing that day in the House that the Minister of Internal Affairs take up this matter and have these people apprehended. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: I think the case has been made. What you need is a prompt action.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, let me give some information. Whereas I appreciate the concerns of members, there are specific things that I want to call on my colleagues in the House to always attend to. I would like to say that whereas we have government, it may not be present to police every individual. We also have a responsibility of notifying and educating our people about the dangers of dealing with such organisations in our constituencies. 

A similar situation happened in Bunyole and I ran a radio programme on Radio Uganda once every week. I specifically told the listeners that if they joined that organisation, they would be doing so at their own personal peril. We also linked up with the district authorities and the sub-county officials. How can such an organisation begin marching in your respective areas and as leaders you keep quiet while it is fleecing people, then you begin crying to Government? I know that this does not stop the obligation of Government to look after its people and arrest those fraudsters, but as leaders we must also come up and tell the people what they should do. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

MR AMURIAT: Well, I appreciate that applause and also the information given by my colleague, but this is exactly what we have done before. I would like to remind this House that the local people that we are talking about are very poor people who are desperate. They are so desperate that when they see a possibility of making little money, they go in for it. 

In fact I have tried and my colleagues from Kumi and Teso indeed have tried. They have spoken about this, but the population says we are speaking because we are well off. It was only yesterday that they begun to call in saying that they now believe in us that these people want to steal their money. Men in Kumi Town are mourning like women; it is a very hard situation. 

I think it is important that whereas there is government at the higher levels, it should be appreciated that there is government at the lower levels. Before such an organisation is allowed to operate in districts, the RDC’s office should be made aware; they should be cleared by the RDC’s office. What I am seeing is a failure, not from the political elders but a failure from Government. I think Government should own this up and take responsibility. They should not be seen as abating conmen moving around the country. This must end. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, what is being raised on the Floor is an international problem -(Interjections)- yes! I just want members to know because as I talk, there are cases in the United States where the fraudulent –(Interjections)- it is established. A guy who wants to cheat you starts with some money and promises that if you pay for example Shs 60,000 at the end of the month, we shall give you Shs 100,000. The first group brings the Shs 60,000 and he pays them the Shs 100,000. They will spread the word for more people come. As they come, the first group is paid by the in-coming one and the in-coming one is paid by the next one. However, a stage reaches where the market is simply filled and the majority will lose. I am giving you information because COWE was an example here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, without going further in this matter, let the responsible agencies of government move, investigate and arrest the situation. In this I see the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Go and take it up because what you are interested in is finding a solution.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I wish we could learn from the experience of others because COWE cheated and people went to court. I can see this being repeated in the east and north, yet one could know it right at the beginning that these are cheats. There is no way somebody can give you a return on your investment twice or three times the initial investment in six months. Where would he be getting that money to pay you? If you really simply ask yourself, these guys are cheating and we better stand up as leaders and report them to the police without waiting. By the time you wait -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we assume one should not accept that kind of enticement but people have been enticed. What do we do for them? Do we laugh at them? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Let me just mention this example: COWE registered as an organisation to help orphans, widows and the elderly. When they took the guy to court, he said, “It is like you contribute in a church; you are not compelled.” In fact he won the case but we knew he was cheating. That is where leadership becomes central before the law. That is the point I was putting across. Thank you very much.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, as it has already been alluded to, this must be either the third or fourth time I am standing on this Floor to answer this question of fraudulent companies or non governmental organisations or trusteeships that are defrauding our poor population. I have a statement, which I had prepared in the past. I do not have it right here with me because I did not know this matter would arise, but can I promise that I will come with that statement if Parliament is sitting tomorrow –(Interjections)- or any other appropriate date when Parliament will sit so that I read this full statement on action taken. With your permission, I will come and catalogue for you the action that Police has taken on these various individual organisations.  

Having said that, let us look for a solution to this problem. Today I was chairing a national security council meeting and this matter arose. With no objection from anybody, we agreed that the only way we can find a lasting solution to this problem is sensitisation. Therefore, I am calling upon all Members of Parliament and other leaders to really help our population not to be misled. There is no way you expect the police to be nosing in each and every organisation. 

The solution lies in opening the eyes of our people so that they do not -(Interjections)- there is no way the police will be in a position to know how each organisation is operating. By the time police detect and find out that there is something wrong, at times it is too late, and this is what has happened to COWE and to other organisations.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the hon. Minister. He actually has stunned this House by saying that the police, and more particularly his ministry, should not be expected to nose in every organisation. 

The Non-Governmental Organisations Statute clearly provides for a supervisory role by your office on how NGOs are registered and are operating in this country.  Surely, if you cannot do that, which other ministry, organisation or institution in Government has the mandate to do that? I just want to seek that clarification. If it is not your duty as Minister of Internal Affairs, which is mandated by law to inspect and report six monthly and 12 monthly, whose role is it?

MR KASAIJA: I thank my colleague for this clarification. Maybe you did not understand my point.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is it being suggested that we take no action and we sensitise people? This is going to be a process. Can’t we take interim measures as we sensitise people? If so, who is going to take the interim measure?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as police we have taken action where we have received information. As I said, when we get back here, I will come with a catalogue of the various actions that we have taken.  

Two, I think my brother here has not understood me. I would love that we prevent the crime before it takes place. That is my point really. How can we ensure we prevent crime before it takes place? This cannot be the sole responsibility of the police. It is not possible. That is why I am appealing to my colleagues to sensitise the population about these rather attractive terms. As my colleague here, hon. Kamuntu, was saying, how do you come and tell me you have paid Shs 500,000 and you will educate your five children and each child is being paid for up to university!  

We should really address this matter very squarely. I am very serious on this matter. We shall only cure this problem by sensitising the population so that they are aware. Otherwise, we shall be taking action after the horse has run away. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think it has been appreciated. My personal view is that sensitising is good but at the same time remedial measures should be taken. Maybe as a ministry you have radio programmes and go to newspapers and alert unsuspecting citizens about this. I think that addresses the issue. There is nothing more that you have not said. We have appreciated the concern and I am appealing to the agencies of government to take further action to prevent more losses.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to lay on the Table the report of the Standing Committee on Science and Technology on the activities undertaken during the period 2006 to 2008. 

This report is quite detailed and contains pertinent issues on the science and technology sector. There is a chapter on science and technology in relation to all sectors but there is also a specific chapter on bio-technology. Since this time I am just laying the report, it is our request that our report is saved for discussion in the next session. I wish to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2007

3.26
MS WINNIE MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Since I have not completed the consultations on the way forward, I beg that this is postponed to the next sitting.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, yesterday there were some issues raised but the ministers were not here and we decided to get the responses today. These were issues on cotton and then on fisheries. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Sulaimani Madada): Hon. Members, I stand here on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to give a statement on the pricing of cotton for the season 2008 to 2009. (Laughter)

As you are aware the global economy was hit by a financial crisis, which has affected most commodities, of which cotton is inclusive. Depressed global consumer purchasing power has reduced demand for textiles and consequently for cotton yarn and cotton lint. Accordingly, spinners are not buying lint from merchants and the cotton merchants are not offering to buy lint form ginners. As a result, the ginners are not buying cotton from the farmers. 

The above situation pushed cotton prices in October 2008 from a high of US $1.63 per kilogramme of lint, which is translated into Shs 800 per kilogramme of seed cotton at farm-gate, down to a low of US $1.14 per kilogramme in November/December 2008. This translates into Shs 550 per kilogramme of seed cotton at farm-gate at present. Last season, the indicative price announced was Shs 600 but the farmers received an average of Shs 750 per kilogramme of seed cotton. 

The indicative seed cotton price of Shs 550 is based on the international cotton outlook index but not on spot market price or futures market. The uncertainty in the market makes the ginners’ risk averse. 

In addition, the price of cotton seed has drastically dropped from Shs 400 per kilogramme in 2007/08 to Shs 250 per kilogramme in 2008/09. This is due to collapse of palm oil prices from US$ 1300 per tonne to US$ 500. The collapse of palm oil prices was a result of the recent sharp decline of petroleum prices, which rendered the use of palm oil for bio-fuel not cost effective.

Given the crisis stated above, the ginners are not prepared to pay Shs 400 to the farmers compared to Shs 800 per kilogramme of seed cotton announced by government in August 2008 as the indicative price for this cotton season.

Government has prioritised cotton as one of its strategic crops due to the advantages and benefits from its value chain. Honourable members should note that if we want to continue with cotton as a strategic crop, it should be adequately budgeted for annually to cushion the sector against international vagaries in price fluctuations. Fluctuations in agriculture commodity prices influence production for the subsequent seasons, which can greatly affect the wider objectives of government. 

Steps taken by Ministry of Agriculture and CDO and Sector Consultations

1. 	The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, together with the Cotton Development Authority, met with ginners who are the sole buyers of cotton from the farmers to discuss the cotton pricing on 14 and 24 November 2008. This followed the outcome of the International Cotton Advisory Committee meeting which was held between 17 and 21 November 2008 in Burkina Faso. 

2.	Considering the different factors affecting cotton prices at the current international prices, and given that we are price takers, the price that should be paid at the farm-gate by ginners is Shs 550. However, the ginners are insisting on paying Shs 400. They explained that although US 57c translates into Shs 550, there is no demand from the lint merchants and spinners, thus necessitating ginners to hold stocks for an unspecified period between December 2008 and April 2009.

3.	You will appreciate that Government is promoting the cotton sub-sector as a strategic vehicle for Prosperity for All and industrialisation. Price fluctuations to levels that are uneconomical to the farmers will affect our strategic direction. This state of affairs necessitates Government intervention to stimulate marketing and enable payments of a price that covers farmers’ input and labour.

4.	The Ministry of Agriculture’s long term objective is to add value to cotton and all its products for lint, seed and cotton stalks as you will see in Annex 1 attached. We should, in the immediate and medium term, target to produce textiles for school uniforms, bed sheets, curtains, towels, cotton wool, gauze and sanitary towels for both hospitals and private use. The by-products should feed into animal feeds, pulp, Nitro-Cellulose, to mention a few. This will kick-start industrialisation at local levels, create jobs, and free Uganda from being a price taker, and ensure good and stable prices to farmers. India and China mastered this model and have become world powers in the cotton sector.

International Market Prices and Market

1. The drop in international palm oil prices from US $1,300 to US $500 per tonne has made crude palm oil cheaper, causing a drastic drop in the price offered for cotton seed locally by the oil millers. Consequently, cotton seed price has dropped from Shs 500 per kilogramme realised last season, to between Shs 240 and Shs 250, thus reducing the price paid to the farmers by ginners by Shs 100 per kilogramme of seed cotton.

2. You should note that other countries which market their cotton at the same time as Uganda have put in place the following government measures to save their sectors:

(i) 	China (mainland) purchased 220,000 tonnes, which is equivalent to 189, 198 bales in October 2008 and is in the process of purchasing an additional 1,000,000 tonnes (5,405,405 bales).

(ii) 	In India, the ginners have failed to buy seed cotton from farmers, therefore the Cotton Corporation of India – the government is buying cotton from farmers at an equivalent of Shs 1,140 per kilogramme of seed cotton to the farmer and oil millers have agreed to pay Shs 460 per kilogramme of cotton seed.

(iii) 	Pakistan is going to buy seed cotton at a minimum price to cushion their farmers and prevent domestic prices falling drastically.

(iv) 	The US and European Union have given subsidies of  US 12c and 107 per pound of lint, which translates to Shs 502.65 and Shs 4398.20 per kilogramme of lint respectively, above the international prices in the 2008/2009 season.

(v)	In some Central and West African countries like Mali, Benin, Chad, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Togo and Senegal, the farmers will be paid prices announced at planting which are higher than the current global cotton prices. The respective governments will pay the differences between the current market price and the indicative price announced at the time of planting.

(vi)	Kenya will pay the difference between the government indicative price of Kshs30 (equivalent to Ugshs780) and the current market price of Kshs24 (equivalent to Shs 624) per kilogramme of seed cotton.

The Request to Parliament

1. 	With the above details, and due to the gravity of the matter, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries brought the matter to the attention of Cabinet last week and this week, with a proposal for Government intervention with a price support of Shs 150 per kilogramme, which would give the farmer a farm-gate price of Shs 700 per kilogramme of cotton.

2. 	The matter was conclusively discussed at the Cabinet meeting on Wednesday, 17 December 2008 and Government agreed and adopted this proposal. The total financial implication, based on 170,000 bales for the 2008/2009 season, is Shs 13.52 billion.

3. 	Given the gravity and the urgency of the matter, Parliament is requested to approve the government price support intervention without delay in order to salvage the cotton farmer.

4. 	The Ministry of Agriculture, through the CDO, will enter into an understanding with ginners to monitor cotton prices and hold onto lint and sell it when prices have recovered, to recover the relevant portion of government support.

Explanation of the Price of Shs 800 announced in August 2008

The International Cotton Advisory Committee, to which Uganda is a member, is the world authority on cotton. Following assurances from ICAC till October 2008 that the international price would hold at US$ 1.63, government went ahead and announced a farm-gate price of Shs 800 per kilogramme in August. It is normal practice to announce the indicative price as an incentive to farmers to look after their crop better and increase yields. 

It is not until 03 November 2008 that because of the global financial crisis, the price of cotton collapsed internationally. The Ministry of Agriculture immediately started consultations with the ginners and the wider government with a view to availing an intervention to ensure that farmers are paid a reasonable price. Further, government had to establish what measures other countries - especially developing countries faced with a similar crisis - were doing to help their farmers. The final outcome was for the ICAC meeting held in Burkina Faso between 17th and 21st November 2008. 

While government has been trying to find a solution, there are middlemen and speculators who are already in the field with a motive of exploiting the unsuspecting farmers. However, CDO has been running local FM radio messages to advise farmers to hold and not to be exploited. That is why it is important that Parliament immediately authorises the proposed price support intervention to save the farmer from exploitation. 

Government recognizes that the cotton price problem is affecting all parts of the country and not Pader district alone. It is not true that the Government of Uganda, Ministry of Agriculture and the CDO have stopped Dunavant from paying Shs.800 per kilogram for organic cotton in Pader District. 

However, government is concerned with the distortion in the market caused by the price difference between organic and conventional cotton. Government advised Dunavant to desist from making media announcements but pay the Shs 800 price to their contracted farmers who had been audited by Pader District and government to safeguard the farmers. 

Government has not stopped Dunavant from buying organic Cotton from its contracted farmers at the promised price of Shs 800 this season. However, Government’s concern on organic cotton production is because of the scientific study undertaken by NARO which established the following:

a)	That the system being used by ginners including Dunavant for organic cotton production does not meet the recommended international organic practices but it is just the usual general cotton agronomy. Pesticides used – Nimecidine and Oxymatrine are non-effective on the major pests of cotton especially Lygus and Bollworm. 
b)	The period required for the level of Ugandan farmers to understand organic methods were too short, that is, two months instead of two years. 
c)	The herbal concoctions of Neem, Chilly, cow urine, marigold, Lanterna leaves, et cetera are not yet tested and proven scientifically for their efficacy, ratio, et cetera, and some were found to be toxic and would affect the farmer’s health.

Net effect: the current system being used can be best described as growing cotton naturally, which exposes the farmers’ cotton to heavy pest damage, loss of yield income which are not compensated at all by the premium differentiation between conventional and organic price paid to farmers. 

d)	Further, government established that last season when this occurred, average conventional cotton price country wide was Shs 750. Organic farmers in Pader and Kitgum were paid Shs 650 per kilogramme by Dunavant across board thus exploiting the farmers by Shs 100 per kilogramme.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, once again I call upon the august House to support the government price cotton intervention. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to make a correction on page 5(4.1), where Parliament was being requested to accept a farm gate price of Shs 700. The correct position is that when we met in Cabinet, we directed the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Finance to meet his Excellency the President and to consider this Cabinet proposal. So we are not requesting Parliament. (Laughter) The correction is that his Excellency the President, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Agriculture are considering a Cabinet decision which appears on top of page 5. That is the correction.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Prime Minister. Who is the chairman of Cabinet and why do you want to seek authority from the President yet he has tasked you to do some assignment? 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I am surprised that the Leader of Government Business has not understood his own laws. First of all, the Cotton Statute states clearly the role of the Ministry of Trade. The ministry responsible for tirade should be consulted on the subject of price announcement. Here he is informing Parliament that it is the Ministry of Agriculture which is responsible for production only and that of finance that will be consulting the President. I do not know how you left out a key ministry in this particular function. Can you clarify on that? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, His Excellency the President does not always attend Cabinet. In fact yesterday I chaired Cabinet and when his Excellency –(Interruptions) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Prime Minister in order to allege that the chairperson of Cabinet does not always attend Cabinet? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. What are the facts?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Secondly, regarding hon. Odit’s question, of course I am knowledgeable; I am technocratic. The Minister of Trade was in Cabinet – it was hon. Mukwaya. So she was part of the Cabinet decision but to sort out the final details, we asked the Minister of Agriculture to meet His Excellency the President, and I also talked to His Excellency the President. This is a small mistake and please, accept it.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I would like your guidance based on the explanation of the Leader of Government Business, which tends to contradict the statement which the minister has brought here, asking Parliament to accept this report and agree to the intervention by the government. Is it still in order for us to continue discussing this document when actually the purpose of this document is to request us to agree to the intervention being proposed although the Leader of Government Business is saying that is not exactly the situation? So there are already contradictions. I think as Parliament we need to be taken seriously. Since the Cabinet is not cohesive, I do not know whether we should continue to discuss contradictions. I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know. I think I have to ask the Prime Minister whether he thinks we are relevant on this particular matter.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you requested the Minister of Agriculture to make a statement and the statement has been made less that correction. So what we should discuss are the other issues - the other global issues for example.  

3.51 
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, when this petition was brought yesterday to the House, it was for the purpose of seeking concrete solutions to the plight of the farmer who is holding his cotton not knowing what to do with it; whether to sell it at a low price or base his judgment on an earlier promise that Government voluntarily made to the farmers. What the Prime Minister has done this afternoon is to tell us to discuss global issues, which do not address local issues directly. What the farmer wants to hear is: will they have the price of Shs 800 per kilogram for their cotton as was promised by government?

Secondly, this is not the first time this is happening. I remember some years back in the seventh Parliament, we had protracted debate here and the matter was referred to the President. He had to see the committee of Parliament and there was a lot of red tape. We are talking about poor people who need cash; they need it yesterday, not next year. I think the Prime Minister needs to be serious and Government needs to be serious. They have to be sensitive to the plight of the people that we lead -(Mrs Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion.

3.53
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I do not see why we should continue to debate on this matter. But I do understand that the matter is very serious. This is the cotton season and we are going for Christmas and we are likely to adjourn today. A decision must be made and made now.  

As a farmer and as a  member who was voted by cotton farmers, I beg you that we put aside this document because it does not help us, and we request that the Minister of Agriculture in consultation with the Minister of Trade and the Committee on Agriculture will sit and discuss broader issues. But as of now, I propose that the government intervention be the gap between the current international price and the indicative price which the government has itself pronounced, which is Shs 800 and, therefore, the gap is Shs 200. 

I beg to move that this House approves intervention by government of Shs 200 per kilogram of cotton this season.  

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion supported?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I need guidance from you, because Article 93 of the Constitution makes it clear that any decision involving finance can only be moved by government. That is the essence of Article 93. So I would like to ask you whether Parliament can make that decision. I would like your guidance.  

THE SPEAKER: Now I am asking you; what do you want Parliament to do in this situation?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all let me reiterate the point that His Excellency had already been privy to this situation and Cabinet made a recommendation to him, and of course His Excellency is aware of these problems. I would like to inform hon. Amuriat that I am a serious person. So I did not like his statement when he said that I should be serious; it was a very an unfortunate statement.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am asking you Rt hon. Prime Minister to tell us whether you want any assistance and support from Parliament.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, this was an information paper. That is all!

THE SPEAKER: So you do not want Parliament’s assistance?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is all!

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, there is a motion on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but the kind of motion you brought contravenes Article 93 because it increases a charge on the Consolidated Fund. You can only bring such a motion to propose an increase with the consent of the Executive. Otherwise, it can be knocked down because of that. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that this Parliament will be approving expenditure because of emergency. I stand here on behalf of the poor who now have cotton in their houses, but they cannot sell it. They are supposed to -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I entirely agree with you, but the question is: can you move a motion on a proposal to increase a charge? The answer is no. But then Government can make a proposal, which we can support. That is why I asked the Leader of Government Business to say whether he needs any support from us and he said that this paper was just intended to give you information. So, he is not seeking support from you in this case. Therefore, because of Article 93, your motion fails.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, when hon. Cecilia Ogwal moved that motion, my thinking was that she was doing it in the spirit in which this paper had been presented because the government had committed itself to bridging the gap. I think the problem is how much Government should contribute to bridge that gap so that the price can come to Shs 800 that was already announced. So because there is commitment by Government to bridge that gap; that is the spirit in which I understood the motion by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It was because Government had already moved ahead and committed itself to help the farmers. 

In the last Parliament I remember that I moved a motion to increase the price of cotton although I did it with the support of hon. Cecilia and hon. Odit who was the Chairman of the Agriculture Committee. I remember we met the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance; we also met the President together with CDO Members. I also recall we were able to agree on an increment, which was helpful to the farmers. It is from that spirit that we are again asking government to take this into consideration and bridge this gap having already shown the goodwill to help the farmers.

THE SPEAKER: I have no doubt about the good spirit by hon. Cecilia Ogwal; she was helping a situation, but the concerned people whom we would ask to assist the farmers said they do not need our help. Maybe they already have funds from somewhere else to which they will resort. Anyway the point is about this Article 93 of Constitution, which provides as follows: “Parliament shall, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government, proceed...” That is why I asked the Prime Minister whether government needs our assistance or not and he said “No; do not worry.” Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that as Parliament we represent the people and we are now in a crisis. So if we do not help our people then I do not know what we are doing. I remember that one time, in this House, an issue about cows that were dying because of lack water was presented and because they were from a specific area, money was immediately passed to deal with that issue.

Cotton is grown in the North and Eastern –(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)– you can see where the order is coming from.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to think that cotton growing is regionally specific when cotton is grown in the central and western provinces of Uganda and in Kasese; Bushenyi and Rukungiri? Is he in order to appear to tell this House and those listening to Parliament proceedings that cotton growing only takes place in his area?

THE SPEAKER: I think we should be helpful. We are all sympathetic to this problem, but if you make a statement that is going to divide us, that will not be helpful. Maybe, it could be that the Executive has decided on another way of getting funds and later report to us. Anyway, what do we do? I asked the Prime Minister on whether he needs assistance from us and he said he doesn’t. Are we going to force ourselves on him to give him assistance when he does not need it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to divide the House, but I want to plead with our colleagues that it is time we stand to help the farmers. I am saying this because I also represent farmers who are being badly affected by the world prices. I would like to say that government’s responsibility is to help citizens while in crisis because they usually support it by paying taxes. I would not like us to only always help investors. Why are we not helping the local people? You may think that I said this because I am annoyed, but I think you can also feel the pain that our people are going through. If you see the people who are suffering with poverty – a person is a destitute, but we can sit here and think about helping such a person; I think we are not delivering our services.

I would like to plead – sometimes we pass here many issues – this is an emergency and/or a crisis; we should get up and deal with this matter as Ugandans; failure to do that we shall only pray to God to help us. I thank you.

4.05
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is only one truth in this statement and that is on page 5 when you read what has been stated there as an explanation for the prices of Shs 800 announced in August 2008, then on page 6 the last statement of 5.1 which states, “It is a normal practice to announce an indicative price as an incentive to farmers to look after their crops better and increase yields.”

So, farmers have been taken for a ride. It is very clear that we have been taken for a ride n- so that when you announce the price we go into digging, we go into planting, increasing cotton, looking after it, and when the yield is very good, you can now come and set any fee. I think this deserves an apology to the farmers in the first place.

That is why we are trying to find out what is wrong. Because down there if we are joking with these statements; this ends the production of cotton in our area. We cannot just be taken for a ride like this and you make this statement. Uganda is part of the authority of international cotton association. 

Why therefore should this paper be brought here and then when it is dangling like this, we have nothing to say about it? The farmers are now waiting, they have their cotton and they want money. And they just went back from the IDP camps, Mr Speaker, desperate as they are. Are we doing them any good service? Are we delivering to them? We are in government and we are not delivering at all according to this paper. Can’t we therefore resolve this paper and then the farmers begin selling their cotton tomorrow? 

I believe – yesterday, when I was coming to Parliament I almost thought when the other part of parking yard was clear, no parking was allowed, I saw those who were guarding and I realised His Excellency the President was chairing Cabinet. Today you hear another story that they never attended. What was the purpose of blocking us from parking there? Because usually when we come there and see that kind of parking, we know His Excellency the President is chairing a Cabinet meeting.

So can this one be explained to us? I think hon. Members, the Executive must be serious about statements that they make on the floor of this House. Let us decide today, should we continue reducing producing cotton? Because when you touch the issue of animals in western Uganda, that is a very serious matter; when we are talking about cotton in Northern and Eastern Uganda, that is a simple matter. After all, the farmers do not matter with this kind of statement. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I have been reading this paper and I think I thank government for producing this paper and keeping us informed. My earlier concern when I consulted my constituents who grow and live on cotton, was that they were being cheated, being promised a price of Shs 800, yet they were given a price of Shs 350.

Therefore, they were not reaping all that government had promised them and nobody was quiet about this particular fact. People were just being exploited; Government at that time was seen as if it was quiet while the people were being exploited.

On page five, section 4, this request to Parliament which I do not know whether it is being denied but I think it is a request to Parliament -(Laughter)- Parliament is being requested to intervene in the price of cotton so that it can be raised from what is prevailing now, because you see different prices are being applied in different areas. But the will of the government is that it should now come down from Shs 800 to Shs 700. And that would cost the government an additional Shs 13.52 billion which we hope is being sourced from somewhere and outside the budget.

Therefore, as a chair of the Committee on Budget I will just need clarification from Government as well; where is this money coming from? And is it coming in as supplementary or it is some kind of reallocation from some source? That would actually assist us in quickly approving this.

The urgency and gravity as explained in 4.3 is of course noted that Parliament is requested to approve the government price support intervention without delay. Which means Parliament is expected to do something to approve and therefore it should not be denied that it is just a matter of information to us. I do not think that is the case.

So I would request -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you hon. Okecho for giving way. On page 6 there is some other good information in 5.3. The last paragraph says that is why it is important that Parliament immediately authorises the proposed price support intervention to save the farmer from exploitation. Thank you. 

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I think the Leader of Government put it very clearly and I want to inform you as Minister of Finance that we are consulting. This was an information paper and out of our consultations I think something will come out. So, can you give us time to consult and come back to you? Thank you very much.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for giving way. Yesterday, the acting Prime Minister hon. David Wakikona deferred this matter to today. (Laughter) In his own words, he said government is engaged in a serious Cabinet meeting on the subject and the answer to the questions raised would be brought today.

In fact most of us decided to come here at 10 a.m. to wait for this answer. But I am surprised that this answer is not forthcoming. So you probably need to be informed that it appears the Prime Minister says what ever the minister reported here concerning our approval or disapproval is now null and void- because matters have to go to the President. It really perturbs me. We are probably ending today. The farmers are being pushed to the wire. What happens in our absence if there is a need to approve money? And this is a festive season as it was observed yesterday. 

MR OKECHO: I think I am still on the Floor. Really what I wanted to suggest therefore is that much as the Minister of Finance is saying that they are still consulting and yet they are now expecting us to approve this immediately, in the interest of the farmers, the people we represent here and the very poor people in this country, we would go ahead even to approve this intervention without this other further consultations. (Applause) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.15
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was in Kasese recently where the people of Kasese grow cotton and they are actually very restless, so this is a national issue; those who are saying eastern or northern, I think many parts of this country grow cotton. My understanding now is that government has withdrawn pages 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this report since the Prime minister says he does not need our support as of now. So the clarification I wanted from the Prime Minister is the assurance on when the government intervention will be pronounced so that the restlessness among the farmers can be stopped particularly given the fact that we are breaking off probably today. The farmers will be asking us questions over the Christmas season. So we would want the Prime Minister to commit himself on when government will pronounce the intervention so that the farmers can settle. I thank you very much. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament and hon. Members of Parliament. His Excellency the President is aware of the plight of the farmers. He is aware and as soon as the money is found we shall announce. We are aware of the gravity of the situation. That is why we had to discuss this matter in Cabinet and also I spoke to His Excellency the President; the matter is going to be sorted out. And we shall announce to the entire body politic. So we have to announce; His Excellency the President is going to make a propitious decision and I do not want to make a statement beyond that because it would be wrong because I know His Excellency the President is aware of the gravity of the situation. I do not have any other statement to add or subtract. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Members if you look on page 5, the title of page 5 is “Request to Parliament” I just want to make a point not that we approve what is withdrawn but there is an important information. The information was that government would intervene with a price support of Shs 150 per kilogram. It is quite obvious that a mechanism should be put in place for that price support to be implemented. And it cannot be that government will be sitting with the buyers, when the buyer pays Shs 650 and the government adds the other Shs 150. 

The normal procedure I believe would be that the buyers who are the ginners would be requested to pay a certain fee – a certain amount to the farmers and then they are compensated on the basis of the cotton that they have. If that is the case, then this period that you want to look for the money does not matter very much. All you need to do is to approve the principle, authorise the ginners to buy the cotton at this rate and then by the time they finish the buying and submit their claim, you would have found the money. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for being very articulate on the issue. I think the problem arose out of a problem of a statement that was not correct in presenting the position of government. And that one the Prime Minister came on the Floor and tried to explain but somehow it did not catch on. The reason why there is supposed to be a meeting of the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Agriculture and His Excellence the President is precisely to get the nit gritty of how this can be handled before an announcement. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Actually thank you for informing me because you now allow me to go and even talk about what was withdrawn. (Laughter) You see hon. Sulaiman Madada who read this document on behalf of the ministry is a very normal person. He is a normal person; he is not crazy. (Laughter) I also believe that the officials of the ministry who wrote this document are not crazy. And, therefore, something is really crazy here. (Laughter) Something is really crazy here. I did not want to talk about it and the Rt hon. Prime Minister is also not crazy. (Laughter) So there is something which is really crazy here. 

But the point I was making is that even with that money found, government will not pay up front. They can reach an agreement with the cotton ginners, you buy, they verify the volume that you have and you are compensated. But as a matter of principle and a statement of commitment to the public and to this country, government can still say that we have accepted to support the cotton price to remain at what was announced and that way we will work out the mechanism. If that was your position Rt hon. Prime Minister or the position of government as amended, we could have said look this is slightly better but as of now actually what you have done - you have already done is  to renege what you agreed on in Cabinet yesterday. And I am very sorry for this. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am moving on a matter of procedure and giving an experience of the last Parliament. We had the same scenario and the way we proceeded was that government was given some time to reconcile and then eventually bring back this document for us to approve. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we give a time frame to Government and then this matter is resolved? When you look at page 6, they have told us that we should expeditiously approve. I am sure the chairman of agriculture then was hon. Odit. This is what we did to save the farmers. Isn’t it procedurally right that we move the way we moved last Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think you have been here since this business started and I am sure you heard the questions that were put to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. His last conclusion was that this document was just for information and that he does not need any assistance from you. So we cannot insist that they take time. He knows what he wanted so why give him time? What for?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, most especially because I come from the NRM which is the ruling party. I want to find out from the Prime Minister whether in their Cabinet meeting they considered the implications of government making a statement and then turning on the people in the same statement. 

Because according to page 5 of this statement, it is very clear that Government indicated a farm gate price of Shs800. It would be ordinary that the subsequent price that should eventually come up should be either Shs 800 or more. That is the intention of an indicative farm gate price to the farmers. 

After the farmers heeding the government’s position and working very hard, tirelessly sacrificing all they did, they come to yield and the words soured and government comes back to say, “We want to announce a price that is less than that.” Have you weighed the implications on the side of government and the wrath that we are going to face from the voters to explain the decision of government which cannot keep its promise when it has indicated a price to the farmers? 

I want to find out from the Prime Minister whether at the time of the Cabinet sitting they weighed this implication? 

And secondly, did you also weigh the implication, in financial terms, of making it 800? Because to us as Parliament, it would be better if you told us the implications of Shs800 in financial terms and we weighed whether we cannot raise this money either through a supplementary or a budget reallocation. It would be better that way other than dillydallying the way we are doing right now. 

And Mr Prime Minister, really tell me what I should tell the voters in Bunyole about the issues of cotton. 

4.26
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Dombo Emmanuel -(Laughter)- and please accept my condolences upon the loss of your father. (Laughter) 

He knows what he knows but the implications of announcing a price were all considered and the reason why it is not proper for us to give details at this point - and it was a mistake. I must inform you that it was a mistake. If I had seen this paper I would have disallowed it -(Laughter)- yes! I would have disallowed those areas but I had not seen it. (Laughter) I would have disallowed it. (Laughter) So, it was a mistake -(Laughter)- yes! And that is why I have had to correct it. 

But I want to inform you that we have a President who was elected. He cannot ignore the interest of the farmers. I want to assure hon. Members of Parliament that a decision will be made and it will be announced and it will not injurious to anybody.  

THE SPEAKER: Does it make sense really continuing with this debate? We are just repeating ourselves. I think we should move to another item. Because according to our rules, you are not permitted to submit twice but I am seeing people who have been submitting on this issue again standing a second time and a third. But as I see, they said this was for information. Motion!

4.29
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, given the fact that the Prime Minister has withdrawn pages 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the nine-page report, I move that this statement be withdrawn and that government brings a new statement with correct information to this House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have got a satisfactory explanation from the Minister of Education why she, or the ministry, was not here when we called them to lay papers. But they are ready to perform their obligation under item 3 and I have permitted them to do so. After that we shall proceed with the other items.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table a Government White Paper on the report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities in Uganda and this paper was gazetted. I also want to lay on Table the report on the visitation committee to the public universities. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee undertake a study and subsequently report to us about these documents. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you deferred two issues; the second issue was in connection with the new rates to be paid by the fisheries and yesterday, the minister actually undertook to bring an answer.

THE SPEAKER: Okay then, hon. Madada, since –(Laughter)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I – 

THE SPEAKER: No, let him react -(Laughter)

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I stood in for the Minister of Agriculture because as you know, we lost one minister in that ministry. The senior minister is outside the country; he is unwell and the Minister in charge of Animal Industry is in Libya. The Minister in charge of Fisheries has been delegated to officiate over the World Fish Day in Kalangala and there are even delegates and other ministers from other countries. So he would not be here. 

As for the prices, the minister will ably come to present the concerns –(Laughter)- to Parliament. We are quite aware but we could not contain both these areas - the cotton and the fish - at the same time. Thank you. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, yesterday after plenary, I had interaction with the minister but you will recall that the honourable minister has already sent circulars and the new tax rates are going to become effective 1st January – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Member, assess the situation. You expected the minister to come and make a statement; you have been told the minister is not there and the one who acted on the issue of cotton says he has no brief. What do you want us to do?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, there is a lacuna that I want to raise because first and foremost, the fishermen paid licence from July and it will expire in July 2009 and – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, there is no doubt that your point is very serious but do you want a comprehensive response or do you just want somebody to say, “Yes, I agree with you?”

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I want a conclusive answer but we are breaking off today for Christmas recess and this new tax is coming into force on 1st January – 

THE SPEAKER: Agreed. But now who should explain this? I think that is the dilemma we have. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we represent fishing communities and this affects all of us on the lake shores, and we know that licences are renewed come July. Our request, now that we are breaking off, is that the minister halts the introduction of this new licence from 1st January as we wait, after all we have that provision already that it is always from July that the licence fees or the new rates are paid. So, our request is that the minister halts this decision since we are breaking off this week such that we keep applying the old rates until July or until the time we come back to Parliament. That is our request, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I hope the Leader of Government Business has noted the request or the suggestion. Please, take it so that action is taken. It is in good spirit. 

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, for the few hours I have held this portfolio -(Laughter)- I have also learnt that the law of fixing prices is only done in January. Therefore, you cannot wait until July. 

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t there provisions for suspending the levying of a tax? But anyway, the right person to give us the response is not here. Well, if the Minister of Finance is around, then why are we asking the Minister of Fisheries? Can’t we really tackle another item on the Order Paper? (Mr Nsubuga rose_) You are as much concerned because even my constituency has many landing sites, maybe more than what you have. Really, what do we do? We have another item here. I think let us go to another item. 

DEBATE ON THE STATEMENT MADE BY THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER ON PEACE RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN (PRDP); A STATEMENT MADE DURING THE CONSIDERATION OF THE POLICY STATEMENT OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/09

THE SPEAKER: We have debated this subject twice but we also wanted to conclude it on Monday, which was Idd Adhuha. Therefore, we were unable to sit that day and yesterday there were problems but we said it is high time we concluded it today by continuing with the debate. I think when we adjourned the other time it was to receive responses from various ministries that are involved in this programme. Can we start with that? Hon. Minister of Education, what is your response to the subject?

4.39 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): My I ask the chamber assistant to distribute my paper? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am making a report on what my sector of education and sports has put in place as activities in the Northern and Eastern Uganda PRDP districts.

The education and sports sector received a total budget of Shs 720.8 billion for the financial year 2007/08. And for the Financial Year 2008/09, this budget increased to Shs 786.4 billion, recording an increment of Shs 65 billion over the previous year’s allocation. Out of the above total budget, the PRDP districts received Shs 161.7 and 175.9 billion in the financial years 2007/08 and 2008/09 respectively. We are giving the two figures so that you can easily arrive at the over ceiling allocations that we have for the districts.

Therefore, the current budget had Shs 14 billion for decentralised activities in that region. These include UPE wage and capitation, school facilitation grant, inspection grant and presidential pledges. The latter two provisions were new allocations and only started this year. So, the resultant allocation is Shs 14.19 billion. It was part of the sector MTEF and was arrived at as indicated below.

i)	An increase in the UPE capitation grant for primary pupils. This year we are paying 6,000 as against last financial year’s 4.7. The indication appears in Table 2.

ii)	The recruitment of more teachers in the country from a national ceiling of 129,000 to 130,000 this financial year with PRDP districts receiving priority in that recruitment exercise. That means that aggregate ceiling will be moving from 50,871 to 52,665 this financial year. I would like to ask my colleagues to note that there is an increase as far as staff ceiling in PRDP areas is concerned.

iii)	There is the Quality Enhancement Initiative Programme, which covers 12 districts out of which seven districts (58%) are from PRDP areas. The PRDP districts were drawn from the 12 worst performing districts in the country using the education sector performance indicators. So out of the 12 that we are focusing on, seven are from the PRDP region. In the footnote we have indicated what it means to select those districts. It is about making priorities of some of the programmes to make sure they catch up with the rest of the country.

Mr Speaker, of the Shs 16 billion SFG grants for the whole country, Shs 13.65 (75%) was allocated to PRDP districts during this financial year. Results from the planned and actual expenditures and achievements are indicated in Table 2 and the inspection report will come in January because by the closure of the term we could not easily get the reports.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I invite you to look at Table 1. In this table, we have indicated the primary wage and listed the PRDP districts. Let me also ask you to look at the bottom of the first two tables where we have indicated that last year we had Shs 135.7 billion while this financial year we have given Shs 143.7 billion. We have also indicated the increment, focus, and priority that we are putting to the PRDP districts.

I also would like to ask you to look at the school facilities grants where you will again see that there is some increment as from last financial year though you will realise that some of the districts did not qualify because they already had the minimum required classrooms. That is why there is a drop in that allocation. What I mean here is that school facilities grants comprise the monies that construct classrooms and procure desks as well. However, before we allocate that money, we have to use a formula of 1:70. So those districts that have the classroom-pupil ratio of less than 1:70 do not qualify for the allocation from the school facilities grants. 

Kindly look at the column for presidential pledges; you realise that Shs 1.5 billion has been allocated to PRDP districts to fulfil presidential pledges that fall under the education sector. 

On the UPE capitation grant, I would like to draw the attention of Members to the total at the bottom of the column. From that column you realise that last year we had Shs 13.5 billion while this year we have Shs 17.7 billion as UPE capitation grant. I am happy those figures reflect that the enrolment in schools in the PRDP areas went up this year, which is a positive indication that maybe with the expected peace people are returning to their homes with more children joining schools.

The last column on Table 1 indicates the inspection grant. Allow me take this opportunity to inform the House that this year we have a budget of Shs 2.5 billion for the inspection of schools. Figures of the monies that were sent to each district or which are to go to each district are indicated in there. And as you can see at the bottom, the PRDP districts will receive Shs 799 million. This will go through all the other districts as the figures indicate. That table indicates the key areas of recurrent expenditure that include the primary teachers wage, school facilitation grant, UPE capitation and inspection grant. When you look at the corner at the bottom, you will see that that table accounts for the Shs 14.1 billion which was a surplus of what we got for this financial year and allocated to the PRDP districts.

I will call the attention of the Members to Table 2 on the following page and that again indicates the local government recurrent and development grant allocations for the two financial years as I have indicated. It is indicated that planned expenditure for last financial year, and in the second block of columns, the planned expenditure for this financial year and then the next is the inspection grant and then the last is the classroom grant.

I would draw the attention of the Members to the column where we have remarks, reports to be received in January, that is reports for the inspection and then in the last column we are saying, civil works not started because 80 per cent of the districts have indicated that the current unit cost is not adequate. We are allocating SFG grants on a unit cost of 14 million per classroom.

The information we have from the PRDP districts is that it is impossible to construct a classroom of Shs 14 million each. We are consulting with them and we have employed our sector engineers to go over the specification of the classrooms and come to agree with the local government leaders that that money should be adequate for constructing classrooms, but I am happy to report that the moneys are already being released to the accounts of these districts.

Finally, the last page is Table 3, which gives a break down of what each of the districts which qualified for school facilities grant has been allocated for this year. I can just give an example of Apac at the top, No. 1, allocated Shs 367.5 million. We are expecting them to construct 21 classrooms at a unit cost of Shs 14 million. We are expecting them to construct 18 stances of latrines at Shs 1.0 million each and we are expecting them to purchase 811 desks at a unit cost of Shs 45,000.

So the allocations are already there, the numbers of classrooms at a cost of Shs 14 million, latrines and desks and of course when the construction starts we hope the leaders will be able to deliver on those items as specified in that table.

I thought that information would give a break down how the Ministry of Education and Sports has used Shs 14 billion which was above the ceiling to allocate facilities on a recurrent and development plan in the PRDP districts. I beg to submit.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I would have done so much earlier but given my respect for the hon. Minister for Education, I did not want to do so. 

I have looked and all of us have listened to the minister’s presentation. I have also quickly looked at what has been circulated for the Ministry of Works. Will it be really procedurally right to receive from the ministers what we have already passed in the budget, covering the whole country and which will not be presented for the rest of the country as PRDP?

I feel very sad that government wants us representing people from those districts to accept that moneys that have been to all the districts in Uganda for various purposes for our case becomes PRDP. What would be the purpose of PRDP if what is budgeted for activities in all the districts, presidential pledges did not stop in PRDP districts? The President fulfilled pledges many more in other places. Now to portray the ones that come to our districts as PRDP, what does the government want us to say; to thank it?

So procedurally this Parliament will be wasting its time receiving these reports as reports on PRDP. If government cares to report on PRDP, let them extract specific increments directed over and above the budget to address PRDP concerns. Otherwise, we thank government for the budget; we will live the way we have been living. But we do not want to be fooled on this matter.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we are in a House which passes budgets. We are in a House where questions are raised and answers are provided. A question was asked legitimately about the implementation of PRDP and government has come up with different ministries’ explanation of the undertakings -(Interjections)- I want to understand what the Leader of the Opposition wants to say. Does he mean –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think it is simple. What he wanted to say as I gather from him is that there is a normal budget say for Education or Health, but then there should be a separate budget for the programme. But he says that what has been presented is what is happening in Masaka, in Kabale. I think what he expected –(Applause)- is to show which part for education is under PRDP. I think that is what he is saying. 

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the matter which has to have the basic understanding of implementing PRDP. First of all, PRDP itself was not supposed to be independent of the ministries in the decentralised institutions. Under the budget, it was indicated there are MTEF ceilings and eventually the Leader of Opposition came to it. 

Under these ceilings of the normal budget, we are now dealing with cases beyond the ceilings and what each ministry is doing say our ceiling – like education gave two figures. One of them was Shs 720.8 billion and Shs 786.46 billion. The difference, therefore, is what –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek the following clarification from the minister. When the President launched the PRDP he had a budget and the President announced that government would give 30 percent contribution and donors are expected to give the 70 percent. For the people in the PRDP districts, it was understood that government had actually quantified what was not going to be part of the normal budget and what was going to be the additional one. Later on when we followed, there was talk that Finance had not budgeted for PRDP money. As we are aware now Finance never budgeted for PRDP fund and that they will be cut across the ministries to facilitate this financial year so that by next financial there is proper planning and Finance can budget. 

I am now getting surprised, Mr Minister, that despite the earlier understanding that there is no money and there will be some internal cuts, government is now shifting goal posts and presenting to Parliament what has been the normal budget and baptising them PRDP projects and funds. 

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I just wanted to give information on this. Most of the districts no longer get school facilitation grant. The only problem I am seeing is how the money is being utilised; instead of building more facilities, they are building less. So, I think we should look into how the money is being utilised not really the amount because here we have more money as school facilitation grant. Most districts do not have but this money is going to the PRDP districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No. What they want is to show them this amount of money is there because of this programme. Because even if it was not there, the normal budgeting, they would budget for this thing but what makes it a programme. I think this is what he –

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to conclude because I was seeking a clarification. We have been in this Parliament for sometime and we know the budgetary processes. We know how government plans and how government executes its planning. Why come to this House and deceive an entire region that, “Look, while you were sleeping, while we were promising you that PRDP had not started, we were already implementing PRDP”. Why tell us that there was no budget provision which was initially acceptable? 

We interacted informally with people in Cabinet. I do not want to mention names, but with high people in Cabinet and they admitted that actually there was no budget provision and that government would make some cuts to make specific provision for PRDP. Now the clarification I am seeking Mr Minister is that after shifting this goal post today and baptizing the normal government project to be PRDP, what is going to be your work as the minister responsible for reconstruction of Northern Uganda.

Secondly, what are you going to do with the recruited staffs of PRDP who have been appointed at very high level as commissioners for PRDP? One is supposed to be a commissioner in the Prime Minister’s Office here, one is going to be a commissioner in the field in Gulu and you are supposed to recruit staff. What is going to be their work? 

Thirdly, what messages are you sending donors today with this kind of response? Because donors have up to recently been asking for government contribution; the donors are saying, “Yes we are ready but where is the counterpart funding?” What message are you sending donors? The World Bank, for example, is ready with the money for the secretariat of PRDP to fund the functioning but government has delayed in this process. Donors are even ready with the money to recruit the staff. What messages are you going to send to these people?

Finally, I want the minister to clarify whether there is truly political will to the people in the PRDP affected districts; that what was launched by the President would be delivered.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, just last week, the minister in the presence of the Prime Minister informed the people of Amuria District that he had acquired Shs 1.1 trillion for PRDP. I want an illustration if we looked at vote 547 Busia District, for example, which the minister is well conversant with. You have primary teachers’ wages, you have school facility grants, and you have universal primary education and inspection grant. Where have you put the Shs 1.1 trillion over and above the normal budget of Busia District?

THE SPEAKER: From this contribution my thinking is that, the government may have to sit with a few of us and go through this one because what was raised by the Leader of the Opposition is in the minds of many who are here.  So you don’t need this general debate here, I think that maybe one way to solve it is by having a group of 20 or so.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make some clarification on the budget of PRDP.  Obviously we know even during the budget you saw a figure of 51 billion for PRDP announced by Minister of Finance. Then when it came to the money actually released for PRDP it was 69 billion and it went through ministries and this is what ministries are trying to pass over. 

Secondly, the 1.1 trillion is not money for one year, is money for three years.  The government has to pay 30 per cent per year of the yearly budget which is 120 billion per annum. It is 340 for the whole annual budget but we expect 70 per cent of these to be paid by the donors. So for the Government of Uganda the 30 per cent is 120 billion but this year there was a deficiency of 50.1 billion and the government is going to add it on next year’s budget so that it is 170 billion to cover up the deficiency which has –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Minister, for accepting this information. I am very faithfully following this issue and here is the Budget Speech for this year - let me read for you. Mr Speaker, I beg to quote page 31: “Peace Recovery and Development of Northern Uganda.” I will go to page 31, “Given the financial year 2008/09 launches the first year of the PRDP implementation, the government has committed an additional of 51.68 billion in the financial year 2008/09 to the PRDP strategic objectives.  This implies an additional 37.2 billion and above the 18.6 billion per annum that was provided for humanitarian assistance in the financial year 2007/08.” The simplistic implication is, since and before the launch the 18.6 billion per annum that has been provided as humanitarian assistance has been looked into as PRDP. So, your shortfalls are justified by the implementation that was never ever approved before this financial year started. Thank you.  

The hon. Minister is asking me about which financial year. But I have just read to him that the 37.20 billion over and above the 18.6 billion that has been provided for humanitarian assistance in the years before. Mr Minister, I am just telling you in the years before. In other words, government has been counting the 18.6 billion which actually was being invested in and never used anyway in IDP policy that was passed by January that your government never brought for Parliament’s approval of discussion, implying that this has been going on for the last years and therefore this shortfall in other words is justified.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you think there is need of a small group between the government and some of you to sort out so that you have what we call a meeting of the minds about this programme?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the stalemate in which we are talks for itself and there is actually a lot yet in the peoples’ minds to be talked. I will strongly buy the idea and more particularly appeal to government to be very objective and serious. And if they are, we are equally cooperative and if that small committee consisting of Members of the Executive, Members of the ruling party and the Opposition we can take a few days and have a heart to heart talk. That way we will be able to give the true picture and impression to the people out there who are expecting this project as an entity and not an appendage to the routine budgeting process. Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I do accept your proposal and this meeting is going to dispel misunderstandings and also what will happen is that, when we meet in a smaller group especially in the presence of either Dr Suruma or hon. Omach they will be in a position to clarify those issues because they are experts in their own right. I totally agree with what you have said because these matters are complicated and PRDP although I involved a number of stakeholders, some of them are no longer Members of this Parliament. Therefore, it is essential to come together and we sort out this problem because it is not proper for us to come to Parliament and we have this kind of problem.

THE SPEAKER: Can I suggest if this is agreeable that after two weeks from today you meet and discuss this matter. So we have agreed?

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Good. Thank you. I would think that Members of Parliament from this zone meet with the Executive. They will choose who to be there so that you meet and thrash out these differences. (Applause)

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I suggest that the Standing Committee of the Budget Committee participates in that meeting so that we can look at these figures because they look to be more or less scrambled up, giving us a rosy picture and yet they are using all the money in the budget for the one simple project. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now next item!

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS/REPORTS

5.17
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report about the visit to the Republic of Sudan by a delegation of five Members of Parliament of Uganda and Members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on the Nile Basin, 7th to 11th April 2008. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, thank you very much.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: Before it comes up, today the Business Committee sat to consider the business which is still on our table and they realised that so far, there are 35 questions that have not been answered as expected. This was a serious matter and as a result of the discussion we had today, we thought of making some adjustments in our rules to address this problem of not answering questions that are put to the ministers.

One of the suggestions that have been made is that after the dates within our rules have expired, and the question has not been answered, we shall, in future, put the question on the Order Paper whether the minister has returned a written explanation, so that it is on the Order Paper and then we see what happens. This is what has been discussed and I think that is how we are going to proceed. 

Another issue that was considered is the consistent absence of some Members in their committees. Again we thought that our rules should be amended so that the leadership of the committee concerned makes regular reports of the attendance and non-attendance and so that the chairman of such a committee says, “Yes we are so many people but so and so has only one percent or five percent attendance.” We think this may remedy the situation. 

We also think that people should go to committees where they have interest other than putting somebody in a committee in which he is not interested. 

The absence of a Member in a committee for many times may also earn him/her a sanction that will be determined. But these are things which we discussed this morning. Think about them; you may have ideas so that we really become serious about the work of Parliament.

Now there is a question from hon. Okupa – Oh! He is not around. Call another question.

QUESTION 48/1/08 TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL/MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

5.22
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): “a) Why has the Electoral Commission not organised local council elections and local council by-elections contrary to the law?

b) What plans does the minister have to ensure that the elections of local council leaders are held expeditiously?”

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General is not here? (Laughter) Well, sorry this is the state of affairs but perhaps when we come back these questions are going to remain on our Order Paper and when we start, the very day we come, they will be on the Order Paper.

This then brings us to the end of today’s business. I want to thank you very much for the contribution you have made during this year which is ending next week. But we should improve our performance. We should address maximising the use of our time so that we do not spend time without doing serious work.

And maybe I forgot this but the leaders are here. Perhaps it may serve the multi-party system if on a certain subject, say Foreign Affairs you get a team that may make a contribution to that subject. If for instance instead of ten Members from one side having to share say 30 minutes of an hour, it may serve better if we have five and utilise the one hour. The content of their contributions will be weightier than if the ten share the time because they will be speaking for two minutes each, whereas if they are five, they get more time and the content of their speeches will be better than the content of the speech which you make in three minutes. These are some of the matters that we have considered this morning but this will be subject to the Rules Committee to advise us as to how best to do it.

We have decided that we start the Christmas recess today because it is no good for me to call you on Monday which will be 22nd or Tuesday which will be 23rd, when actually you have to travel to meet your people and share the Christmas spirit with the family. So we agreed that we have a recess which will end on 3rd February. This is about a month and one week. So that is what we have decided. And it may be better when we come, for the committees to sit in the morning and afternoon to clear a number of issues that are standing before them. 

I wish you an enjoyable Christmas and a prosperous New Year. But we have arranged for you this evening, starting at 6.00 p.m. a party in the Parliamentary Gardens. You are all invited. Go and enjoy whatever will be on offer. 

Thank you very much, hon. Members. As I told you, our friend has lost a wife and I have told you arrangements for the funeral. Hon. Kasole’s wife died at midnight yesterday. Actually I was with hon. Kasole here in Parliament up to about 10.00 p.m., only for him to go back and find that the wife had passed away! Any observations? 

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

THE SPEAKER: So with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned and we shall come back on 3rd February 2009. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 February 2009.)



