Wednesday, 16 December 2009

Parliament met at 3.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and apologise for the delay. We had a commission meeting this morning to deal with issues of your welfare and it overflowed slightly into our work. 

On a sad note, I regret to inform you that our former colleague, hon. Agard Didi, the former MP for Moyo West, died this morning. I have not yet got the programme for the burial and I do not know whether hon. Auru is here. I think we shall be informed about the programme for the burial but I want to ask members to stand up in his honour.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

3.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise two issues, which I think are of very serious concern. The first is to do with health care provision to prisoners.

About two months ago, media houses and particularly the NTV, ran a series of documentaries portraying the situation in Luzira. Also from our experiences having visited Luzira, the heath care situation is appalling. It has come to our notice that there is a policy problem. Whereas Luzira and prisons generally fall under the ambit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, it looks like the Ministry of Internal Affairs is incapable of providing adequate health care to the inmates therein to the extent that there is acute drug shortage for people in our prisons; as well as inadequate staff. 

I am told that Luzira for instance has just one doctor. I am also told that the staff who work there, even in the TB ward, do not have masks to put on. Moreover, there are no medicines for the patients. The sick bay in Luzira is partly a VIP ward. I have had occasion to visit a few friends who have been kept in Luzira for some time and I found some of them sleeping in the sick bay. That is where they keep inmates who are high profile and not necessarily dangerous.

It is our duty to ensure that adequate health care is provided. If you look at a condition like Tuberculosis and you consider the overcrowding in our prison facilities, I think we are condemning prisoners even before they are produced in the courts of law. Our Constitution provides for a presumption of innocence, so either intentionally or inadvertently we should not condemn them to death by failing to provide them with the necessary medical care. Therefore, I would like to ask the Ministry of Health to sort out the issue with Internal Affairs.

The Ministry of Health gets fairly adequate money to provide drugs for Ugandans so why is it that they have left out the prison facilities and are forcing people to die or to waste away without medication? I would like to hear from the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. If Internal Affairs is incapable of delivering health services to the inmates like it has seemed to, let Ministry of Health take over this responsibility and manage the prison facilities like they would manage a health centre I or II and at least save them and then let the due process of law take its course.

Secondly, we have raised issues concerning road safety in this House a number of times. I do not wish to take the House back but we all know the pain associated with our roads. Actually, someone told me that if you arrive alive on a Ugandan road then that is an accident. When you reach home alive it is an accident because the road is supposed to kill you as there are traps. That seems to be the agreed position. 

Now that the festive season is coming, I make this request first of all that we should appeal for responsible driving on our roads. The other disturbing bit is that I got some information that the authorities that manage buses in our country have allowed them to do more than one route during the festive season, so if a bus is coming from Soroti it is allowed to come and go back. In the previous seasons, especially during the festive season, buses would be restricted to make only one route and go back the following day but listening to news on various media, I got information that now they are allowed to come and go back. 

In the absence of speed governors, the only imposed regulation on speed on our roads is a denial to bus operators to move here and there as they wish. I do not know whether the minister concerned would not like to ensure that we do not let public service operators take on excessive trips on our roads during the festive season. I believe it will save some lives. Thank you.

3.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for raising these very important matters. The issue of appalling prison conditions is a very serious matter. It is one that obviously calls for immediate attention. The sentiments, the concerns that you have registered will be brought to the attention of the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs for appropriate action because prison matters are of concern to all of us for obvious reasons.

Regarding the issue of road carnage, I will ask the minister in charge to say something about the operation of buses during this festive season.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the minister talks, since we are approaching the festive season, last week, hon. Oleny raised the issue of the ASTU personnel who have not received their salaries. How will they survive in that place and how will they have Christmas?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, you are right. The Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs came up with a statement, but he was required to provide more information and more importantly, take action. I promise to raise the Minister of Internal Affairs so that I find out what action has been taken in light of the instructions that were given by this House. 

3.30
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I want to give some information about the issue of medical services for the inmates, which will also be part of the response. The information I want to give, which would be useful for the response concerning the health of the inmates in Luzira is that I have got constant complaints from the health workers who handle those inmates. Sometimes, they are made to appear in the courts, especially for inmates who need to get bail on medical grounds. They are made to give information saying there are drugs when there are no drugs in the hospital. If they refuse to go and give that information, they are punished. 

I want to find out how professional or ethical issues of health workers who are working under the Minister of Internal Affairs come in because they continue complaining about unprofessional and ethical issues. I have been raising that issue, but I have not got any response. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the minister is in. Can you quickly talk about the road? 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon. Member for raising this issue. According to the law and regulations of the Transport Licensing Board, we do not allow a bus to do a return journey on certain routes depending on the distance. Since you have told us that you have heard that, I need to verify this information with the Transport Licensing Board. Trust me, if it is true, they will have to halt it. I promise.

Also, I want to appeal to you hon. Members to help us in order to spread the gospel of safe driving -(Interjections)- let me finish. It is everybody’s responsibility to make sure that our roads are used properly and people drive at a reasonable speed. I think you have even got the powers to arrest a driver whom you see over speeding. I thank you very much.

3.33
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national concern. In my constituency, over 180 teachers have not been receiving their salaries for the last one and a half years. There have been various efforts to try and have these teachers paid but up to date, nothing has materialised. 

There are primary teachers who receive payslips every month but do not receive money. There are also teachers whose names have just disappeared from the payroll without any reasonable cause. There are also teachers who have been recruited but to date, their names are not on the payroll.

If you recall, last year in the whole of Amuru District there was only one first grade in PLE. The cause of such poor performance may have been due to the fact that teachers are not well facilitated. Being a Shadow Minister for Public Service, I cross-checked with other districts like Namutumba and Masindi and found the same problem. I believe many other districts have the same problem. 

The Ministry of Public Service should do its best to ensure that teachers who are employed, who are taking care of our children, are paid. We already have a problem of meagre salary for these teachers, so if paying the meagre salary is a problem, then that is terrible. 

I would like to implore all members to cross-check with their respective districts to ensure that teachers who are not on the payroll get there. I thank you so much.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for bringing to our attention that irregularity. I will see him after this to get more details about what is happening in those areas. I am taking note because it has never been brought to our attention. I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 80,000,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT-3; THE UPGRADING OF NYAKAITA-IBANDA-KAMWENGE ROAD

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to move a motion for a proposal to borrow UA 80,000,000 from the African Development Fund (ADB) of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Road Sector Support Project-3 for the upgrading of Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I commit the request to the Committee on National Economy.

3.38
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I will go and attend those committee proceedings but I am wondering which criteria we use to select this particular road in Western Uganda and come to the national Parliament and borrow money for it only yet the state of the roads all over the country is bad. Which criteria do we use to select this particular road? All of us will pay the loans and the money is heading to one area? (Laughter) So, which criteria have we used?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I am really very surprised that we as Members of Parliament sometimes do not follow the proceedings, which go on in this House. We have just borrowed money to tarmac Soroti-Dokolo-Lira Road -(Interjections)– wait, why can’t you let me talk? Today in the Cabinet we have approved money for Gulu-Atiak-Arua-Vuura–Koboko Road. We have got Kapchorwa–Swam Road. These roads are at different stages of development. Next week you will get a resolution for Gulu-Atiak–Arua-Vuura-Kiboko. I thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS 

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had a long debate yesterday and in view of the fact that we are about to break off for holidays, we should really get this business out of the way. So, I would like to ask the clerk to ring the bell so that we start voting on the districts, one by one. Please, ring the bell. 

3.42
MR GODFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as we wait for the bell and Members to come in, I am seeking your indulgence to allow me raise a matter of national importance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two months ago I raised a concern on the Floor of this House that the Ministry of Finance and Uganda Revenue Authority have changed the mode of clearing of goods at Malaba and this is frustrating Government’s raising revenue and causing loses because many goods are imported without tax clearance at the customs unit. 

You directed the Minister of Finance to come here with a statement but he has up to now failed to bring it. The intention of the Minister of Finance was also to frustrate the establishment of the inland dry port to which Government, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Trade signed an agreement with Great Lakes Port Limited and yet the investor has secured funding to start construction but with this mode of operation, the investor is now worried and planning to sue Government for breach of contract. When will the Minister of Finance come to this floor with a statement to clarify the matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was raised on the Floor of this House and a statement was expected. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I find that the practice and the behaviour of the three ministers from the Ministry of Finance to be very un-parliamentary; they do not have any feelings for this country. Is it in order for the Minister of State for Privatisation to be seated there with that of the General Duties and I saw hon. Syda Bbumba just outside in the corridor as I raise a matter of national importance? Because 40 percent of the revenue that runs this country comes from Malaba and Busia customs points. Are the ministers in order to ignore responding to the clarification I am seeking? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the finance minister? Anyway, I think I have taken note. Now hon. Members, the voting – order! The voting will be by show of hands. We shall first ask those who are in favour to raise their hands, then those who are against and those who are abstaining and we shall record them - district by district. Can you ascertain how many we are? 

Hon. Members, the Constitution requires that for the creation of any district, there must be a majority of the Members of the House. At the moment, we are 143 in the whole House – hon. Members, I am urging you to really fulfil your constitutional obligations because you are supposed to be here to legislate for the country. I told you yesterday that I do not want to see empty benches but I can see them – you are not even 50 percent! (Laughter) Yes, hon. Kawanga. 

3.49
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I understand your predicament. The problem is not with us here but those who are not here –(Applause)- and we have no method of getting them to come here. So perhaps the best thing to do is to adjourn this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Members –

MR KAWANGA: Otherwise, this whole effort will be wasted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I yesterday appealed to the leaders on both sides of the House to ensure that the Members are here –

3.50
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Rt. Hon. Speaker, when I critically reflect on this motion, this would have been an easy motion except for one of the tenets. The most crucial thorn in that motion is that which touches on Terego and Maracha and if that is the first thing to be dealt with, I can guarantee you that we will have more than half of the people here -(Laughter)- I can promise –(Laughter)- I can promise you that within five minutes, this House will be full to make sure that we reach the 179. 

3.51
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): As we try to mobilise our colleagues to come so that we can realise the necessary quorum, we need to have at the back of our minds that what we need is not only the majority of the Members to be in the House. Article 179 says, “Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or create a new district shall be supported by majority of all the Members of Parliament.” So the operational phrase is, “Supported”. If we are to have – because there are reservations about this motion amongst some of us; there are those who may even oppose it and the mobilisation we need to make is not about getting 170. At least 200 Members –(Interjections)- should be present so that you have those who are opposing and the majority who are supporting are over 170. That is my interpretation of this.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: My understanding of Article 179 that talks of majority of all Members of Parliament. I do not know where the figure of 179 comes from.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, it says, “Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or create a new district shall be supported by majority of all the Members of Parliament.” 50 + 1 is already a majority of 49. So I do not see any requirement as to quorum of 179 because the requirement is only as to any figure that will be more than one half of all the Members and that is my interpretation. I beg to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, when you count the 145 Members who are seated in this Chamber, are they half? That is what I am saying; that the Members who are seated here are below half and that is the problem I have.

3.53
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much. Since the respective chief whips are mobilising the Members, I just wanted to suggest that maybe we could stay that item and proceed to the next one as the numbers are mobilised and then we go back to the issue instead of seating idle in Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, things are improving and we now have 152 Members. I think we have improved. Can I call upon the Members who are still outside to come in and we start this work?  

3.56
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): We have noted that the majority of the Members who are not here are hon. ministers. Their addresses are known, can’t they be contacted because the biggest offenders in the House are the ministers. (Laughter) The biggest offenders in this House are the ministers. (Laughter)

3.57
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we have a problem. The job of mobilising Members of Parliament is for the whips of the various political parties. I do propose that you suspend the proceedings for some 30 minutes –(Interjections)- but we cannot just sit here idle! We have serious things to do. We are now gossiping and some of us do not have that time to gossip! 

I think what we should do is to suspend the proceedings and the various party whips mobilise their Members. But we cannot just sit here idle. We need to be here to do business -(Interjections)- then let us vote.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I can see how constrained we are with this issue of quorum. I would propose that as mobilisation goes on, we proceed to item 5, because this too is another very urgent matter to be disposed of and also needs appropriate quorum. 

3.59
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to inform the House that UPC has got 60 percent presence in this House. (Laughter)

Secondly, as we mobilise, some people will be demobilising themselves and so we are going to get stuck. I think if we are tired, let us go for Christmas -(Laughter)- refresh our bodies, minds and souls and come back next year when we are full of vigour and we pass this. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, let us go to the next item. But hon. Members, you know what you are proposing, I think, is something very painful for the population especially like the people of Buyende. I am in the Chair, I cannot vote and the person who would be voting for them is not there. But now they are all being punished and Members are not willing to work. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, procedurally, we have whips of different parties but is it procedurally right for the whips of the Opposition not to be mobilising their Members especially hon. Wadri? Has he abdicated the duty of a whip to ensure that Members come and we vote on this matter? Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, let us proceed to the next item while you mobilise the Members - 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have been forced to come to the microphone by the statement, which has been made by my friend, hon. Kubeketerya. He has made a statement which is going to remain on the Hansard and there are people who will come after us to this Parliament and will wonder what kind of Opposition Chief Whip hon. Kassiano Wadri was.

You know very well that my senior brother, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, got involved in an accident on 11 October this year and I have been holding the two portfolios and since morning we have been locked up in a commission meeting. Now, for a person who should have understood this to come and make a sweeping statement without knowing the reasons - the best I can do is to ring Members. If they are not here, what more whipping do you want me to do? Those who responded are here. So, please be mindful of your language. This is what is going to remain on record. I just needed to correct that.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, may I propose that the House takes another count because we have sufficient numbers that have turned up since the last count? Some are actually lacking space to come in. I propose that we have another count now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I urge the Members to come into the Chambers; you cannot vote from outside! Hon. Members, the situation has improved. We have 167 Members now in the House and so we can proceed with the voting. I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Zombo District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 161 Members for Zombo District; four abstentions and none against. Zombo District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the creation of Amudat District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 164 Members for Amudat District; three abstentions; and one against. Amudat District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the creation of Otuke District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 164 Members in favour of Otuke District; one against and we have three abstentions. Otuke District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion of the creation of Lamwo District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 160 Members for Lamwo District; one against and three have abstained. Lamwo District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion of the creation of Kyegegwa District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 161 Members for Kyegegwa District 161; one against and five abstentions. Kyegegwa District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Buikwe District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have 164 Members in favour of Buikwe District; one against; four abstentions. Buikwe District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Buyende District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for Buyende District, 168 voted in favour; one member voted against and three abstained. Buyende District is approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now Maracha District -

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, it is our view that we should stand over Maracha District and altering the boundary of Arua as we are consulting over these matters.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, can I have some protection please? A few minutes back the Prime Minister did consult me and he indicated that it was their considered opinion to stand over this matter. However, right from the beginning of the voting process, there has been a consensus that we vote on these districts and the voting has been going smoothly on either side of the House. 

I do not know whether standing over this matter is as a result of the legal implications that this House observed and raised. If that is the issue and for the purpose of the record as well as for the purpose of the relevant committee of Parliament - Government assurance to take it over from there - I will need to have it stated explicitly so. If that is not the case, then time is ripe that we vote over this matter the way we have voted over others here and now. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the mover of the Motion is the one who has said he wants this matter stood over so we cannot force him to vote. The motion belongs to the Leader of Government Business and he is the one who is saying he wants to stand over it. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I take cognisance of your ruling and in no way am I here to challenge it but the most logical thing will be for the Prime Minister to commit himself. Leaving it open will not help us. Up to when are we going to stand over this matter? We just need that assurance. Also, why does he need it?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we intend to deal with this matter in February.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the proposal of the Prime Minister but we need to follow our rules. There was a motion that was moved by the Minister of Local Government and it included Maracha and Terego. To withdraw that off the list needs a formal motion. You do not just stand over because we are voting on a motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, supposing some are voted for and some against; what happens? Let us move to Namayingo District. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have stood here to seek your indulgence. We want a situation where we vote together in unison like we have been doing. My side seems to be divided –(Interjections)- I do not know whether it is –(Interjections)- no, I am for you. There is a lot of confusion on my side and I want us to move together. There are different views. Will you mind giving me a minute or so to consult these people and we move together as a House? That is what my prayer is; as evidence from my side. That is all. It is in good faith.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not see why you are getting agitated. We secured an assurance from the Minister of Local Government that the business of the districts will be concluded in February. The Prime Minister has said that let this one go with those, which will be concluded in February. So, what motions do you want? He gave us the assurance. We extracted that assurance from him.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a representative of the people of Maracha, I want to go on record and say that I appeal to all Members present in this House who have been voting right from the beginning to continue voting on all these other districts on which we have not yet voted. I see no reason why we should punish other innocent Ugandans – you know to create a situation similar to that one in Maracha and Terego. So if the position of Government has changed that this matter will be considered in February, I have no problem with it. (Applause)  

After all, who is responsible for this problem? It is our own creation; why should we come and say that we are not responsible for this problem and, therefore, we should punish other Ugandans. I want to go on record; I appeal to all of you that we continue voting because this matter is not a problem of the district on which we have not voted yet; it is our own problem. So, let us carry our own burden. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me allow the Leader of the Opposition to consult his team. 

MR WADRI: We are here for a genuine cause; in order to pass a district, we need at least 160 Members and in order for us to reach that 160, I need also to build consensus on my part otherwise all this voting will be in futility. We will not be able to pass even one of the districts in the second schedule. So that is the reason why my Members here are requesting that we consult. That is what they are saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, while they are consulting, as I informed you that our late colleague, Mr Agard Didi died, there will be a requiem mass at Christ the King Church on Friday this week at 9 O’clock in the morning; and then burial will take place on Sunday in Metu, Moyo. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.59 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.15 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This motion was in two parts; we have completed one part and so I want to adjourn before we complete the second part. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 December 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 
