Thursday, 15 December 2011

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.


ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Prof. Gilbert Bukenya

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Bukenya, I congratulate you and welcome you back to your home. I give to you tools that are very familiar to you, which will be used in the conduct of business while representing your people. I present to you the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda and the Constitution, which you have just taken oath to uphold and defend. Congratulations on taking the oath again. You are welcome.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take your seats. We have a long day this afternoon. In the technical bench this afternoon, I have Mrs Margaret Bukenya. She is here to witness hon. Gilbert Bukenya’s swearing in and to witness proceedings of Parliament. Please join me again in welcoming her. (Applause) You are welcome, Madam.

The Africa Challenge Foundation always gives an award for the best male and female Members of Parliament. They give different awards to different kinds of people who have distinguished themselves in different things in this country. The Africa Challenge Foundation has a Uganda chapter. The Uganda chapter has considered nominations and taken a vote from the 27 universities in Uganda. The vote was taken by all the students, and now I have the pleasure to announce to you that this Parliament has two distinguished members who have won this award. (Applause)

The best male Member of Parliament award has been bestowed upon the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Lwemiyaga. I am told he has been awarded a plaque which he wanted to show to the House, but it looks like he is not yet here. In a moment we will do that. Also in this very House, we have the best female Member of Parliament award, which was taken by hon. Beatrice Anywar, MP Kitgum District. 

The awards conferred upon these people should serve as an inspiration to all you, Members, because you are all deserving candidates and the next year’s award could go to any of you. All of you are potential winners; so, work hard and take this award. It will be an inspiration to all young leaders who are looking at you as examples of people they should emulate.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a team of 16 journalists from South Sudan, and it is headed by Mr Kenneth Oluka, former editor of New Vision. They are here to train on covering politics in a multiparty democracy. Please join me in welcoming them. They are up in the VIP gallery. 

Honourable members, we have a long day today. At the same time, we have the Christmas tree lighting function today and also the other thing that I have been announcing for the last three days, which will happen immediately after the plenary today. I am sure all of you have come with your best shoes to make the evening a successful one.

Again, let me welcome Professor Gilbert Bukenya and congratulate him for joining the House. This not being his first time, I am sure we will proceed straight to begin the debate while his people are still here.

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Gilbert Bukenya for having won a resounding victory. I want to take this opportunity to receive him with open hands back in Parliament, and I am sure one day, he will be back in Cabinet.

You are all very familiar with his incisive discussions and contributions to the affairs of this nation. I am sure, hon. Bukenya, you have now come back with much more strength. You have come after a baptism of political fire and you will even be able to perform much better than you have done hitherto. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.26
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition, and particularly on behalf of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I stand here to welcome His Excellency, Prof. Bukenya. He comes to Parliament at a time when there is a gap in the Cabinet in the ministry of the Presidency. Before Prof. Bukenya became Vice President, he was a minister in charge of the Presidency. So, we hope that he will give appropriate guidance on how the Presidency should be managed. 

Thank you so much, professor, for having gone through all those difficulties. The Opposition will do everything possible to assist you appropriately.

2.28
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. On my own behalf, and on behalf of Tororo Municipality and of the Independents’ caucus, I would like to thank the people of Busiro for giving to Caesar what belongs to Caesar. They have proved that the victory was not a falsehood but righteous. We want to thank them because 70 percent is not an easy feat. We know that there are certain Members in this House who have come by the thread - 10, 50 or 100 votes. So, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Gilbert Bukenya for the resounding victory. 

I would also like to congratulate him upon his victory in court. This morning, the courts of judicature in this country pronounced themselves, and it is a clear manifestation that there were ulterior motives in whatever transpired, considering the sequence of events. So, I would like thank the public in general and the people of Busiro North and congratulate my mentor, Rt Hon. Gilbert Bukenya. I thank you.

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I rise on a sad note, on a matter of national importance. This morning, Obongi Health Centre IV, especially the OPD and the drug stores, caught fire. Even drugs which were delivered only yesterday at 4.00 p.m. to cover a period of two months got burnt completely. There is a problem there now as there are no drugs. I would like to bring this issue to your notice. We need urgent assistance. 

Secondly, there are questions lingering in our minds as people of Obongi, and I think as Ugandans. We should be concerned about the cause of the fire and the relation particularly of the delivery of drugs that were brought in just yesterday in the evening and someone reports that they are burnt; and also, a whole building and a motorcycle delivered by Baylor Uganda early this month got burnt. I would like to call up on all the concerned –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the rules. You have the information and that is why you rose. You do not take information when you have risen on a matter of national importance. You have all the information. Please finish.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, thank you for the guidance, but that is my woman MP for the district of Moyo. Maybe she has additional information about the same for the good of the country. 

We would like you to help us in the investigation of the cause of the fire. Was it a cover up for a fraud? Maybe drugs were stolen and then the house was burnt to cover up. Was it a genuine accident? We do not have electricity there; so, it was not an accident caused maybe by faulty connections or an electric circuit. We suspect ulterior motives in that fire which burnt the whole OPD, the stores including drugs, and a motorcycle. Help us find the cause and help us to supply a new drugs consignment. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think this is not a matter for debate. This is something that has happened - a fire has caught a hospital. I would like to take a statement from the minister and we move forward on other things, please. This is not a debateable matter. Okay, let hon. Bukenya make his maiden speech. (Applause)

2.34
MR GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker and all of you, honourable members of this august House. First of all, I want to sympathise with my friend, hon. Fungaroo, for what happened in your area. 

Secondly, I want to thank the Parliament of Uganda for the way you have conducted business in this Ninth Parliament. (Applause)
I want to thank you for supporting me. There are times of difficulty and there are times of happiness. Today is my double win. In the morning at 9.15 a.m., all cases that were alleged against me were thrown out of court -(Applause)- not for lack of evidence, but for no evidence. Then this afternoon, I am very glad that I have been welcomed back by the House, to this home where I should belong and I now belong. (Applause)

I have learnt a lesson. I have been in prison for no good reason because the case has been dismissed; not dropped but dismissed.  Therefore, I will join Parliament to fight against corruption -(Applause)- in its entire form. I will not allow anybody to be covered. From today, let justice take its place without intervention so that the Judiciary can arbitrate when there is a problem.

I thank the Ninth Parliament. We have started well and we are going to continue. I have been on holiday, but I am back, and I am back. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I thank you as a good friend, and I am back for good. I want to thank you for the way you have been conducting the House because Speakers show how things move if they conduct the House properly. I want to thank you. (Applause)

To all of you who came to campaign for me, I thank you. There is nobody I stopped from coming to campaign for me, and I want to say in Parliament that nobody ever rung me to say, “Be well” as it was quoted in the Red Pepper. That was also wrong. I know the names and faces of those who came and those who rung me. Mr Speaker, I want to stop there and say, thank you very much. I am the happiest man. (Applause)

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry to note the unfortunate incident that has befallen the people of Obongi and Moyo in general. It is very unfortunate. I can only undertake to make sure that we revive the services immediately in that part of the country, by providing the medicines and other health supplies immediately. 

As for the reconstruction, of course this takes some bit of time, but it is also our obligation as Government to make sure that services are restored. So, we will keep in touch with the districts of Moyo and the Members of Parliament from the area to make sure that we immediately restore the infrastructure and the services. I thank you.

2.40
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and this relates to salaried workers. There are mainly two important days that the people of Uganda consider so dear to them; for Christians, it is Christmas and for those of the Islamic faith, it is Idd Aduha.

Christmas is ten days away from now and the concern I want to raise - good enough the Minister of State for Public Service, my former bureaucrat, is here, as well as the Prime Minister and also the Minister of Public Service. We know for a fact that the majority of our civil servants are lowly paid, especially teachers who are the majority. They hardly earn Shs 160,000 as a take-home. For a number of months, new districts especially, have not been able to access salaries. Small as it is, it means a lot to them. 

It is also a fact that it is a parental obligation on the part of whoever heads a family that on Christmas Day, something special needs to be seen in a home. You need to have a change of diet for that day. It is a fact that many of our people taste animal products - for that case meat - for the first time on Christmas. In the same vein, every responsible parent will also want to overhaul the wardrobe, however simple it may be, so that the family members are clothed in order to go to church on Christmas Day.

Here is a day to which every Christian is looking forward to. I would like to ask and request the Minister of Public Service to ensure that salary earners are able to get their pay by 20th of this month so that they can be able to do purchases and be able to prepare for the coming of the Lord. There are many new districts, which cannot access banking facilities. Some of them have to travel hundreds of miles in order to access banking services. If this salary is not paid to them on time, it becomes difficult for them, therefore, to even access the little that is due to them.

My earnest appeal to Government is that, can they please pay the bulk of our people who are salary earners the little that they deserve, so that they can be able to make a meaningful Christmas for their families? That is my prayer, Mr Speaker, especially for the teachers and low community-based workers of Government, who are actually in a difficult situation. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

2.44
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had also approached you on the matter of salaries. The only difference and point I want to add to what hon. Wadri has said is that in Kanungu District - and this morning I rung the minister - the civil servants have not been paid their November salaries. This has been a chronic problem. In Kanungu they get their salaries two months after the time when they are supposed to be paid. I do not know what the special problem is with Kanungu. I would want, in addition to the response to be given on what has been raised, to also get an explanation as to why in Kanungu the salaries are not paid on time.

Lastly, we also want to congratulate Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. The people of Kanungu requested me to tell you congratulations, and they love you very much. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. You know why I am doing it this way. It is because I have three pages on the Order Paper; so, I need to manage my time properly. I will ask the ministers in charge of this sector to make some commitments and then we see how to move from there.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I will address the two concerns from the honourable members regarding issues of pay. I wish to confirm and to assure the House that salaries for the month of December will be paid by 21st. The Member asked for 20th but I am actually saying that by 21st of December, salaries will be in the bank accounts of civil servants. I want to confirm that, because we are always mindful about Christmas ourselves. Our payrolls will get ready on time and Ministry of Finance is releasing funds. It has been confirmed to me. So, the pay and payrolls can be completed and salaries paid.

The second concern was from hon. Baryomunsi over payment of staff in Kanungu District. I want, personally, to thank hon. Baryomunsi for constantly bringing this issue to my attention. I will now explain what must have been the concern and why this occurrence has been taking place. In our budget for allowances and salaries for these areas, we had requested for Shs 5.2 billion and we had a shortfall of Shs 4.4 billion. This shortfall has affected six districts, namely: Gulu, Kanungu, Kisoro, Kitgum, Agago and Kole, including health workers whose salaries are delayed. This is because we did combine the hard-to-reach allowance and salary to be paid at the same time and yet we had a shortfall on hard-to-reach allowance.

I want to assure Members that this issue has been presented to the Ministry of Finance and they have confirmed the release of the shortfall for the month of November, of Shs 771,450,325. This is for paying salaries including hard-to-reach allowance. 

We also submitted to Ministry of Finance that we are mindful about Christmas and, therefore, the issue of the hard-to-reach allowance should also be handled for the month of December. We have requested them to provide Shs 1.7 billion for the month of December to allow these districts to receive their salaries combined with the hard-to-reach allowance. The confirmation is that the release has been done and we are going to make sure that they get the salary for November and the hard-to-reach allowance, as well as December salary and hard-to-reach allowance before Christmas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SAM OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues. I remember yesterday before we adjourned the House, I had raised a concern about how the debate on the state of the economy has always been relegated. I remember you ruled that the agenda on the situation of the economy should come as a priority on the Order Paper today. When I look at the Order Paper, that agenda has been relegated to item number 7. 

I still want to plead with the House and with you, Mr Speaker, that matters of the economy are extremely important. It should receive due attention especially when we are going through the hardships right now. In any case, you had made a ruling, so I am wondering whether you have been overruled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. You have taken five minutes of that time, which we should have used productively to run into this business. Actually, you should apologise to the House for taking that time. The next items are very short items and that is why we want to finish with them and go straight to that one. I am very mindful of that. Please, next item.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday when I raised an issue of an epidemic, you guided that the Minister of Agriculture will be here on Thursday to give an explanation on the Anthrax issue.

Much as they are talking about public servants not eating meat, those agriculturists are not going to eat meat too. It is not anywhere on this Order Paper and I do not see any minister from the Ministry of Agriculture to talk about that issue. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are following up on that, honourable member.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the 18-month period ended 30 June 2011 for Makerere University Economic Policy Research Centre (EPRC). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the audited books of accounts on Bujagali Interconnection Project, which obtained funds from Loan No.ADF 2100150014594 and also obtained a loan from JBIC, loan No.UDP1, covering the period up to the end of 31 December 2010. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured as such.

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the audited project books of accounts on the project of strengthening ICT training and research capacity in the four public universities in Uganda under NUFFIC project, No.NPT-UGA-238, for the five-months period ending on 31 May 2011. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the record capture it as such.

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): The third audited project books of accounts that I wish to lay on the Table, Mr Speaker, is that on Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. This is a rapid strengthening of blood transfusion services in selected countries funded by Centres for Disease Control and Prevention under grant No.5U62PS023653-05 covering the project period ended 1 April 2009 to 30 September 2010. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured as such.

2.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kagwera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Moving under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the trip to the National Assembly of Ghana from 19th to 26 November 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured as such.

STATEMENT BY HON. KABAHENDA FLAVIA RWABUHORO MP, KYEGEGWA (CHAIRPERSON UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN) MOVED IN ACCORDANCE TO RULE 43 TO BRIEF PARLIAMENT ON THE DELAY IN TABLING OF THE CHILDREN’S ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL

2.57
MS FLAVIA RWABUHORO (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request you to allow me make a correction on the Order Paper. I am not the chairperson -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have no authority, madam. Proceed with the statement.

MS RWABUHORO: But I do not want to usurp powers, Mr Speaker. I am not the chairperson of the forum; I am the publicity secretary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but you are representing the chairperson.

MS RWABUHORO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement that is made by Kabahenda Flavia on the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill. It is presented under Rule 41(1) and (2) and the background is as such:

The ratification and coming into force of regional and international child rights instruments was a commitment by the Government of Uganda to put in place measures for implementation of these instruments at national level that guarantee children’s rights to survival, development, protection and participation. Over the last two decades, laudable progress has been made towards the realisation of the rights of children in Uganda including, but not limited to, the establishment of administrative, policy and legislative frameworks for the operationalisation of treaties. 

Government has undertaken national level programmes at ministerial level and collaborated with bilateral donors as a demonstration of its commitment towards the realisation of children’s rights. One achievement registered by the Government of Uganda is in meeting its obligations of submitting progress reports to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, 1997, 2005, and 2008, and the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of Children, 2010.

In furthering her commitment, the government domesticated the provisions of the treaties into the Children’s Act, Cap 59. However, the Children’s Act has limitations with major gaps in dealing with emerging child protection issues.
 
Progress towards the Amendment of the Children’s Act

The then Minister of State for Children and Youth Affairs, hon. Felix Okot Ogong, initiated the process of reviewing the Children’s Act in 2004 and the following processes were undertaken: 

1. 	In 2004, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development put a formal request to the Uganda Law Reform Commission to amend the Children’s Act. 

2. 	In 2004, a technical committee composed of civil society organisations and other partners like the Law Reform Commission was established to commence work. 

3. 	In 2005, the Uganda Law Reform Commission conducted a study on the statute to inform the amendment. 

4. 	In 2008, the Uganda Law Reform Commission released a report of the study.

5. Between 2008 and 2009, civil society organisations engaged in lobby efforts with the Uganda Law Reform Commission and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the amendment with no success.

6. 	In 2010, a draft amendment Bill was presented by the Uganda Law Reform Commission to the Ministry Gender, Labour and Social Development.

7. 	In 2011, a revised amendment Bill with input from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was generated.

My Concerns - and certainly concerns of the UPFC

It is unfortunate that to date this Bill has not been tabled in the House for first reading. It has taken seven years under the leadership of four ministers without much success. There are many reasons why, as a country and as representatives of the people of Uganda, we should take this very seriously: 

1. 	With 62 percent of its population under 18 years, Uganda is one of the countries with the youngest populations in the whole world. 

2. 	Child protection challenges are on the increase including, but not limited to, child sacrifice, defilement, child trafficking, child sex tourism, adoption challenges, all of which require a very robust legal framework to guarantee protection to these children.

3. Uganda has been implored by the UN committee of experts on the rights of children to take this action. In its recommendation to the Government, which it issued in 2005, the committee noted, under article 13, as follows:

i) The committee recommends that the state party strengthens efforts to bring domestic laws in compliance with the convention. In this regard, the state party should provide the Law Reform Commission with concrete direction and with the necessary resources to perform its task.

ii) The committee further recommends that that state party takes the necessary measures to ensure the effective implementation of laws and regulations in the area of children’s rights.

4. 	The National Council for Children, a semi-autonomous institution mandated by an Act of Parliament to inter-alia monitor and oversee all Government programmes concerning children in Uganda, has since its birth remained chronically underfunded, understaffed and ill-capacitated to implement its mandate. 

The amendment of the Children’s Act in line with the recommendations presented to the Government by the UN committee of experts under article 15 would go a long way in facilitating the realisation of the rights of the child. The committee of experts therein notes, under article 14, that the restructuring of the National Council for Children has been included on the whitepaper on constitutional amendment with the intention to replace National Council for Children with the Uganda National Children’s Authority.  

However, the committee is concerned that this restructuring process has delayed, which might hamper the efforts to implement the rights enshrined in the convention in a well coordinated manner. The committee, therefore, recommended that the state party expedites the process of restructuring the National Council for Children in order to ensure full implementation of the convention.

In this regard, the committee refers the state party to its general comment No.5, on general measures of implementation of the convention on the rights of the child. The committee further recommends that the state party provides the National Council for Children, and as soon as it is established, the Uganda National Children’s Authority, with the adequate human and financial resources to execute its mandate, including effective coordination of activities at national and district levels for the implementation of the convention.

Mr Speaker, I am concerned that despite all the efforts, both nationally and through the recommendations directed to the state party by the committee of experts at UN level and African Union level, very little progress has been made in bringing this amendment Bill to the august House. 

Mr Speaker, in the words of the former UN Secretary General, Koffi Anan, there is no task more important than building a world in which all of our children can grow to realise their full potential, peace and dignity. One clear way in which you can guarantee this for Uganda’s children is to put in place legislations that guarantee their protection and budgets that provide for their well-being.

My recommendations are: 

I implore this august House to consider this as a matter of urgency and strongly recommend that this august House expeditiously causes the tabling of the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill within the next two months and ensures its passing into law soon thereafter.

Mr Speaker, I stand by our motto as the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children – “Children First”. I will always want to give them a voice in this august House since they cannot be here to speak for themselves. Article 34 of the Constitution enjoins all of us to do this. That is the spirit in which I present this statement on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children executives and the members. 

If the minister does not respond to this statement as soon as possible, with the help of your Office, Mr Speaker, I will not hesitate to move a Private Member’s Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The rules under which you have proceeded do not allow us to proceed beyond this point. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INSTITUTE MEASURES TO ADDRESS MATERNAL MORTALITY AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware that we had a long debate on this subject and at the conclusion of it, we referred it to the committee responsible for this sector. By it being here, I am sure the committee is ready to report on the motion of hon. Nambooze so that we can take a decision on it. There will be no long debate on it because we debated this matter for more than three hours. So, we will receive the report and see how we can move forward with the motion. 

3.07
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the report of the social services committee on the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to institute measures to address maternal mortality. 

The motion was moved by hon. Nambooze on 29 November 2011 and it was forwarded to the committee –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order regarding the procedure under which we are moving. Is it in order for the honourable member, the chairperson of the appropriate committee, to deliver his report in absence of copies to be circulated among Members? We are not here as spectators; we are supposed to react to what you are going to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it would not be in the knowledge of the chairperson that the report has not been circulated. You should have raised a procedural point rather than a point of order. Chair, proceed. 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the committee concluded on the consideration of the report. In considering this report, the committee found it prudent to seek guidance from experts and consult a variety of stakeholders and health professionals. We interacted with the mover of the motion. We interacted with the Minister of Health, including a team from the Ministry of Health and experts from Makerere University School of Public Health, and also civil society organisations. Additionally, the committee scrutinised various local and international positions, recommendations, reports, documents and research findings on the matter. 

Mr Speaker, in giving this report, the committee made general observations. The first observation was that there exist policies and administrative decisions, including recommendations, for effective interventions to improve maternal health and yet the evidence on the ground reveals that there is glaring failure to implement these recommendations/polices even to the minimum. 

The committee is of the view that even if a very serious recommendation came out of this motion without resolving the paradox or mischief as to why there is failure to implement, this recommendation would be part and parcel of a bunch of papers that will not be useful to the 16 mothers who die every day from preventable causes. 

The committee is, therefore, of the view that Parliament should take a further step and be concerned with the recommendations and enforcement of all recommendations that have been made regarding maternal mortality –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, matters relating to maternal health are very important in our day-to-day life. We, as Members of Parliament in our respective areas, are supposed to follow what is going on. Is it procedurally in order for the honourable chairperson to continue reading the report when we are in the dark? We cannot follow the statistics he is referring to and the details of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, were copies submitted for reproduction? Can the clerk at the Table provide some guidance on this? I think, honourable members, let us allow the honourable chairman to proceed while we arrange for copies of this report. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, I am reluctant to give sanctity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t they bring the copies in instead of leaving them at the table outside? I am advised that the copies are on the table, but they should bring them in. Are those the reports? Mr Chairman, proceed. 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, that portrays how the voiceless mothers die. This report came some time back, but I can see it delayed to be brought yet I saw another report on the economy brought earlier. This is because dying mothers are voiceless. 

Page 2 of the committee report – The committee noted that there is evidence that the factors contributing to the reduction of maternal mortality are affected by numerous and complex factors within the health context. In order for any measure to have fruitful results, that measure must be implemented in tandem with the general improvement of the health services. In Uganda, the committee observed that the health care delivery system is deficient and, to say the least, critically sick. Accordingly, any specific measure or action aimed at improving maternal mortality will heavily pay only if implemented in tandem with measures to address the encumbrances and rigidities within the entire health care delivery system.   

The committee, therefore, is of the view that this matter, in addition to the report and the resolution, will be adequately dealt with after the ongoing enquiry into the health system, which the committee is handling, is concluded. 

The last general observation was that the committee was concerned that many serious recommendations on this matter made in the past, and even in the most recent report to Parliament by the committee, have been grossly ignored. 

There are many recommendations specific to improvement of maternal health in that report that have been elaborated upon on pages 4 and 5 regarding the decentralisation of health services, and the fact that there was need to improve on a new template for the health system, the health sector strategic plan, including the fact that the finances that had been provided in the budget were inadequate. The committee had recommended Shs 75 billion to be released. This also includes the fact that there is need to recruit additional workers in terms of the staffing norms of the health sector that stood nationally at 65 percent yet in the last few years, this matter has not been dealt with.

Basing on that, the committee was of the view – Mr Speaker, we can go to page 7. Pages 4, 5 and 6 were just information trying to emphasise the fact that there are a series of recommendations and we picked out some few as clearly elaborated on pages 5, 6 and 7. The position of the committee, therefore, was that Government should show utmost goodwill by first implementing the said recommendations that are, in the view of the committee, modest and the basic/minimum prerequisites and first steps in the long walk to achieving redemption for the voiceless reproductive mothers in this country.

I now turn to the specific recommendations on the resolutions that were referred to our committee. The first resolution was that Parliament urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually to establish the causes and publish its findings. The committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the number? 

DR LYOMOKI: Page 7.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The paragraph? 

DR LYOMOKI: Part 4 on page 7. If you look at page 7, towards the end -(Interjections)- Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me use the version that has been printed. I had the bigger version; the one that has been presented to the House is the version that picks out the general and specific recommendations. So, we start from page 1 of the report which has been given out. This is because we have circulated a summarised version for purposes of –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, the first recommendation is on page 1. That is the one which was stating that Parliament urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually to establish the causes and publish its findings. 

The committee noted that there is a maternal audits policy in place entrenched in Government health facilities and PNFPs as a practice. As a policy - if we have the same report, if you look at page 1 -(Interjections)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we have been supplied with a report which the chairperson of the committee has been reading for a while and then midway, he turns to page 1. This is a very important matter. The procedural issue I am seeking is whether it will not be correct to allow the chairperson to go and organise himself before he returns to this House because I do not know, maybe the next thing he will do is go to page zero. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman of the committee, are you ready to proceed?

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I was given two versions of the report. There was the bigger and summarised report; the report whose copies have been circulated is the summarised version. So, I thought that it may not be good to disturb the Members if I read the whole report. The report whose copy I was reading is the bigger one and that is why I had gone as far as page 10. So, because of time, I have resorted to the summarised one that has comments on the specific issues that were referred to by the committee. So, Mr Speaker, I don’t know what to do next.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ready to proceed?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, I am –(Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, we are not here –I really want to be as polite as possible – we are here on serious business. Whatever is said on this Floor is captured in the Hansard. When you read the Order Paper, a report of this committee is listed as one of the items to be handled. But how is the Hansard going to capture this report?

Also, from what the chairperson is saying, there is information that will not be captured by the Hansard and that cannot be procedurally correct.

Two, Mr Speaker, this is the first time I see a report which begins with observations and recommendations; I have never seen it anywhere. On the first page, the chairperson is already giving us observations and recommendations.

My colleague here is a senior parliamentarian and knows that this is unprecedented; it has never happened anywhere. So, we need a report because we have to digest it before we can have a thorough debate. Otherwise, we are just running over cardinal issues – I am sure the reasons why the honourable member for Mukono Municipality presented these issues are because they are so critical. But from what I see, we are not proceeding in real terms; we seem to be proceeding for the sake of it. We can’t be party to this, Mr Speaker.

In the circumstances, may I, therefore, seek clarification on whether it is procedurally correct for us to proceed the way we are doing?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, in addition to what the former colleague pointed out, if you look at page 9, after resolution 8, we got to the conclusion. But when you look at the conclusions on page 4.2, under resolution 2, it is not clear which one is the resolution;, which one is the conclusion,  which one is the observation, and which one is the analysis.

Mr Speaker, we know you as a person who is critical about articulation, precision and conciseness. So, I doubt that this can pass any test near to your standards, let alone the standards of this House. We still seek your guidance on which procedure the chairperson wants us to follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular motion by hon. Betty Nambooze was debated for two solid days. But we could not take a decision on this motion because the issues raised were much wider. That is why we decided to refer it to the relevant committee, which we gave only up to 13 December to report back. That is what is listed as a motion.

The committee obviously sat and from what I am seeing the chairperson trying to present – but just look at the fact that the report moved from a bigger original text to the summarised version – some of the information seems to have been displaced. I am sure it wasn’t the chairperson who edited this report. So, I don’t want to blame it on the chairperson. I just noticed that the chair saw it for the first time here. Otherwise, initially, he was looking at the original report.

In the circumstances, it does not appear very coordinated. If you are to go through the one that has been circulated, it does not flow the way you would have wanted it to flow, which might be a disservice to the true intentions of hon. Betty Nambooze. So, in the circumstances, hon. Batty Nambooze, how do we move? Are you satisfied with this?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the situation under which the committee worked; they had very few days and most probably this report was printed just this afternoon. In the circumstances, therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to humbly beg that we refer to the motion and consider the prayers therein as they were presented because issues of maternal health are very important. Also, we wouldn’t like people to believe that this Parliament does not give priority to issues of maternal health. 

Given the fact the first time this motion was presented to this House, it was immediately referred to the other sittings because we could not raise quorum, and when it came back, the motion was debated, yes, but it was again referred to this committee. I hope as we move on to consider the prayers, one by one, we may benefit from the submissions of the committee chairperson. That is better than deferring this matter. If we do that, it will definitely return in the next session, yet you know that in the next session we shall start with the Sate of the Nation Address, the budget debates, and this matter most probably –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the State of the Nation will come in the next session because we haven’t finished this session. But okay, your point is well taken. And since that seems to be the attitude of the mover of the motion, and since the chairperson of the committee is present and his committee has made clear recommendations on the modifications they suggest to the text of the motion, we should handle it clause by clause as we move on. My only challenge is that I don’t have the original text of the motion; if I could only get a copy.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Although I was not here when this motion was debated, I have been briefed and my senior colleague who is not here now, had a very useful interaction with the Committee on Social Services. Indeed, this report captures a lot by way of what was discussed in the committee, and by way of what other important stakeholders had as an input to this report.

Surely, the report is available. I have seen a summary of this report and I know that there has been confusion between the more comprehensive version –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the proposition is that we go through the original motion, which the committee handled, clause by clause, and see what input the committee made, 
based on its interactions with the minister and all the additions that you are making, then we see how to move forward. I think that request is not bad at all because the senior minister interacted with the committee. The committee has made very clear recommendations on how they intend to improve on the text of the motion, and it is in the report. They state both the original motion and what they are proposing to change. So, I think it will still not affect our procedure. We could propose resolution one, we read it out, and then the chairperson will respond, basing on what the committee had discussed and proposed to amend; in which case it will not affect anything. Would that be a proper thing, Mr Chairman? Because the chairman has the full knowledge; he has the report; he has his recommendations. So, let us proceed. That is the best way, I think, in the circumstances. 

3.33
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Samuel Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whatever decision you take in your wisdom is right. I will abide by it because we have considered the resolutions in the report, one by one. So, we can still refer to the report and get to those particular areas, because we have our position as a committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. We will go one by one then.
 
MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. Given the circumstances, it looks like even the original motion - I don’t know whether you have it yet - will take some time to get here. My proposal is that we stand over this item and we go to another item, as the chair and the mover of the motion harmonise their position. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are not harmonising any position. There is a position which has been requested for by hon. Nambooze and there is a position that has been recommended by the committee. The text of the original motion is in the report. They state both the text of the resolution and what they propose to amend. So, I think we can proceed. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I concede. 

Resolution 1

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clause 1 of the original proposed resolution is that, “Parliament urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually, to establish the causes and publish its findings.” 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee analysed that recommendation carefully and interacted with the Minister of Health and other stakeholders, and noted that what the motion was trying to propose to Government is already being carried out. So, the main issue was not about Government carrying out the audits, but the exact implementation of the audits, and making sure that they are implemented in all health units. So, there is already a policy. It was also very clear that maternal audits are very useful. Technically, we are supposed to have maternal and prenatal audits and reviews. 

The committee was of the view that the recommendation is rephrased as follows: “That Parliament tasks Government through the Ministry of Health to strictly enforce maternal and prenatal death audits and take action on the established causes.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that Parliament tasks Government through the Ministry of Health, to strictly enforce maternal death audits and take action on the established causes.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the amendments which were made, however, the major item here was about publishing the findings. I want it to be on record that maternal audits have been taking place in private hospitals and there is another audit, which has been going on since 2007, on the instruction of His Excellency the President, but these have nothing to do with the general audits we are demanding for and the publishing of findings. So, I would request that we add the issue of publishing the findings on the recommendations given by the committee.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, is there anything drastically wrong with this?

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, auditing is a technical concept and we have evaluated it. We have noted that whatever we are talking about is on paper as policy. The reports are published annually. The mischief is that this process has, in some places, not been carried out. You find that in some health units – because the process has about six steps - you must establish a committee; you must re-orient the committee, and the committee is of various groups; and then you must come out with findings; do a report – 
 
MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you chair of the committee. I would like to inform the chair that let the mover of the motion refer to the amendment to resolution No.6. I am sure the issue of publishing is catered for. Thank you.
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some additional information; that maternal death audits are actually carried out in some health facilities. What we need to do and recommend is that maternal death audits should be done in all health facilities. Because you will go to Mulago, in the department of obstetrics, every Monday, they sit to analyse the mothers who have died. But that kind of action should be done in all health facilities, possibly up to health centre III, so that every mother who dies is investigated; you do an audit and it’s documented. That is what we need to do. 

I see hon. Nambooze – is it in approval or – so, we should be emphatic that audits should be done in all health facilities. That is the amendment I wanted to add.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. Actually, the committee, the ministry, and everybody, agree with the recommendation, but according to our analysis, we thought that our recommendation was better than the first one, in terms of implementation, if you looked at the technical aspects. So, even if Parliament accepted the original version, it’s fine; but in the wisdom of the experts who interacted with the committee, and the analysis, the second version is better in terms of enforcement. But there is no contention, or rejection of the first version, but following our analysis and the advice from the experts, we felt that the second formulation was better for us to achieve results from that exercise.
 
I concur with hon. Nambooze on the recommendation that she gave, because first, it states the subject, which is maternal death. Second, it is measurable; because it indicates when audits must be conducted. Thirdly, it also provides a mechanism through which we can fast-track by publishing these findings so that the House and even all Ugandans can ably follow what is happening in the entire health sector in Uganda. Therefore, I think what the chairperson is insisting on is ambiguous because it is not measurable, and it is  about enforcement, which is quite different from what the honourable member suggested. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, maybe, we do not understand the concept of a maternal death audit. I agree with the committee because when you look at the original resolution, which urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually, it is as if the government will just do the audits every year, and yet a maternal death audit is done within 24 hours. What it means is that when a mother dies, within the next 24 hours, there must be a committee which sits to investigate and know why this mother has died. So, I think the committee’s version is an improvement from the original formulation, because hon. Nambooze’s statement seems to indicate that the ministry will wait for the year to end and then do the audit; but in the actual sense, an audit means that within 24 hours after a mother’s death, a committee must investigate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is it the reporting which should be done annually?

DR BARYOMUNSI: You could publish the report annually, but the audit is done immediately, and then at the end of the year, there is a report which documents the deaths which have occurred, and also the causes, but the audit is done within 24 hours. What we are saying is that it should be institutionalised   - to be done in all health facilities as a routine - and I think the spirit of the committee’s recommendation captures that, with a slight amendment, which I put that we should include; “all health facilities.” 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to give information to Dr Chris Baryomunsi, and actually remind the House that it is exactly what Dr Chris Baryomunsi is explaining, that this House voted funds for this financial year. We revised the maternal health road map; we put money into those maternal death audits as explained by Dr Chris Baryomunsi; and I thought that information would help the House to appreciate how to go forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, if the “annually” is about the publication of the result of the audit, can somebody improve on this to marry the two concepts?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I think you should put the question so that the matter is resolved and we vote it with amendments. The formulation will be made in consultation with the hon. Baryomunsi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what would we be voting on?

MR KYANJO: We would be agreeing on the version. Mr Speaker, there seems not to be any disagreement any more. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issues are, if I can summarise them: 
i.	Maternal death audits must take place as they always do within 24 hours;
ii.	That they must occur in all the health facilities in the country; and 
iii.	Reports about these should be published annually. 

Is that it?

DR LYOMOKI: I want to give guidance on that matter. There were two resolutions, Mr Speaker. Resolution No.6 is about the annual reports and debate within the same number of resolutions. There are two issues; maternal audits and reviews, technically taking place in all health facilities – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; I want you to help us move forward, hon. Lyomoki.

DR LYOMOKI: I am trying to connect you to resolution No.6. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We seem to be running around again. You are now suggesting that the aspect of annual reporting goes to resolution 6; and so, we should leave the first two aspects only, of audits taking place every 24 hours, and of every health centre, to pick up resolution number one? 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, some of us did not have the opportunity to be born in health centres. There are women who die outside health centres. Can we omit the words “health centres” and look at maternal death audits in the country because as I speak –(Interjections)– yes, Mr Speaker, there is a study that women visit health centres – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, what are you suggesting we do?

MR EKANYA: We omit the words “deaths in a health centre” and say, “death in the country.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, there should be a maternal death audit nationally?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with measurable elements, and if you simply opened it and someone died in some place in the bush, how would you audit that? So, we are going through what is established. We shouldn’t act as if we are not Parliament, really. If we find that there is necessity to include any element outside the established health institutions, then that would be another debate altogether. Otherwise, you will need to give guidance on this. We are dealing with measurable elements. So, I beg that my colleague rests his case –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to support hon. Kyanjo. We all live in this country and you cannot open up an investigation on a death that has not been reported to a health centre, and you definitely need the tools to do that investigation. That audit means that a doctor or a medical assistant is going to investigate the cause of the death. That is what in essence an audit means. You cannot tell us that a TBA or a midwife has the capacity to do the audit. I think as Parliament, we would really be asking for too much from the health department. So, I would like to propose, Mr Speaker, that we move forward with the original statement that you made. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, unfortunately that is not my area of specialisation, but I have been listening attentively and wondering whether we are accepting that we cannot control the deaths because I thought we should engage in stopping the maternal deaths; but in the last 10 minutes, we seemed to be saying that the deaths will be there, and we were just looking at the cause of death. So, I really need to be guided since this Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is for this resolution No.1 and there are others coming. For this, you are dealing with the issue of where death occurs, in case it occurs.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged. 

MS  ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with my colleagues, but really, I must drive this home. One of the problems we have in regard to maternal deaths, is people keeping women at home when they know they are due to deliver, and for us to task the health facility to look for lazy and irresponsible Ugandans at home is very bad. I think the political statement that must go out is that every woman must deliver under skilled care, in a health centre, and then we will be responsible for establishing why she died. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely. So, we will go by the two aspects, that maternal death audits must take place in all the health centres, correct? 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I beg the indulgence of colleagues. As a committee, we considered all the issues that are have arisen. 
 
If you compare resolutions 1 and 6, you will find that if you pass resolution 1 as provided by the committee, and resolution 6 as amended by the committee, all these issues are catered for. Because, when you are talking about audits, there are many mothers - actually about 50 percent - who die from home. And even the ones who die from the hospitals are majorly coming from a private unit, and go there late. 

So, the question was, that there is already an established concept called “maternal mortality audit,” which is known in the community and hospitals. Now, if you want the report to be debated, you cannot subject the “annual” to the audit and the spatial, whether it should be in the hospital or wherever. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have already agreed on that; the audit should not be annual. We said the audit should be done nationally, within 24 hours.  The specification is now being made that it should be in relation to health centres, because it is where the facilities for doing the audit of the people who die are.  

DR LYOMOKI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is the improvement that the committee had made. If you compare the first version - we can consider it, but we have to be – if you consider the first version, it has no element of taking action, but the committee version has the element of taking action. The first version has the element of having the maternal audit done once, annually; while the second improvement is that these audits should be done everywhere and on a case by case basis.  Then the report arising out of all these other actions that have taken place is the one referred to in resolution 6. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much Rt Hon. Speaker and my colleague for yielding the floor.  I am drawing your attention and indeed that of my colleagues to page 3 of the report, on the last paragraph, where you give the figure. You said that available statistics show that 58 percent of the deliveries in Uganda take place in homes. That actually means that in this resolution, you are talking about health centres, which cover only 42 percent. The majority are not covered. You go ahead and say that in Northern Uganda, it is 69 percent, while in Eastern Uganda it is 60 percent. Now, if we are limiting ourselves to the small groups, the problem is actually, more to do with people who are outside the health facilities because that is where the majority are. Our attention should relate to where the problem is most; but we are focusing on where the problem is less. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. That is exactly what the version of the committee is trying to cure, because if you look at the version of the committee, it is not talking about a health centre. It is talking about maternal health audits; wherever they occur, you do audits. Now, it is because we are mixing the issue of audits and the issue of the general report that will come out of the various audits.

DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you very much, hon. Lyomoki, for yielding the floor. I agree with the sentiments being raised. You see, there are three levels which explain why women die; what we call the three delays. The first delay, is that they delay in the home and the community before a decision is taken and they die there; the second delay, is the transport from home to reach a health facility; and the third delay, is within the health facility; because of the problems within that health centre.  

It is true that fewer women deliver in health facilities and that is where we can place direct responsibility on the health workers. So, I just wanted to propose an amendment; and also to answer hon. Otto, that 25 percent of the women get complications that can result into deaths whether they want it or not.  

I also want to propose an amendment to read as follows: “Parliament tasks Government through the Ministry of Health to strictly enforce maternal and prenatal death audits in all health facilities, and take action on established causes and put in place measures to enable auditing of maternal deaths that occur outside health centres.” So, we could task the government to put in place measures so that we will involve LCs and community leaders, so that if a woman dies in a community or LCI village, there must be a framework of how that audit can be done by the LC and community leaders. So, we strictly give the health workers a responsibility within a health centre, but also task Government to put in place measures to track the maternal deaths within communities.  That will accommodate the concerns. 

DR LYOMOKI:  Thank you very much Rt Hon. Speaker. I don’t have that version, but the amendment is fine, except that it would not be right to allow the words “in health centres.” The rest of the addition is okay. But if we say, “Maternal and   prenatal audits in health centres,” you will be leaving out the others who die at home.  That is why the committee would rather that we just refer to maternal death audit without specifically referring to the health centres. 

Now, the rest of the addition is okay, but that rephrase conditioning the audit to health centres is really very wrong, and that is the argument hon. Katuntu was bringing. So, the committee has catered for that and that is why we are not referring to the audit. If you look at the version of the committee, we are not saying the audit should be in the health centres; rather, we are saying that the government should be tasked to enforce; it is not even carrying out, but just enforcing, whether it is in the private or public units. 

Audits in private units are done by private people. In the community, it will be done by whoever, but the point here is, Government should have the responsibility to enforce. So, I would think that the amendment by Dr Baryomunsi is fine if we delete that addition that conditions the audit to the health centres. The rest is okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay now? 

MRS OGWAL:  Rt Hon. Speaker, I have been listening and I think I am getting more and more disorganised. Why? It is because the motion actually addresses the level of maternal mortality. Our concern about the high rate of mortality; and that is what we are addressing; that is what the motion is focusing on.  Now, when we come to this particular point, which has been discussed for almost 45 minutes now: Parliament urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually, and to establish their causes and what have you,  Mr Speaker, I am concerned; unless we urge Government to allow accessibility; that all women must deliver in a health facility. 

So, first and foremost, the government must establish facilities at the lowest level possible, so that at least every mother is accessible to a health facility. Then is when we can be talking meaningfully about the audit. That is how I am looking at it. So, can we first urge Government, to first establish a maternity health centre at every parish as a matter of policy, as the lowest that we can go. From there, we can then talk about auditing at a health centre. Otherwise, you are just talking, but practically, it will be very difficult. That is why I am saying, the more we discuss, 
the more I fail to follow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to move forward now. So, what is the final text of this particular resolution going to be? I do not have the original text because this thing of Parliament tasks Government - it is already part of the running provision of the bigger part. So, now we will be dealing with the specific parts. “Through the Ministry of Health, to strictly enforce maternal death audits, and take action on established causes.” Are we agreed on this now with the explanations of the doctors and everything? So, resolution number one is, therefore, adopted as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 2

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proposal for resolution number two? The original text says, “That Government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal - Oh, that is three; sorry. “That Government develops a policy of compensation of the families of all women who die as a result of maternal related causes while in Government facilities.”

Mr Chairperson, what were you proposing?

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the committee considered that resolution and noted the fact that compensation is not an end in itself, but a means to an end, which is trying to make sure that we do not have senseless deaths, and if deaths occur, there could be avenues for redress.

So, the committee was of the view that if that resolution is carried the way it is, one is that it will be difficult to implement, because it is talking about compensation and yet we have noted that the main reason why we are having maternal deaths is because of inadequate resources to implement measures that can redress maternal mortality. We do not have health workers, logistics and other commodities, and also, we do not have other facilities like ambulances that can be able to assist mothers for referral.

So, the committee had two positions. One is that the recommendation be dropped and we emphasise other measures that can be able to improve the situation. We had another resolution that could take care of the situation that there are some mothers who die and who should not have died because of either incompetence or -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, why don’t you just read the text of the recommendation? I see it on page four.

DR LYOMOKI: So, the resolution, therefore, be dropped or in the alternative in (b) rephrase as follows: “That Government takes all measures to prevent maternal deaths.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is that? On page four? I am looking at page four; recommendation on this particular resolution, which is in italics on page four. Hon. Lyomoki, if we are to move together, I think you should hold the report that we have. That is the only way we can move together. If you are reading from some other text, we will not move together.

MR LYOMOKI: Yes, but Mr Speaker, I have noted that. Okay, the recommendation on page four. The committee recommends that matters of compensation should be left within the boundaries of the existing legal framework as this would adequately cover cases in Government and private health units, as well as by traditional birth attendants.

However, Parliament should urge Government to implement its commitment of allocating 15 percent of the total National Budget to the Health Sector as per the Abuja Declaration. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to disagree with the recommendation of the committee. First of all we should find out why these people lose their lives. They lose lives simply because of the negligence of the medical personnel and lack of facilities in hospitals.

There is a case in mind, which occurred in Mbale hospital. A teacher by the name of Namboozo, went to the hospital and she was left to die because of the negligence of medical personnel. I lost my niece. She gave birth and she bled to death.

Dr Baryomunsi here, a commissioner, can tell this House that stopping bleeding of a lady who has delivered is a very simple thing, and before you administer any birth, you must prepare that injection to stop bleeding.

We are losing these women because of negligence of medical personnel and lack of equipment in the hospitals. Therefore, Government must take responsibility. I was looking at the Constitution of Uganda. The State shall protect women and their rights, taking into account the unique status and natural maternal functions in society. Therefore, Government should not run away from responsibility -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that point has been belaboured for days. The issue here is, maternal deaths occur in the villages, in private health centres, in private clinics and also in Government hospitals and health facilities. The point they are making is that there are enough legal mechanisms to deal with that; to seek compensation where the case arises. That is what the recommendation is saying. So, the committee is now saying, we should go beyond that because the framework of the law is sufficient to handle each case where negligence has occurred, and has resulted into death like the case of your niece.

So, now they are saying, let us move a step forward, and upscale to accommodate the Abuja Declaration in terms of our budgetary things. So, belabouring this point of death occurring and negligence, and all these things, is already captured and there is recourse for that kind of negligence within the legal framework.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are talking about policy and law. The specific case, which my colleague has cited, is actually covered by the law. If any of your relatives dies in a Government facility as a result of negligence of the staff of that health facility then Government
 - it is not even about policy, but by law – is obliged to compensate the families. It is there already. If she dies when she is in a private clinic as a result of negligence of the health staff in that private clinic, then the owner or the operator of that private health facility is obliged by the law to compensate the families. 

So, I would request my colleagues, yes, Government has no option. Actually, Government has no option. It is by law obliged to compensate; that is if the staff has acted unprofessionally. They have no option. So, really, I would agree with the committee’s recommendation that there is enough legal framework. What we have got to do I think, is what they are covering in the second leg of their recommendation; to have the budget increased to a bigger percentage to make sure that there are more facilities in the health centres to help in healthy delivery of children.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not believe there is enough legal framework to cover death through negligence or mothers losing their lives or their children in the law as hon. Katuntu said. I am not a lawyer, but my assertion is, in our area, northern Uganda, where nearly 70 percent of women give birth in villages, no law covers them. They die at will; there is no law which covers them. The law is not adequate. I want the law to expand. If that law exists, it must be expanded to include any death of a Ugandan woman, who dies while giving birth, whether in the villages or in a designated hospital. This is what I want us to put in place. Thank you.

4.14
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, for us to move forward, we should go to page 4 and adopt that statement made by the committee that, Parliament should urge Government to implement its commitment of allocating 15 percent of the total national budget to the health sector as per the Abuja Declaration, and we move forward. I think we should just adopt that recommendation. Thank you.

4.15
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An additional point to the amendment, which I wish to put forward about the enforcement of the existing laws; because many of these things do exist in the policy framework, but we have poor implementation of these policies.

Then, we have to carry out awareness for our local communities because as we look at the mothers, it is us to tell them where to go and have safe delivery, but many of them do not know about this. So, to me, we have to go and raise awareness so that they deliver at the health units, which are safer. Thank you, Mr Speaker and the august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members the proposal -

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I stand here to concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question to resolution number two as amended by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 3

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proposed resolution No.3. “The government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health models”.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee was informed by the Ministry of Health that the curriculum is already being revised and the revision process is expected to be completed by 2013. The ministries of Health and Education have a joint committee that is going to address the training issues of all health workers through the reform that is already being envisaged. So, because of that, it was the view of the committee that that resolution is redundant and, therefore, it should be dropped.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, there is no discrepancy. Government does appreciate that there is need and as they have said, they have not finished. I do not see any harm in adopting this prayer as a way to strengthen our case.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I concede; except what we would do is to amend by saying, “Government should expedite”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, “Government expedites the reform of the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health models”. Is that okay?

MR KATUNTU: Now that the process is on and we are urging Government to expedite the process, I think Parliament needs to fast-track this process. So, I was suggesting that every six months, the Ministry of Health should report to Parliament the progress of the process.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We concede on that because it assists to improve on the whole resolution. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the text therefore, is that, “The government expedites the reform of the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health models and update Parliament every six months on the progress”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 4

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proposed resolution number four; the original text is that, “Government recentralises recruitment of medical personnel and addresses the critical shortage of medical professionals, particularly through recruitment at a minimum of more 2000 well-trained, motivated, equitably deployed midwives in order to reverse the current rate of deaths resulting from preventable maternal related causes”.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee supports that recommendation. 

The committee noted that similar recommendations have been made in the committee for the last five years, that Government recentralises the health services.

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Health had developed a paper, which it had presented to Cabinet and that in line with that proposal, Cabinet had instituted a joint consultation committee comprising of the relevant ministries. 

The committee noted that in various meetings, we got views from the Ministry of Health that that process was not moving very fast. The committee was of the view that the recommendation is fine, but Government should report to Parliament on the status of implementation of this recentralisation, because we did not want to just continue resolving that there should be recentralisation, because we have done the same thing for the last five years. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, continue status of explanation of this resolution; that means, we adopt resolution 4. Is that what you are saying?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, we adopt the resolution and then add on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we add an additional rider on this resolution, and add a second part?

DR LYOMOKI: It was the view of the committee that if within two months, that has not taken place, then the committee is going to present a Private Member’s Bill on that situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay; we adopt resolution number four as proposed by hon. Nambooze. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposed addition by the committee that Government reports to Parliament on the status of the implementation of this resolution within two months from this date, and presents to Parliament its commitment and plans for recruitment of at least 5,000 midwives by 2015 – I put the question that that forms part of the resolution.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 5

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We go to the original resolution number five; it will be re-numbered accordingly. That, “Government empowers the community and enhances their capacity to get involved in the fight against maternal and infant mortality, by requiring that all Local Council Is in the country, do maintain a register of pregnant women in the village indicating the outcome of the pregnancy, and make returns to the sub-county quarterly, which in turn should compile half-yearly reports to be transmitted to the district.” 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee noted that the ministry is implementing the Village Health Teams concept/strategy through the VHTs, though the VHTs have not yet been rolled out to all districts due to resource constraints. 

The VHTs carry out a number of health care activities, including the fight against maternal and infant mortality, and reports indicate that in the districts where the VHTs are functional, great improvements have been registered. The VHT registers have a provision for registration of all pregnancies and their outcomes. They provide sensitisation about maternal health services, and maintain a register with vital statistics that include pregnant women in the villages, indicating the outcome of the pregnancy.

What is needed, therefore, according to the committee, is for this VHT concept be rolled out to all districts and to strengthen them, such that they can adequately provide health promotion services at village level. 

The Local Council Is should be left to provide advocacy and awareness about maternal health services. Therefore, the committee recommended that that resolution be amended. That Government rolls out village health teams to all districts and empowers them to enhance their capacity in the fight against maternal and infant mortality.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the purpose for which we made this prayer can be captured properly under the statistics and data which was given by the committee on page 3 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you in support of this amendment or not?

MS NAMBOOZE: I want to request that we maintain the prayer because LCs are an already established organ of Government and when you look at the Local Government Act, under section 22, the LCs are going to receive payment for their work. So, what we want is to get clear data from the villages. To get issues of maternal health discussed at the sub-county level and at the district level, before we get the national report. This will assist us as a country, to dig out information about maternal health right from the villages. 

And the issue of the village health teams, which I strongly support – at the moment, they have not yet been rolled out and most villages, especially in the towns, do not yet have these committees. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, is there any harm in both of them standing?

DR LYOMOKI: We think they could work together. The only contradiction we saw is that we would have two parallel reporting agencies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the minister?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with the Chair of the Social Services Committee, because about two thirds of the country is now covered with Village Health Teams (VHT). These are people who are doing voluntary work and they have been sensitised on what they do. Where they are active, they have done a very good job.

In October, on the safe motherhood day, the Ministry of Health launched the Community-Based Maternal Registration of pregnant mothers by VHTs. So, you can note that we are already doing something in the direction of working with the VHTs in this aspect.

Involving LC Is would be a very good idea, but you know that they are politicians. At times we have had challenges in implementation of Government programs just because the politicians always look for votes; and they do not want to put pressure on the community to do work that is beneficial for the community. 

I can give an example of pit latrines. Even in some of these villages where we have bye-laws passed by the sub-counties it is still very difficult for the politicians - the councillors and LCIs - to implement this very important aspect of sanitation and hygiene. For that matter, we feel it is better to use the VHTs rather than the LCs who are politicians.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I want to support the argument of the honourable minister, because all of you are aware that currently, we do not have LC Is. And you know that Government has really ignored LCs. So, tasking them with a very important job of registering mothers will not be very easy.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to pray to my chair and the committee members that increasing stakeholder involvement does us no harm. This House has been considering making the LC system more functional and I think that if we ride on the earlier proposals of getting the records that are outside our health systems, then the LC system would be more helpful.

Therefore, my position on this matter would be that we use the VHTs with the Ministry of Health. And this part of the recommendation No.5 would form an additional amendment to the earlier proposals of the LCs. We could actually have both.

MS AURU: Mr Speaker, I want to support the recommendation by the committee. But we should be able to give a timeframe within which the Ministry of Health should rollout the VHTs. They are trained and they are doing a lot of work. So, I would like to say that the Government rolls out the village 
health teams in all districts, within a timeframe of six months. At least by 2012, all the districts - because he has already said that two-thirds of the districts in Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 2012 is only two weeks away.

MS AURU: But during the budget time, the ministry should be able to budget for them.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. There is information I want to give this House. I can tell you, if a pregnant mother did not support an LC I chairperson during elections – if it happens, and you find that this pregnant mother or pregnant mothers in this village did not support the LC I in the previous elections, the possibility of the LC I not even visiting the pregnant mother is going to be very high. That is why we are saying, we leave this to the village health teams, empower them, and they do this work. 

The village health teams have been given some bicycles to do the work and move around. The moment you start putting in an LC I, he will also ask for a bicycle. The moment he does not get it, there is going to be a very big conflict. I was of the view that empowering village health teams, who are supposed to be doing this specific work, will give us the results. I thank you so much. Only, I beg you.

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am not seeing why we are pulling the rope over these two issues. The VHTs can be there as well as the LCs. LC Is are administrators at the village level. What responsibility are we giving them if that is the lowest level of our governance? How are we involving them in governance in this country? Are we going to have separate bodies, with each one working in isolation? How are they going to know what is happening? They should be part of this system. They should be held responsible as the lowest level of governance in Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any harm in having these two provisions? (Interjections) Honourable minister, really – because you see, we cannot sit here and just talk.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL)(Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, when I went over there, I consulted with my PS, who assured me that the entire country, come next financial year, will be covered with VHTs. So, the fear that the LC Is should be included just because the entire country has not been covered, should not arise. We are going to cover the entire country, come next financial year. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I would like to know from the honourable minister whether these glorified village health teams are paid. Are they paid or they are simply volunteers? I met a team when we were visiting Ntungamo sometime last month. I talked to them and they were crying about how they are not being “facilitated” - that is the famous word - and therefore, you cannot rely on them. But the LC I chairman is a person who is part of Government. Before their bicycles were swallowed, they would be having bicycles now and they can at least provide those statistics now, which can easily be picked. So, what is the problem with a chairman keeping records of children who have been born in his village, those who have died, and the women who are pregnant? What is wrong with that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not intend to take any more time on this resolution. It is not now; where we are going –

I put the question to the proposal by hon. Nambooze.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question to the proposal by the committee that this forms part of the resolutions.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Resolution 6

“The Government compiles and tables to Parliament annual reports on the status of maternal health in the country with a full national maternal mortality audit report, and that Parliament shall dedicate a particular day to debate this report and propose the way forward.” Mr Chairman -

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you Mr Speaker. The committee accepts that recommendation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Resolution 7

“That Government provides free HIV testing services and free ARVs for every HIV positive woman in the reproductive age, as a strategy to secure an AIDS-free generation, and also scales up the accessibility of family planning services throughout the country.”Mr Chairman 
 
DR LYOMOKI: Thank you -(Interjections)- very much, Mr Speaker. The committee had concerns about that recommendation because it has the idea of providing free ARVs for every HIV+ woman in the reproductive age. Already, we have established guidelines for determination to put an HIV+ individual on ARVs, based on their medical condition, their CD4 count, cost-effectiveness, sustainability and risk of possible resistance to drugs.  There exist interventions for HIV+ expectant mothers, who are put on prophylaxis during pregnancy and the breast-feeding period, as a strategy to save the unborn child from contracting HIV/AIDS. 

The Ministry of Health has planned to equip all health centre IVs with CD4 counting machines to widen the provision of this service. In addition, Government has a new strategy code-named the Accelerated PMTC Strategy that aims at eliminating maternal and paediatric HIV/AIDS. 

Therefore, the committee was of the view that, that recommendation or resolution be rephrased as follows. “That Government should urgently implement the Accelerated PMTC Strategy in order to secure an AIDS-free generation and scale up accessibility to a complete package of quality reproductive health services that include: Ante-natal care, delivery care, post-natal care, family planning services as well as access to comprehensive and basic emergency obstetric services throughout the country.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you agreeable to that, hon. Nambooze?
 
MRS BAKIREKE: I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You concede? 

I put the question.

(Question put, and agreed to.)
 
Resolution 8

“Government convenes a national convention for the dominant voices to reconcile their stand on family planning with a view of harmonising family planning messages.” Mr Chairman

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee supports the resolution, but adds the following. “In addition, Government should ensure that quality family planning services are accessible to all women throughout Uganda in order to eliminate the unmet need for family planning.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, when we include the amendment, then it defeats the purpose of the convention. This is because, the very reason why we are praying that people should come together and agree on the messages is so that they can agree on what they want. But if you put this one, it means you are just calling them to give them already determined instructions. I suggest that we leave the prayer as it was originally, and that this resolution should come from the convention itself. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the original text of the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is all. Thank you, hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, for a fight that has gone this far. Let us move to the next item.


MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman of the committee, you have only 15 minutes to present your report. Yes, guidance from hon. Abdu Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The country is grappling with a very big problem regarding the economy. This particular report is, therefore, very crucial to all of us. But looking at the time now, it is 20 minutes to 5 O’clock. I am worried and, therefore, seeking your guidance on whether this House will have the opportunity to exhaustively discuss this very import report within two hours, because we still have other business on the Order Paper, Mr Speaker. 

I would like to make a suggestion, if that is okay with you, Mr Speaker and colleagues, to have this report debated maybe in the next sitting other than today. My view is that we don’t have the time to seriously consider this report and do justice to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Abdu Katuntu, but I still think that the committee should present its report. I will make a decision after that presentation. Chairperson, please proceed.

4.45
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Birahwa Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the State of the Economy Report. But before I do that, I want to thank you for giving us this opportunity to present our report. I also would like to remind the Members that this committee has the responsibility of making quarterly reports. As it was said yesterday by hon. Sam Otada, many times, the Budget Office, the Research Department of Parliament and the committee, get this report, but we rarely get the opportunity to discuss the concerns of the committee.

So, we realised that we are beginning to get into problems. For example, the early warnings that the committee made in 2009, about the secondary effects of the global financial crisis, was not heeded to, yet it happened. On that basis, I am happy that this time round the concerns to give the report a lot of attention is coming from the Members. On behalf of the committee I appreciate that.

Mr Speaker, on page 1, you will realise that we have indicated that the mandate of the committee arises from Article 90 of our Constitution, and consequently Rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Pursuant to the above, the Standing Committee on National Economy exercised its oversight duties on the performance of the national economy by carrying out consultative stakeholders’ meetings with selected key players in the economy.

On the request of Parliament, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and that of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, presented statements to this House on the depreciation of Uganda’s shilling at that time vis-a-avis the United States Dollar, and on the sit-down strike by traders at that time.

The statements were accordingly referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Rule 152 (1) and (2)(a) and (c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee considered and scrutinised the statements presented to Parliament by the honourable ministers and I now beg to report.

The overall objective of this report is to document critical information on the current performance of the economy. In particular, this report is intended to inform Parliament on the current state of the economy in order to make a case to Government as to why the current economic challenges facing the country need to be addressed with more commitment in order for the country to recover from this harsh economic situation in both the medium and long terms.

Specific Objectives

The specific objectives of the committee are as follows:

1.	To assess the current economic situation in 	 the country;
2.	To enhance the engagement between Parliament and key stakeholders in the economy; and
3.	To assess the concerns of the various stakeholders in the economy and come up with recommendations to address the way forward.

Methodology

In the methodology, as I have already mentioned, the committee reviewed some literature from the Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda and UBoS. We also held consultative meetings with the following stakeholders: Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Uganda, the Shadow Minister of Finance, Private Sector Foundation, Uganda Revenue Authority, Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Kampala City Traders Association, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration, and Uganda Real Estate Association. The consultations will continue.

Mr Speaker, I now don’t know how to proceed. Since Members now have copies, and considering the timeframe given. I am at a loss on what to summarise and what not to.

Anyway, when you go to page 2, 4.1, you will see the analysis on the regional and Uganda domestic economy in the global and regional perspectives. In there, we looked at the world economic outlook, which projected growth to be reducing during these operations both in the region – East African Community - and the figures are there. That table 1 shows the GDP inflation and exchange rates trends for the East African economies. 

From your copies, you will see the downward revisions in the growth rate of the major economies, which meant that there would be possible implications on Uganda, if the downturn continued. Specifically, tourism and high income products in the horticulture, fish and coffee markets would be affected.

A number of indicators of the global economy are being affected by the events in both the Euro zone and the United States. You know what is happening with the PIGS – Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain.

There are significant financial sector-driven concerns in the region resulting into instabilities of the Euro and the dollar respectively. These developments have significantly had knock-on effects on the East African regional currencies as indicated in the table.
On page 4, we looked at the price movements, and the table below shows the annual rates for 
headline and core inflation between July 2006 and October 2011. Colleagues, initially we were ready with the early version of the report - as early as August - but because of the budget process in Parliament, we could not move. 

We are looking at how Electricity, Fuel and Utilities (EFU) have responded in that time. On page 5, we go ahead to look at the annual food price inflation. Colleagues, you are aware that since the beginning of this year, we have had high rates of food. We have analysed food vis-à-vis other non-food price movers. We are saying that price increments were also registered in some other non-food components. 

On page 6, on money supply, over the review period, notwithstanding the expansionary monetary policy to stimulate subdued demand in the economy in the financial year 2009/2010, there has been a year-on-year increase in currency in circulation from below 2 percent in November 2009, to over 30 percent for the period between December 2010, and February 2011, as illustrated in the figure below. 

Although food inflation contributed to the high headline inflation, growth in currency in circulation to an extent, accounts for the current inflation and the depreciated shilling. And this you will analyse as per the table below. 

The committee is saying, the increase in currency in circulation stems from increase in net domestic credit, which significantly grew over the period from September 2010, peaking at Ushs 6,860 billion in March 2011. 

Despite efforts to restrict credit by the Central Bank, domestic credit has continued to increase, amounting to Ushs 7,674 billion by September 2011, largely driven by Government borrowing. It is clearly evident that over the last 12 months from September 2010, the position of Government in the banking system has not been favourable at all. Government borrowing from the banking system amounting to Ushs 1,000 billion in March 2011, drove domestic credit upwards, although as of September 2011, net borrowing by Government had slightly lowered to Ushs 656.54 billion. 

The situation is not different when it comes to borrowing by the private sector. In order to sustain the high cost of living in the economy, credit to the private sector has smoothly increased despite efforts by the Central Bank policy rates. 

On exchange rates; over the reporting period, July 2010 – October 2011, the shilling continued to depreciate as can be seen in the next figure 4 below. The Uganda shilling depreciated by 24.28 percent or from Ushs 2,257.29 against the US dollar as at July 2010. So, you can see a shift from Ushs 2,257 to about Ushs 2,805. 

On an annual basis, the shilling registered a depreciation of 23.87 percent, and no wonder the bank rate today is also 23 percent.

The depreciation of the shilling is attributed to the weak performance of Uganda’s exports due to subdued demand in the midst of the global recession, you are aware of what is currently happening in Europe, plus a stagnation of other sources of foreign exchange due to the global financial crisis. 

On the other hand, given the high demand for the dollar, importers seem to have decided to hold onto their dollars for their near term imports. So, there is that go-slow, as Bank of Uganda was also analysing; people seem to be holding onto their money. But of course colleagues, you are aware of the other intervention of a government bond, which is attracting some offshore investment; they are finding that there is free money they can make in Uganda in this period in time. 

On the domestic scene, there is a strong dollar demand from the manufacturing, energy and telecommunication sectors as well as commercial banks, to cover their short dollar positions, and speculative behaviour by market players in the face of the rising inflation and uncertainty arising from the February elections, contributed to the depreciation of the exchange rate. In addition, increase in money supply arising from growth in real currency in circulation, also accounts for the volatility in the exchange rate. 

Mr Speaker and Colleagues, you will appreciate that every election period, investors develop a cold; some run back; some keep their money. That was very bad timing with the drought we had faced and other challenges, thus complicating the situation further. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

MR MUKITALE: I will not go into the details. I will skip and go straight to the committee observations and recommendations, but the point I was making here is that our foreign reserves had reduced. Those of you who had read in the media, the Governor was saying, the only way Government can use its monetary tool better is to have at least a six-months reserve. Government reserves have increased to about 5.3 months, but we need to keep reserves as high as possible so that they have some latitude to oscillate. 

Page 9 talks about interest rate movements. I wish I had time to talk about some of this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do the important ones. 

MR MUKITALE: Page 11, downstream petroleum supply and distribution sub-sector. This is critical. The committee is saying that the sector has experienced enormous turbulence in the last quarter of financial year 2010/2011. The situation deteriorated further in the first quarter of financial year 2011/2012. Colleagues, you are aware that volatility of crude oil per barrel was even worsened by what happened in the North Africa region, including Libya and the Middle East, who are the major producers. 

You will read about GDP growth. 

On page 12, we have table 4, which gives the sectoral real GDP growth rates. But we must add here that the fish sector has suffered; most factories have closed, and even those which are operating are operating under capacity. You are aware about the recent move by the Ministry of Agriculture in putting order in the fisheries sector. We would want interventions we had earlier, like the accord between 1980 and 1985, and the rural farmers’ scheme, around 1990, which had good interventions for the fisheries sector. Currently, there seems to be no stimulus coming in that direction.

On page 13, you have the GDP growth table. On page 14 – how I wish I had time to talk about this. Page 14; Government fiscal operations. It talks about revenues and grants. Mr Speaker and Colleagues, at the beginning of next year, the committee would want to come and make another 
report, specifically on debt sustainability. 

On borrowing, we thank Government that we are now able to raise most of our money, close to 74 percent, but we would want to even analyse that over 25 percent that we are borrowing, and we also want to thank the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, for what they brought up the other day, that borrowing is one thing and implementation is another. Always, when we bring a report on a loan, we have been urging the sectoral committees to follow up the implementations, and that is what is lacking, and we need to strengthen these committees, because taking that responsibility from the committees would be a problem. After we get the loan, the same money is appropriated in the budget. So, it is the sectoral committee, which should be following up this loan, and it is not even necessary to create another committee to follow up the implementation.

Fiscal deficit, on page 15; again as I have said, we shall have a comprehensive separate report to talk about sustainability, but I will interest Members to look at the debt strategy. Last time when we were looking at the budget support loan, I did lay on Table and requested the Ministry of Finance to give us the performance of loans. You received the yellow books, and I would like you to look at them so that when we are discussing that report, we have more information, and that is part of page 16 running through to page 17. 

I have already mentioned that the elections affected a reduction of the direct foreign investment. Let me rush through page 18 on the observations and recommendations, and Mr Speaker, allow me to read these ones. 

The fiscal discipline 

i) 	The committee has observed that the economy experienced massive liquidity injections arising from excessive Government expenditure in the run up to the general elections, which partly contributed to the current inflation in the country. This consumptive expenditure curtailed allocation of resources to more productive investments of the country. On the other hand, the weakening of the shilling, increase in fuel prices and drop in food supplies are also factors responsible for the current increase in the general price levels in the country. 

Whereas Government operated within the budgeted funds, the priorities were re-allocated and that is what we are bringing to the attention of this Parliament. The committee further noted that the Uganda current tax to GDP ratio is 13.12 percent, much lower than the reported average of 16 to 18 percent for developing countries or 18 to 20 percent for sub-Saharan countries. Taxes contribute to less than 60 percent of the total Government expenditure requirements. Much of the tax yield comes from discretionary tax measures by Government rather than from natural growth in GDP. Only a small bracket of the formal and registered firms is financing nearly half of the national budget. The economy’s limited tax performance must improve. So, colleagues, we must support efforts to broaden the tax base of this country. 

The committee has also observed that the weakening of the shilling to the current record levels is on account of deteriorating current accounts. In the face of weak export performance, this has resulted into increased costs for imported inputs and consumer products. The committee also observed that the Uganda foreign exchange reserve had steadily declined. The declining foreign exchange undermined the Bank of Uganda capacity to absorb the volatility shocks in the foreign exchange market. I had already explained that the more they have, the more the capacity they have to play about on how much they can  withdraw from the public, and if we reduce the amount they have, then we limit them because the policy they have is that of a monetary policy. We, as Parliament and Government, can use the fiscal policy because we do appropriate and control Government spending. 

In order to enhance fiscal contraction, the committee recommends that Government should observe the highest level of fiscal discipline by sticking to the efficiency measures and spending priorities proposed in the budget. In addition, rationalising supplementary requests as emergencies for public administration must be avoided. So, the committee is against unnecessary non-catastrophic supplementary spending. 

Inflation targeting

It has been observed that as a result of prevailing inflation, the Central Bank has increased the bank rate from 14 to 23 percent, in a bid to control the excessive aggregate demand in the economy, which will dampen inflationary pressures. However, this restrictive monetary policy may not be conducive for private sector investment in the medium to long-term, since commercial banks have responded by increasing the lending rates since interest on lending is the main driver of the bank earning. In addition, banks have responded by adjusting their contractual obligations on lending, with their customers, to cater for the increased bank rates. The committee, therefore, recommends that in order for the private sector to access affordable credit, in order to be consistent with the practice in the region, the government must seriously consider adjusting to more distributive ways of taxing at a flat rate, as opposed to the current form of charging stamp duty on loan security value of 0.5 percent. Secondly, withholding tax of 6 percent charged on banks’ capital requirement deposited with the Central Bank, should be scrapped since it will only increase the cost of borrowing by the private sector. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, given that the monetary policy actions have profound effects on the lives of ordinary citizens, the committee recommends that Government strengthens its communication mechanisms to sensitise the public on monetary policy choices. In addition, the supervisory capacity of the Central Bank should go beyond ensuring financial soundness of a banking system to also protect consumers through public awareness on the effect of monetary policies on financial services. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, when we talk about consumer protection, when our civil servants like the Police officers, our teachers and the nurses, who are paid little money, go for loans, there is a lot of literature behind the agreement, which they don’t care to read, and in there is a kill. The Minister of Finance is saying, even MPs. What that means is that we have to rely on the Bank of Uganda as a Government bank, while doing their supervisory work, to make sure that on behalf of the public, they are mindful of protecting the consumers and making sure that the citizens of this country are not duped by this silent small font details in the loan agreement. 

Related to this, I must add that we even went as far as asking the Governor why the commercial banks have slapped an increment on the lending rate in already existing loans. The governor says it is not the practise; salary loans have a fixed interest rate because their earnings are fixed. So, we have asked the governor at a later stage to tell us how far. So, the bank right now is following up different banks to find out how many banks have slapped an extra charge on our teachers, our policemen, civil servants, when actually –(Laughter)– the contract they have with their employers cannot increase and we expect at a later stage – we have requested for an instrument from the Bank of Uganda as an instruction, and even the Shadow Minister was very emphatic about this when he came back to our committee; that we want feedback from the Bank of Uganda on how far they are going to stop this exploitation of our people. 

Liberalisation Policy

The committee observed that while the liberalisation policy has served Uganda relatively well for the past 20 years in some areas, by kick-starting and invigorating the economy by the state divesting itself from what it could not handle, it has now largely served its purpose and needs to be revisited. The over reliance on market - we have been discussing cotton here for about 10 days - forces has stifled policy innovation and effective regulation and controls, and has limited the range of policies the government would use to address its challenges. That is why some Members yesterday were asking whether CDO is for ginners and investors, and not for the public; basically that is what it is because the policy is protecting the investors while leaving the farmers vulnerable to getting the lowest in terms of the farm-gate rates. 

As a country, we have been programmed to a few predetermined actions and yet our circumstances have vastly changed and continue to change rapidly, hence requiring innovative interventions like all other countries have done. Colleagues, what this volatility in the global economy means is that we have to be more inward looking. You cannot be inward looking by just depending on the private sector. Government must be able to come in here and there, and that is what is happening in Europe and America.

The committee further observed that official and private capital flows presented a challenge to the conduct of monetary policies. Such flows represent a potential source of instability in the nominal exchange rates, and all monetary policy budgets, by generating potentially large changes in the liquidity condition in both directions.  A natural question is, whether there is a case for imposing controls specifically on the short-run speculative flows. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the government should revisit and reconsider its role in the state control and regulation of key strategic economic sectors by the private sector, such as the oil and gas, energy, transport infrastructure, financial services and agriculture.  When the times get rough, the multinational companies tend to go back to their capitals, and if you the bigger part of the banking sector - foreign-owned, telecom foreign-owned, oil and gas foreign-owned, energy, what happens when we have the turbulences? That is why we think that Government should move very fast. And that is why we welcome the PPP policy and look forward to the fast-tracking of the law, because those who come should be regulated within the PPP arrangement.

This will address concerns of high energy tariffs, energy losses, constant blackouts, inefficient movement of goods and services, uncontrolled foreign exchange outflows - you know we have a very liberalised forex market - hoarding and adulteration of goods and fuel products, illegal aliens working - and that is why we met the Citizenship and Immigration Directorate to understand who is responsible for all these aliens working where they should not be working - and low agricultural productivity. 

Land Reform

The committee observed that though the process of developing a National Land Policy was initiated seven years ago, the process has moved at a snail’s speed and has dragged on, yet farmers need a policy that guarantees security of tenure, ownership and user rights, to enable them put land to effective and productive use. This has not only undermined the agricultural sector, but also national development efforts.   

The committee recommends that Government should seriously carry out comprehensive land reforms that will free land for large scale agricultural production and other investments. In addition to land reforms, Government must develop a policy on compensation to urgently address the issue of land compensation across all sectors of Government as it affects the effective implementation of public works. I have said here many times that every time Government has a project, whether it is a pipeline, electricity transmission line or a road, we have challenges of compensation. Even for the Bujagali Power to bring the lines to Kawanda has not been easy. Last time we made a report here as to how areas that were supposed to be compensated just 20 million are demanding billions. 

This should be complemented with ensuring that a comprehensive land use plan with a special provision for agriculture is in place, together with ensuring that physical planning issues are funded as well. Colleagues, you are aware that the Eighth Parliament did pass a law making the whole country a planning area, but whether it is being done is another matter to which the answer is contrary.  So, we should really find money for the land sector.

We should provide leadership and support Government in the land sector, including taxing idle land if that is what is going to –(Interjections)- I don’t know whether I am talking to landlords or not, but I am saying that we should provide leadership and put the land to production. Rt Hon. Speaker, let me leave the controversy and move to the next item.   

Agricultural productivity challenges 

The committee has seriously noted that the current volatility in food prices indicates a structural breakdown of the economy. This is attributed to among others, poor infrastructure, low productivity due to climate change effects, loss of soil fertility, which has been worsened by the use of poor quality seeds and adulterated chemicals - you heard in the cotton sector again, how we relegated the seeds to ginners who even crush them for other uses – and the lack of regulation and enforcement of standards in the agro inputs market. There is a growing concern of counterfeit agricultural inputs. Farmers are buying seeds which do not germinate; even chemical control is still a problem.
The committee recommends that Government should expedite the enactment of the National Fertiliser Policy to among others consider subsidies on fertilisers as a matter of priority. In addition, Government must also develop regulations to guide implementation of the Crop Protection Act, and I am happy that it is among the Acts that were brought here. 

Furthermore, Government must improve on the capacity of Uganda National Bureau of Standards to curb the fake agricultural inputs plus chemical adulterators in order to help farmers.

The government should also restock stock farms for demonstration, and the Cooperative Movement needs to be revived in order to enhance production, especially for export. The only way we can protect a farmer on the ground is to save them from the middlemen, which is through the Cooperative Movement.  

Despite the government’s efforts to provide long-term agricultural finance, the committee has observed that the current financial infrastructure does not take into account farmers’ credit needs. Farmers still face high interest and transaction costs, hence delays in accessing agricultural credit, and also lack access to long-term finance in agricultural input and value-addition technologies. Farmers are borrowing from microfinance institutions, which expect payment every two weeks; farmers are borrowing from commercial banks as if the gestation period is of two weeks or one month. So, we need to seriously think about a specific bank for the agricultural sector to give them long-term financing.


The committee recommends that Government should institutionalise an agricultural bank for farmers. In addition, Government should set up a special fund to support small medium enterprises engaged in agro processing.

The committee last year visited a lot of technologies being generated by our research stations, but the effort to replicate them is lacking. A lot of infrastructure sold in Namalere, Kawanda has good technologies, as well as in Namulonge, but the replication is lacking and until we do that, we have a problem.

The committee has observed that the government has not put much effort in promoting organic export in the country. The government lacks a policy to promote organic products. In addition, lack of research in organic products is slowly promoting the introduction of bio technologically enhanced products - GMOs as they are popularly known - which are not competitive in the country export market.

The committee recommends that in order to enhance growth and competitiveness of the organic sector, the government should fast-track the enactment of the policy, but also of the Act.

On Energy, it has been noted that in addition to the low levels of energy consumption in the country, the prevailing high energy tariffs cannot sustain the demand for power in the economy. The current power generation mix is currently dominated by thermal, which is expensive, hence accounting for high tariffs.

The committee recommends that Government should consider investing in alternative sources of power in order to sustain the current power shortages in the country. The government should seriously consider developing a policy on solar energy use to mitigate the challenges.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I think just read the recommendations now.

MR MUKITALE: Yes. But on solar specifically, aware of the cost of power and the little we generate, the committee is of the view that we should remove taxes on solar equipment so that as many people as possible at household level, use solar and leave the little generated power for industries and other bigger installations. If we can subsidise solar instead of subsidising the thermal generators and others -

On tourism, the committee has observed that the sector is clogged with parallel government agencies doing the same job in the name of promoting marketing in tourism. Among these are UWEC, UEPB, UWA and Tourist Board. This continues to pose a danger of diluting the marketing and promotional efforts at the international level with consequent wastage of valuable resources.

The other day the President said people are talking of only mountain gorillas, but what of other beauties of this country? So, you start talking of gorillas as if there are no other attractions in the country, and he was addressing the technocrats.

The committee has noted that despite efforts by Government to support the tourism potential in Uganda, there are a number of challenges, which still suffocate the steady growth of the sector. These include among others, lack of operational tourism policy to guide developments in the sector. Uganda’s image on the international tourist market is bad; poor road network - the tourist circuit has been talked about for long - inadequate electricity supply, and Internet connectivity challenges to major tourist destinations in the country, and the 17 percent VAT levy on safaris to Uganda, deters the promotion of tourism.

In addition, the committee noted that a mismatch in the laws and regulations of the tourism sectors in the East African Community is not helping much in revamping tourism in this country. So, we need to also look at the integration as we go into the East African Market. How do we harmonise the laws?

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to improve on the competitiveness of the sector, the government should fast-track the development of a tourism policy and regulations, to fully implement the Act so that the sector is able to realise its potential.

In addition, the sector should be restructured with the objective of identifying a lead agency in marketing of the country tourism sector, to avoid duplication of activities and resource wastage.

The committee further recommends that under the PPP approach, in a bid to rebrand and market the country image, Government should urgently consider attaining a national carrier to fly a national flag with a view of boosting the Tourism Sector.

In addition, Government should provide incentives to the population to encourage domestic tourism. The committee also recommends that in order to address the mismatch in the legal regime within member states in the East African region, governing the Tourism industry, Government should take steps to harmonise the laws in the region.

Private sector competitiveness, as I come close to the conclusion. [HON. EKANYA: “Read the recommendations.”] Shadow Minister of Finance, I thought you would appreciate for the report to be -

The committee observed that a good business environment alone cannot deliver or improve the country’s competitiveness. The country’s competitiveness has continued to deteriorate largely due to insufficient progress made to address the education and skills challenges, coupled with poor work ethics, institutional weaknesses and infrastructure bottlenecks, lack of innovation and inadequacy of technology readiness.

You have heard that you need so many Ugandans to do what one Kenyan can do. You have heard that debate. And colleagues, you must be aware that we dropped eight places in the global competitiveness; so, we really need to work very hard in skilling this country to increase productivity.

The committee recommends that Government should consider allocating more resources to support technical education in order to address the technical skills gap, lack of innovation and technology readiness.

Regarding the committee, which was doing other work on behalf of this Parliament on the loan on technical schools, which was almost being rejected last time, we have agreed with the Minister of Education that we should be informed on the re-skilling Uganda program. As we find money for Universal ‘A’ Level, we want to see how much more business agriculture - vocational business training can be done and I want -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, please read the recommendations or I will ask you to stop there.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The legal and regulatory framework competitiveness. Allow me to read -

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Recommendations.

MR MUKITAKLE: Yes. Mr Speaker, I thought this is very critical. In order to boost competitiveness, the committee urges Parliament to urgently pass the following Bills, which are already with the House. The Geographical Bill, the Companies Bill, the Insolvency Bill, the Industrial Properties Bill, Uganda National Bureau of Standards Bill, the Chattel Securities Bill, and the Meteorological Authority Bill.

In addition, the committee recommends that Government should urgently bring to the House the following Bills; the Capital Markets Amendment Bill, the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, Free Zones Bill, the Investment Code Bill, the Accountants Bill, the Public-Private Sector Bill.

This is very critical because the country can only do better if the legal framework is okay. 

Transport infrastructure 

The committee recommends that Government - colleagues, you have the report; you will read it. I have been guided by the Speaker to only read the recommendations. The committee recommends that Government should urgently address the challenges of high transport costs. More efforts should be directed towards cost-effective and reliable transport links in the country. The fast-tracking of the development of rail, water and air transport will lessen the dependency on road transport and promote increased investment and access to markets. As a landlocked country, it only makes sense that we should be having very good rail transport.

The committee also recommends that Government fully refurbishes the Jinja fuel storage tanks in order to check fuel shocks, which also adversely affect transportation costs. Government should work expeditiously on the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline project, and construction of other regional fuel storage tanks, in order to fore-guard the economy from the often turbulent effects of oil shocks. Furthermore, utmost transparency is needed in the management of the petroleum, oil and gas sector, which is fast growing, because that will provide the solution finally.

On the integration of the East African Community, the committee recommends that the implication of the East African Community integration framework in legal trade and tax regimes should be mainstreamed in Government planning and its implementation. For instance, tax policy plus trade and non-trade barriers arising from the East African Community regional integration must be addressed by Government.

In conclusion, the current economic challenges in regard to high inflation and depreciation of exchange rates, cannot be over emphasised. It has been observed that the prevailing level of inflation is generally attributed to a combination of factors, which are both external and domestic. The economy experienced massive liquidity injections arising from excessive Government expenditure in the run up to the general elections.

On the other hand, the weakening of the shilling, the global fuel prices, the drop in food crop supplies because of the drought, are also factors responsible for the current increase in the general price levels in the economy.

In respect to the foregoing, Government should observe the highest level of fiscal discipline by sticking to the efficiency measures proposed in the budget speech, in the medium to long terms. Government should endeavour to address the supply side constraints by urgently addressing the need for domestic regulation and control, and comprehensive land reforms to boost agricultural production, productivity and private sector competitiveness. 

Government needs to pay particular attention to the need to boost our tourism as we diversify the economy, in order to re-brand the country and also ensure that the state explores all the necessary means to acquire a national carrier. 

Government should also restock stock farms for demonstration, and cooperative movements should be revived in order to enhance production, especially for exports as well as fast-tracking the energy, roads and railways infrastructure development. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I want to sincerely thank the Budget Office of Parliament for helping us get this data, and I want on behalf of my Members, to thank you very much for this report. I hope this report will be given enough time to be debated if this economy - like Parliament can play its role in guiding Government on what is coming. I once again thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Since you have not been able to go to the text of the report, I would ask you to lay a copy of the report on the Table for the Hansard to capture the full text.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I now lay on Table a true record of the report. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. Thank you very much, honourable member. The issues are important, they are detailed, they are critical and they require time for us to go through and really give it a comprehensive coverage. In the time we have now, we cannot accommodate this, and also, the next item which is quite critical on the budget. So, I am going by the recommendation raised earlier by hon. Katuntu that we could defer debate on this particular item and then get a proper time to deal with it in better details. If the House agrees, then that is the way we move. Correct?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO BORROW UA 46.0 MILLION AND ANOTHER UA 10.0 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND/BANK (ADFB) AND THE NIGERIA TRUST FUND (NTF) RESPECTIVELY, FOR FINANCING THE IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY AT MULAGO HOSPITAL AND IN THE CITY OF KAMPALA


5.37
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to carry out a noble duty of presenting to this Parliament a request by Government of Uganda to borrow UA 46 million and an additional UA 10 million, which together comes to UA 56 million from the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund, respectively.

These monies are for financing the improvement of the health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and in the city of Kampala. In the interest of time, I will not take you into the nitty-gritty of the aspects of this report, but at least, given the sensitivity of issues pertaining to loan matters, I would request that you allow me take you through some of the sensitive issues of this report.

With the methods of work, this committee held many meetings with various stakeholders like the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Health and the management of Mulago Hospital. The committee further studied and made references to various documents and among them, we had the appraisal documents, we had the minister’s brief on the loan requests, and the draft loan financing agreements. 

With me, is a copy of the presentation that was made by the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital, because as we shall move on, you will realise that Members made onsite visits to some of the implementation sites.

I also have on me the project profiles in the health sector for financial year 2011/2012. All these documents at an appropriate time will be laid on Table.

The committee also undertook tours to the proposed implementation sites of the projects, that is, Mulago Hospital, Kiruddu Health Centre III in Makindye Division, Kawempe Health Centre IV and Komamboga Health Centre III in Kawempe Division, where the project activities will be undertaken.

The committee also undertook an oversight visit to South Western Uganda to the implementation sites of the related projects financed by the bank. 

On page 2, we have the background, and in this one, the country has continued to register impressive economic growth, and is also making significant progress to reduce poverty and to reach the health Millennium Development Goals. To this, the country requires investments to address the requirements of modernising and expanding its health services, infrastructure and systems, to sustain the MDGs gains.

Health is an essential pre-requisite as well as an outcome of sound development policies. Without good health, individuals, families, communities and nations, cannot hope to achieve their social and economic goals. 

On page 3, the last statement in the first paragraph; the capacities of the Ministry of Health and Kampala Capital City Authority need to be reinforced to adequately respond to the demand for these services in Kampala. 

On the other hand, in paragraph 2, the lack of a functional referral system with an integrated ambulance system in the city of Kampala, is also negatively impacting on the Government’s commitment to guarantee an effective quantum of health care services. 

Issue No.4, project linkages and objectives; this project fits well within the national development plan of 2010/2015. The project also strategically complements current efforts from other development partners in the areas of capacity development, public-private partnerships and health infrastructure expansion.

On page 4 we have the project objectives. The project will redirect the high demand for basic primary health care that currently congests service delivery at Mulago Hospital by supporting the establishment of two new health facilities in the divisions of Makindye and Kawempe, and a referral system. This will improve service delivery at Mulago Hospital and in the city of Kampala through improved access to quality and publicly funded social services supported by the referral hospital. 

The objective of the project is intended to specifically decongest service delivery at Mulago National Referral Hospital. Two, the financing gap in the nursing sector will enhance Uganda’s capacity to attain the objectives of improving quality and publicly funded health services supported by the referral system.

Three, this project is intended to establish on public-private partnership basis, an ambulance system for patient referral as a follow up within Kampala; and four, to, strengthen the managerial capacity and medical education and research of Mulago Hospital and Makerere College of Health Sciences, respectively.

Mr Speaker, on page 6 we have the project components. The components are three:

i)	Capacity development and system strengthening;
ii)	Revitalising the referral and counter referral systems; and 
iii)	Improving specialised health facilities in Kampala.

Mr Speaker, the first component will consume $6.2 million. The second component, on page 6, that is, revitalising referral and counter referral systems, will consume approximately $3.31 million. And component No.3, which is expected to consume the biggest chunk of this funding, will consume $78.42 million. 

But since this component is consuming much of the funding, allow me to briefly go through some of the issues in this component. This component will support technical assistance – to increase efficiency and effectiveness. It will also support extensive rehabilitation and modernisation of the lower Mulago building, which has a bed capacity of 860, including complete replacement of water, electricity, sewage, mechanical systems, re-organising the space for increased efficiency, and rehabilitation of all wards, including the private wing. 

This component will also support the construction of two general referral hospitals in Kawempe and Makindye divisions of greater Kampala. The two referral hospitals are expected to have a capacity of 170 beds each. 

These divisional referral hospitals will also have adequate provisions for 24 hour emergency and pharmacy services. 

On page 7, we have the project costs and financing. As earlier mentioned, the total cost of the funding will be UA 56 million, which is the equivalent of Shs 201.41 billion. Down on page 7, we have a summarised table which depicts the project cost estimates by component. We have capacity development and systems strengthening as a component; we have revitalising referral services. Then the expanded and improved specialised health facilities in Kampala, which gives us the total basic cost. When you add the incidental costs to this, it gives us the total project cost which is UA 56 million as indicated.

On page 8, we have table 2, which gives us the sources of financing; there are finances from ADB Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund. In table 3, we have the project costs by category of expenditure. This talks of the category of civil works, goods, services and operating costs, which gives us the total basic cost of UA 45.78 million. When you add it to the physical contingencies, the price escalation - in this case, we are taking into account the inflationary factor – if you add on the project preparation facility fund; it gives us the project total cost of the UA 56 million. 

Table 4 depicts the expenditure schedule by component for the ADB and the National Trust Fund Financing. This give us a breakdown of all the funding within the five-year duration from 2010-2015.

On page 9, we have the terms and conditions of financing. As earlier intimated to you, we have two loans. There is one from the African Development Bank with a loan amount of UA 46 million, and a maturity period of 50 years, including 10 years of grace and a service charge of 0.5 per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances.

We have the funding from the Nigerian Trust Fund with a loan amount of UA 10 million and a maturity period of 20 years, not 25. This was an error. It is 20 years, including 7 years, not 10 years of grace period, plus a service charge of 0.75 per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances.

All these terms have been considered and they fall within the Government debt strategy. In B, we have the conditions, but these revolve around issues of legality, availability of land, issues of environment concerns and provisions of the specified accounts. I will not dwell much on them because you have a copy each.

But most importantly, on page 10, condition 6 is submission of written confirmation that the Ministry of Health will manage the general hospitals at Kiruddu and Kawempe on a self-accounting basis, in line with the national budget framework. Government of Uganda will recruit and deploy appropriate medical, nursing administrative and maintenance staff to the facility.

Another condition is that Government will allocate non-wage budget allocations beginning Financial Year 2012/13 for the two new general hospitals. 

On the issue of project implementation, the project is expected to use the country’s own system with the permanent secretary as the accounting officer. The permanent secretary is expected to designate a coordinator for the day-to-day implementation of this project, but overall supervision of this project is expected to be done by the Ministry of Health’s steering committee, which is, of course, going to be chaired by the permanent secretary. 

Effective implementation of the project will require sound collaborative arrangements to advance the principles such as enhancing the functional relationship between the health and education sectors. 

On page 11, issue number 10 is to do with sustainability. The project is part of a broader Government of Uganda commitment to improve public sector services and infrastructure in Kampala, whose oversight now falls under the Central Government with the adaption of the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010, by the Uganda Parliament. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The high cost investments under the project will be at Mulago Hospital, Kawempe and general referral hospitals that will have separate budget votes in the Ministry of Health Medium Term Expenditure Framework. In addition, each of these hospitals will operate private wings with full-cost recovery to augment the official budget allocations in line with Government policy. 

Lastly, on observations and recommendations, the committee noted – that is on page 12 – that the government is seeking partial funding from two financiers. That is, the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund. This financing model should be avoided. In future financing arrangements, the committee recommends that Government desists from partial loans and goes for total project funding from one source in order to get a better bargaining package. 

Two, the committee observed that the level of dilapidation of the existing infrastructure at Mulago Hospital at all levels, was shocking. Most buildings were undergoing renovation, reconstruction or extension, while some facilities were inadequate and others completely missing.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and the management of Mulago Hospital, should expeditiously develop a comprehensive development plan for Mulago Hospital so that the envisaged public-private partnership in health service delivery is also planned with the hospital. The Ministry of Health and the management of Mulago Hospital should also ensure that hospital land is free from all encumbrances, especially encroachers. 

The committee also recommends that the management of Kampala City Council Authority, expeditiously ensures that the land on which the new proposed referral hospitals are to be built, is free from all encumbrances. 

The committee also observed that in order to decongest Mulago Hospital, the project will support construction of two general referral hospitals in Kawempe and Makindye divisions. However, whereas the proposed hospital construction site for Makindye Division, that is Kiruddu Health Centre III was satisfactory, the hospital construction site of Kawempe was not. The current Kawempe Health Centre IV is not satisfactory due to the limited available land to accommodate the proposed new hospital structure. The committee observed that there was more land available at Komamboga Health Centre III of five acres, compared to the less than one acre that was available at Kawempe Health Centre IV.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health shifts the new project referral hospital from the proposed construction site of Kawempe Health Centre IV to Komamboga Health Centre III. 

The Ministry of Health should also mobilise more resources for rehabilitation of Kawempe Health Centre IV as its current state is equally inadequate to cater for the challenges of primary health care services.

In four, the committee observed that under the project, the Ministry of Health will establish a referral system and pilot an ambulance service for effective continuum of care and follow-up within the Kampala Metropolitan area. The ambulance service will be managed through a public-private partnership arrangement, but the country currently, does not have an adapted PPP policy that can serve to enhance the capacity of Government to successfully manage the risks associated with the growing number and value of public-private partnerships.
 
To this, the committee recommends that the government expeditiously submits the Public-Private Partnership Bill to Parliament for its subsequent scrutiny in order to timely enact it into law. 

The committee also observed the good quality of civil works for the construction of health facilities under the support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project that is exhibited by both Excel Insurance Company and Multiplex. To this one, you remember, I informed this House that the committee made field visits to similar projects that are ongoing. 

In six, the committee further observed that despite the good quality of civil works which was exhibited, there were significant delays specifically in the implementation of the civil works for the construction of Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital and the health centres e.g. Rwashamaire Health Centre IV in Ntungamo, Nyamuyanja and Rwekubo health centre IVs, and Endizi Health Centre III in Isingiro district, among others. Such delays in the implementation of key project activities affected the timely achievement of the intended project goals. The delays were partly attributed to delays in the procurement process, and to the slow pace of works by the contractors, especially in the case of Multiplex Limited, who are engaged on many other sites. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health mobilises more funds to ensure that all other regions are planned and catered for to get  a semblance of the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health should constantly review the operational processes of construction projects in the sector, to ensure that such delays are avoided in the implementation of projects of this nature. The practice of allocating so many construction sites to one contractor should also be avoided in future. 

The committee further observed that most of the established vacancies in the health units were not filled, hence leading to a high patient to medical worker ratio. The mostly affected staffing positions were medical doctors, clinical officers, enrolled midwives and laboratory staff. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should expedite the process of recruitment to fill vacant posts in all health facilities, in order to improve the patient to medical worker ratio.

The lack of staff accommodation and poor remuneration, which are major factors in attracting and retaining medical personnel, should also be addressed as a matter of urgency.

The committee also observed that the financial impact of the project on Government’s health spending will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of renovated facilities, repairs and replacement of medical equipment. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should scale up its commitment to increase health budget financing if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project’s lifespan by ensuring that the recurrent costs due to the project are timely absorbed into the national budget.

In conclusion, the committee appreciates and has noted the government’s efforts to address health systems’ bottlenecks and improve effectiveness of the health sector. By improving the functionality of the Kampala health system, including Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital, Government’s capacity to provide referral and hospital best services in Kampala will be strengthened.

The project is expected to benefit the national population, currently estimated at 31.8 million people, taking into consideration that Mulago Hospital is the main national referral and teaching hospital. But the more immediate project beneficiaries are an estimated 3 million people, the majority of whom are women and children under 15 years. This comprises residents of the city of Kampala and a significant proportion of the inhabitants in bordering districts of Wakiso, Mukono, Luwero, Nakaseke, Mpigi and Mityana, which use the city’s services. The overall beneficiary population is expected to rapidly increase due to a combination of a high urbanisation rate and a higher than world average national fertility rate, resulting in a population growth of 3.4 percent with estimates as high as 4.1 percent for the Kampala Metropolitan Area. Consequently, the beneficiary population at project completion is projected at 3.7 million.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House, to approve the government request to borrow UA 46 million and another UA 10 million from the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund respectively, in order to finance the improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the rest of Kampala.

Mr Speaker, before I leave the Floor, allow me to lay on Table, the documents that I earlier on referred to. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which documents are those, honourable member? Please lay them one by one.

MR MBADADHI: Mr Speaker, we have the project appraisal report on the improvement of health services at Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital, and the city of Kampala. It is dated 23 June 2011. I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such.

MR MBADADHI: I also beg to lay two other documents – the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank. It is a draft. The other documents are; a copy of the brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow UA 46 million and another UA 10 million from the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund respectively, for financing the improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the city of Kampala; a copy of project profiles in the health sector for financial year 2011/2012; and a copy of the presentation that was made by the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital to the Members of Parliament when they visited the facility.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it dated?

MR MBADADHI: Yes, it is dated 7 December, 2011. Lastly, I beg to lay on Table, the minutes of the meetings of the Parliamentary Committee on National Economy held on 22 November 2011, in Committee Room 220 at Parliamentary House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture those documents as presented. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Currently, the Committee on Social Services is conducting an inquiry at Mulago Hospital. Because of the glaring mismanagement of previous loans, when they appeared before us during the time we were handling the budget, they presented many inconsistencies. They tried to account for the same items that arose out of a World Bank loan for purchasing equipment and other materials. During that time, we witnessed very glaring corruption.

Right now, I have a petition that was referred to me by the Speaker with a title: “Mulago needs liberation.” It was signed by a person called Fred Kunya who has been ringing me and actually, we were supposed to meet him in the committee. This petition was written to the President and other people before being referred to us here.

The issue is that even the expansion of Mulago Hospital is uncalled for. His argument is that this is just a scheme for people to eat money. The particular question I am asking is: Mulago interfaced with the Committee on National Economy but ignored our committee because they know that we have a lot of information. Now, as Members of Parliament, are we passing loans for people to just use the money as citizens die, or to improve delivery of services? 

Secondly, how can we have this loan scrutinised before we pass it? If we just pass it before the Committee of Social Services even takes the opportunity to look at it and determine whether it will be used properly, we shall be legitimising glaring corruption.

The other question I would like to raise is; how do we build a culture within our Parliament to ensure that before loans are passed, we subject them to very serious scrutiny by the relevant committees working with the Committee of National Economy, so that we do not just keep passing them? If we do not do that we will always end up on post-partum, which comes two years later, after people have misused the money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under our Rules of Procedure, which committee is mandated to look at loans? Isn’t it the Committee on National Economy? And isn’t this the committee that has reported now?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that is so, then we are procedurally on the right track. Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you are very right that the Committee on National Economy under Rule 152(2) in particular, plays the following functions – to examine and monitor the state of the economy; to examine and make recommendations on all loan agreements. That is okay and we agree with you on that.

However, our problem is that as a sessional committee, after they have scrutinised what it is as of now, the whole business of monitoring this will come back to us from next year, two years or even ten years from now. Therefore, it would be prudent for us to be involved. This is because we are the reservoir for all the issues that take place in the health sector.

Secondly, if we borrow from what has been going on in this House – in the recent past, the Committee of National Economy scrutinised the loan for the Civil Service or something like that, and we passed it. But the sessional committees have had a lot of problems pursuing the undertakings that Government made. That is why it would be a gentleman’s position that we agree to the involvement. You know that giving social services is just an opportunity. Given that we are doing an inquiry into money issues at Mulago, if we took off one week or just three days to partner with the Committee on National Economy, maybe the position given to this House will be enhanced. And given the fact that this is a loan agreement, probably, we can make some additional recommendations on how it will be used. Anyway, that is up to the chair’s discretion.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have got two reports this afternoon from the same committee; one from the Committee on National Economy dated October, and the other one which is just being read now, dated December. 

Before we discuss this particular loan before us, I want you to address page 6 of the report that we looked at about 40 minutes ago; The report of the Committee on National Economy on the Economic Situation in Uganda - page 6. I want to read the last paragraph, which is very crucial for us as Parliament of Uganda: “The increase in currency in circulation stems from increase in net domestic credit, which significantly grew over the period from September 2010, peaking at Shs 6,860 billion in March 2011.” I continue, “Despite efforts to restrict credit by the Central Bank, domestic credit has continued to increase amounting to Shs 7,674.36 billion by September 2011, largely driven...” this is the point I want us to take note of, “...largely driven by Government borrowing. It is clearly evident that over the last 12 months from September 2010, the position of Government in the banking system has not been favourable at all.”

Can we go ahead when we know that the situation in our economy is deteriorating, because of excessive borrowing? Can we at least exercise some control and scrutiny so that we understand the impact of borrowing to the totality of the situation in our economy?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I need to guide you on this. I think what you have read is about domestic borrowing. It does not correlate very much with what we are discussing at the moment. Let us move with the subject before us. 

If there are any more procedural points, I can take them and then I make a ruling on the procedure.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, through further scrutiny by Parliament, on the question of borrowing, I am rising on a point of procedure pursuant to Rule 21 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and I beg to read it verbatim: “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.” There are no short-cuts in borrowing. When you commit a country like Uganda to debt, you have an obligation to pay and that obligation is also shared by the generation to come. In light of that, can we proceed in passing this loan when it is obvious we lack a quorum, and can we let the debate to continue when we know we will not raise the quorum?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a matter of quorum has been raised, as it is under our rules. I will ask the bells to ring and we convene in 15 minutes. House is suspended. 

(The House was suspended at 6.16 p.m.)

(On resumption at 6.35 p.m, the Deputy Speaker presiding _)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, for the Members to make sure that we do not succeed, they simply ran away. I do not know whether we can be able to proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had important business to transact. The parliamentary calendar dictates what we should go today after the session. I am constrained. I will not be able to do anything else, but to send the House on recess. This House stands adjourned. All pending business will be revived when Parliament resumes. House stands adjourned until 7th February, next year. 

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 February 2012.)





