Tuesday 11th December, 2001

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m  in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in  the Chair)

The House was called to order.

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I was expecting communication from the Chair on certain issues. Not withstanding the absence of communication from the Chair, through you, Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Government, not withstanding the conspicuous absence of the Leader of the Government Business and the Minister for the Presidency. The clarification I am seeking from the Government is on two very urgent and very disturbing statements issued by two Members of the Cabinet; one by the Vice President, and two, by the Minister for the Presidency.  

The two statements, Mr. Speaker, concern our freedom of speech.  I was very perturbed to hear from the Government and more so from the Vice President who at that time was acting President making a statement of the Cabinet that the public should desist from creating, abetting or encouraging a debate on a matter of succession, on a matter of change of system of governance arising from the statements issued in public by three or more senior Cabinet Ministers.  Mr. Speaker, no sooner had that statement been made than another brief came from the Minister of the Presidency in his weekly Press briefing to the effect that, Members of this House shall be facilitated in the forthcoming LC elections to seek out certain candidates that shall be supported by the Government in their election efforts.

I wanted to know from the Government where this money is coming from, and I do understand that under the Movement system of Government we are all equal, and we fight elections on individual basis. Since when did the Movement become a political party to start supporting specific candidates in elections, whether parliamentary or local councils? The worst part of it which caused me concern is the lack of direction on the part of the Government and much more so by the Movement on how the Government, how members of public and how Members of Parliament can discuss matters of serious national importance.  Mr. Speaker, it disturbs me to learn and hear that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it a contribution, a question of procedure or what?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am requesting through you the Government to clarify on these issues I am mentioning because they impinge and infringe my right of freedom of expression. It is also causing confusion in our debates here, when a whole Minister, a whole Vice President in her capacity as acting President starts directing Members of the Cabinet that do not say this, do not do that. Equally so, Mr. Speaker, how come now that the Movement has started selecting candidates who shall contest elections when I assume that the electoral law is very clear on the matter?  When I see a civil servant shouting - I am referring to people like Ofwono Opondo talking on behalf of the Movement disputing what the Minister has said - I begin to wonder where the Movement is leading us.  Mr. Speaker, through you, can the Government tell us where we are going?

THE SPEAKER: Well, these questions are directed to the Minister in charge of the Presidency and to the Vice President, and maybe, the Leader of Government Business; but unfortunately, none of these are here. And I do not think really the Ministers who are here are in position to make a response to what you have noted.  Since it is on record, I think attention will be drawn to the Ministers concerned so that an appropriate answer can be made.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MOVEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is in the name of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs –(Interruption).

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I note with great concern again without informing the office of the Clerk that Ministers are absent and yet this Order Paper was circulated more than three hours ago! Why are they doing this, why are they insulting the Chair, why are they insulting this House?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is as I said. I know they were listed here to move the First Reading of these Bills but they are not here. I cannot answer for them.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS)(Mr. Henry Obbo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Movement (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read the First Time.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The Minister stood up to read the Bill for the First Time, is it in order for him to read things which are not available?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I understand, hon. Members, that copies of these Bills were given to you.  Okay you move again.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS)(Mr. Henry Obbo): Mr. Speaker, The Movement (Amendment) Bill, 2001 is here and I lay it on the Table –(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee for consideration.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr. Henry Obbo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has been committed to the appropriate Committee for consideration.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2001 be read for the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of Parliament.

MR.LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is not my intention to derail the procedure of Parliament, but I am rising on a point of procedure in regard to The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2001.  

I would like to be assured that the Bill that has been tabled specifically and will seriously be discussed in this Parliament. It has been abandoned for the last four times, and we looked like we were being fooled by the Executive.  I want assurance before we can proceed seriously to sanction the order under which we are moving.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Bill has had its First Reading and therefore, the Bill is before the House. As to what happens here is entirely your business. If you want to fully debate this Bill, you will be accorded every opportunity to do so. You do not need any assurance from outside the House about that.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill 2001 be read for the First Time.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of Parliament to consider and then make a report to Parliament. Apparently, all these Bills are going to one Committee, namely the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janet Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, my apologies to you for being late, but I will catch up.  

Of recent, there have been comments in the print and electronic media, and in corridors of various offices about the IGG’s action to stop the Electoral Commission from having local council ballot papers printed by Lethotech, a South African firm. 

It is true that the IGG stopped the Electoral Commission from awarding the tender to Lethotech. The details of the case will not be given, because the case is still under investigation by the IGG.  

The Electoral Commission, however, went ahead to award the tender to Lethotech in order to avoid a constitutional crisis, given that sub-county, town and municipal division elections must be held by 4th January 2002. If we did not have the ballot papers on time, then that would mean that we would have to extend the lifetime of the local councils, and that would have called for a constitutional amendment. We thought it was not prudent to amend the Constitution on administrative matters.

On the issue of using photographic voter cards for the election of LC III chairpersons and councilors, this will not be possible. The project needs more licenses to increase the only two search workstations now in place to be able to search for duplicates in the entire population of the photos, which now stand at 8.2 million. And each photo has to be searched against 8.2 million photos in order to get the duplicate.  

Initially, the Electoral Commission had requested for 70 licenses. These are for the computer software. But we were advised by tendering advisers to Government that two search workstations would be enough if the Commission had 90 workdays. I do not have these days at hand, so we cannot do a duplicate analysis in order to compare the photos or match them in order to have the photo and the photographic card ready for LC III elections. But we have secured the needed licenses, and for the election of LC V chairpersons and councilors, the photographic voter card will be ready and the register will have a voter’s photo on it.  That is in February.

Under those circumstances, the Electoral Commission had decided that during the display period, the electorate will check for their names using counterfoils, which were given to them during the fresh registration exercise.  

Colleagues, those of you who went for registration, you remember that there was a form and your bio-data was entered on that form.  This form is the one that we use on the computer to get the text into the entire system.  But at the bottom of the form, you were given a counterfoil that would identify you as a voter. 

I want to urge you to first mobilize yourselves to look for these receipts, if I may call them receipts, and then also mobilize our voters, because that is what we are going to use. These will be checked against the name in the register, and those who will be on the register will be allowed to vote. There will be verification teams at all polling stations for those who will have lost their counterfoils. Polling day will be announced by the Electoral Commission at an appropriate time; that is not my mandate.

Besides the delay in releasing project funds to the Electoral Commission under a law, the Electoral Commission had another serious internal problem of both incompetent and negative officers handling the project, which caused the Electoral Commission to lose three weeks leading to crisis management of the register production process.  The Electoral Commission had no option but to cause investigations to be conducted, and the preliminary findings zeroed on three officers who had to be suspended in order for the process of producing the register on time to be a success.  These officers are: Mr. Timothy Wakabi, head of the Data Processing Department; Mr. Elly Sebyatike, senior election officer from the same department; and lastly, Mr. Sulaiman Omita, the senior election official in the same department. Investigations continue.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I want to make an earnest appeal to all of you to assist the Electoral Commission in mobilizing your constituents to trace their counter-folios, which will be used at the polling day and also to make them vigilant during the display period which runs from December 14th to December 24th, 2001.  

During this display period, they should check for spelling mistakes of names, report the dead, and check for those who registered but are not on the register. And they should report to the display officers any illegal registered voters on the register.  Thank you for your kind attention and support.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance from the Chair.  When a Minister makes a statement to the House and there are certain inaccuracies, and yet you are not allowed to debate it, how do you go about it? Can I seek clarification?

THE SPEAKER: I think this statement by the Minister is under rule 37 of our Rules of Procedure. Therefore, if in the statement made by the Minister, there is a matter that is not clear to you, you may be free to put a question to the Minister for clarification. If there is anything that is not clear to you in the statement made by the Minister, you can invoke this provision and seek clarification. 

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Upon your advice and guidance, I would like to put to the hon. Minister a question.

Madam Minister, when you say the matter is being investigated by the IGG and therefore we cannot look into it, IGG investigating is not equivalent to the court proceeding which is privileged.  IGG investigations are not privileged at all. It is a public affair, we are entitled to ask questions and we should ask.  This matter that the hon. Minister has given a statement about is a serious matter of corruption, fraud and should be subjected to debate in this House.

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is the question?

MR. AWORI: The questions is, why is the hon. Minister putting the IGG’s investigation under the same category as if it was under jurisdictions of the courts proceedings?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the Minister’s statement has nothing to do with the IGG.  I do not think the Minister of Constitution Affairs is the one to answer for deeds of the IGG. But I think she only said that IGG had stopped the award of a tender for purposes of producing the ballot papers, and when they balanced the stopping of the award and the awarding of the tender, the other would have a constitutional implication.  So, they decided to proceed with the award of a tender; meanwhile, the IGG can go on with his investigations.  I think that is what she said.  She was not saying anything about the IGG’s report, but she is answering for a commission which falls under her portfolio.  There is nothing about IGG.

MR. SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask Madam Minister, why up to now the grandsons of the soil who took part in this exercise have not yet been paid up to now?  They did a wonderful job but up to now nothing has come forth. Thank you very much.

MR. OGOLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   The question on photo registration of voters by the Electoral Commission has bothered me for sometime; and if you may recall, Mr. Speaker, I did raise this matter before, especially in relationship with the constitutional provisions which require that citizens of this country should be registered, and that registration should take place within the portfolio of the Ministry of Internal Affairs through the Immigration Board. 

Now, the Electoral Commission is photo registering people as voters without caring as to whether these people being photo registered are citizens or not.  This matter may complicate the registration of citizens. If a non-citizen is smuggled into this registration by the Electoral Commission, how do you later on remove him when he has even voted already and he has got this card? He will claim he is a citizen!  So, my question is, is the hon. Minister satisfied that the role of the Electoral Commission is proper at this stage before the citizens of this country have been duly registered?  Thank, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, I can help here because there is a legal position on the matter.  The Electoral Commission is set up by the Constitution itself, even the Immigration Board which you are talking about is also mentioned by the Constitution. So, there are two provisions: one dealing with the registration of citizens and another dealing with the functions of the Electoral Commission.

Now, it seems you are putting importance to the one for registering the citizens and your thinking is that, that one of the Electoral Commission is a minor provision to that of the registration of citizens. But the Court of Appeal says, you cannot say, this provision is superior to the other.  So, what is being done now by the Electoral Commission is to carry out its function.  They are just simply registering voters.  It may be true that some non-citizens may be registered; there is no guarantee that they cannot, but that will be a different matter. But the Electoral Commission is just carrying out its functions without caring what another body is doing.  That is why the registration is okay in as far as the Constitution is concerned.  This case was decided recently as the case which we were using and we have used it.

MR. SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to ask the hon. Minister, because I heard her say that the election of LC.111 councilors and chairpersons of divisions are supposed to be held before 4th January. Mr. Speaker, there is a display exercise which she said will commence on 14th of this month, and is supposed to last 21 days.  So, after 21 days, I think we shall be remaining with very few days to the deadline, that is 4th January.  It is my humble request – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, please switch off your mobile phones.

MR. SSEBAGALA:  It is my humble request, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister should really, maybe, inform or should request the Electoral Commission, because as you are aware that these people were nominated some three weeks ago, and indeed the pressure is too much.  Elections have been commercialised and they do not know when elections are going to be held, and there is a lot of pressure on them.  So, it is my humble appeal that at least, let us in two weeks or one week time get to know the real date when these elections are going to be held, so that they can spend well knowing that they are spending within a given period.  So it is better for them to know; if I am to spend, I must spend, and indeed elections are going to be held within two or three weeks.  The Kakuyeges are very costly for them.  So it is better to let them know.

Secondly, the Minister talked about the Counterfoils or the receipts. Indeed many voters claim that they do not know where these receipts were kept.  It is my humble request that in case someone appears on the register, and he does not have this receipt or he misplaced it; it will be really polite enough to let these people on the register to vote without the other receipts.  I thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Is the hon. Minister of Justice aware that the elections she is talking about, are going to be based on what is called as the Candidates meeting?  If so, how is she going to ensure that the participants, those who were nominated recently at LC III level, Councillors and Chairpersons to be, get a fair deal in terms of capacity to articulate their manifestos before the electorate?  I am saying this, Mr. Speaker, because the Minister has already admitted that the photographic process will not be used under the LC III elections.  They are going to be used under the LC V Elections, possibly in February.  If that is so, why are you stifling debate under the process which has already been started.  Why don’t you enable those appointed to articulate their manifestos adequately and scientifically in time?  Are you arranging to sit on them, so that they are not heard?  I am worried!

MR. NDEEZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I seek your indulgence, as I wish to raise an issue of a specific concern to my constituency, in as far as the on going Local Council Elections are concerned.  

The law provides for special representation of people with disabilities in Local Councils.  Right now, preparations for holding general elections are in full gear.  I understand the Electoral Commission already has programmes for election for women special interest groups; women are already included in the programme; the youth are also included in the programme.  I am also reliably informed that the Electoral Commission has failed to produce a programme for ensuring that people with disabilities elect their representatives.  Everyday, people ask  me, ‘what is going on?’  I say, ‘I do not know’.  When I go to talk to the Commissioner, also the Commissioner says, ‘he has nothing to do as of now’.  We are not among those who believe in being given the photographs, and we believe it is our constitutional right to ensure that representatives are elected as soon as possible.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I request the Minister to explain to me, what measures are being taken to ensure that our people are able to participate in the elections effectively.  Thank you. 

MS. ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am raising on a point of clarification on the issue of photographic registration.  Mr. Speaker, through you, to the Minister concerned, you will realise that the photographic registration, which took place late this year, was not effective in some of the districts.  I would like to quote the example, in Arua Municipality, where very many residents of Municipality were denied the right to register themselves in order to determine their leadership.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware that, the majority of the residents of the Municipality did not register and now that the February election is going to be based on the photographic registration, what is the fate of the residents of  the Municipality who did not register?  I thank you very much.

MR. MAFABI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Minister on two issues.  Supposing the IGG confirms that the tender was awarded wrongly, what remedy do you have for the people who are involved?  Does this not look like corruption of the highest order, which was being used against the law?  

The second one is, I can see here, you have brought an amendment Bill, for moving the day of display from 21 days to 10 days.  Would it not have been necessary for the Minister to have brought an amendment to change the days of voting, to avoid the constitutional problem she mentioned?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KIZIGE: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister.  I am a registered voter, and during the process of registering, I was not told to be specifically careful with the counterfoil of the form that was used for the photographic registration, and I doubt whether I am still keeping it.  If I have not be kept it, what are the chances that the people we represent are keeping these pieces of paper, and therefore, would they be able to present them at the time of registration. In the event that most of the registered voters do not have them, what is going to happen on the voting day?

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, at least in my constituency, the people who were nominated for these political offices that are going to be elected for, were not asked to present these counterfoils at the registration.  They used the old registration cards for being nominated. What then is the logic in asking people to vote for people who were not verified at the time of nomination, using the same system that they want to be verified? Who will be electing?  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, to clarify to me.  During the elections for L.III Chairpersons, which register are we actually going to use?  Why I ask this, is because the display exercise is ending around 24th December, and the elections are around the 4th of January.  Shall we use the updated register?  Shall we use the displayed register?  What register actually shall we use, and what will be the effect of display on that register for this short time and during the time of recess, before the elections on 4th January?

MR. OMODI OKOT:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two areas which I want the Minister to clarify on.  One is on the internal problems in the Electoral Commission that have resulted into weakening down the programme of work and has caused some delay.  I want the Minister to tell the House, as to whether it is true that the people we have in the Electoral Commission are incompetent!  Because, we have heard that some of them have been interdicted; some of them have been suspended; some of them have been put to some funny conditions.  I want her to tell this House, and to confirm whether we have to lose respect in the membership of the Electoral Commission.

Two, is the question of counterfoils.  These are some partisan political indications.  Now, how sure is she going to assure this House that everybody who will be presented on that day, will be allowed to vote even when they have not produced all those counterfoils or whatever you have that should be produced?  Are you sure that everybody will be allowed to vote on that day?

MR. OKUTI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The issue I am trying to raise is sort of a clarification, but also information to the hon. Minister, as regards the photographic registration exercise and the coming elections.  

Some time before the Electoral Commission suspended the photographic registration in Arua Municipality, there was a belief that about 500 or more people from the neighbouring constituencies had registered already in the Municipality, and when they came to suspend the exercise, they were informed, and they said that this can only be corrected during the display period, that is when the voter’s card is now out, and they will be checking according to the pictures, and remove those People who infiltrated the Municipality.

Now that we are not going to use the voter’s card, we are going to use the counterfoils, how do we ascertain that the election will be fair and free?  In case one of the candidates who loses petitions, will it not be very costly for both the Electoral Commission and the winning candidate?  That is the clarification I will need from her.

MR. MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is good this issue has come up in the House.  Already in my constituency, some people are still complaining that during the L.C. elections, a group of people came with exercise books, about two days to election and those who missed registering, did not vote.  Now they have all along been complaining that most of them actually lost their voter’s cards.  I wonder how they will vote!  Thank you.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want clarification from the Minister.  One time after the exercise of photographing the voters, when they were transporting the cameras from one part of my Constituency, these cameras were robbed at a certain place called Ruhoko, but nobody has gone back to retake the photographs of those people.  So, I want to know what will happen when the time for voting and using the photographs comes – whether they will go back and photograph or those people will miss elections?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for the interest you have taken in this subject matter under debate.  But, before, I answer specific questions, let me state here that, I was very careful when I chose my words to say that, besides the money question and the law, I summarized - because the law came to us very late, the monies are coming in piecemeal and the project is huge.  We do not own the technology, and all of you are aware that there is a process.  So, if you demand 70 licenses, these are for the software to help you do a job on time.  The advisors tell you that, ‘only two licenses will be enough’, and the licenses are not there. When you work, towards completion, you realize that the software that we are using is like - if say, for example, you are using A4 page which can only take 200 names, even if you wanted, you cannot fix a 201 name on the A4, so these are some of the problems.  I had thought that all of us would be up-to-date, if we visited the Electoral Commission.  But, that being the case, what I am trying do is, I am managing on behalf of Government, a process that is on with a time frame, and I must find the best solution to the problems, and that is what I am saying.  

So what is happening, I am just seeking Parliament to approve that we reduce the 21 days to 10 days, because the register that we are going to display has only names of areas.  Because of the time frame, we have been pushing to produce a data text that is clean.  Where we are now, we cannot go to the individual names, and our interpretation of the law is, what would be the purpose of display?  So, people will find that a district code is okay; a sub-county code is okay; a parish code is okay; the polling station code is okay. 

So you advise your people to look only where the names are, because those people who wrote on the forms may have written a nine in different variations; so when the computer read the nine, it understood it as a nine, so it printed a nine.  In other areas it printed it to be a T, in other areas it understood it to be ‘O’. So, you may find that Avonji where there is ‘O’ there is a nine, so you can say, ‘this is my registration number, but I am not Avonti, I am Avonji so you can clean it on the register’, that is much easier. So, when you bring back the corrected text, we have a programme that will automate those corrections, because the software was not constrained. 

What do I mean?  We know that in Uganda we have 56 districts, so the programmers would have constrained the computer programme to reject anything beyond the 56 districts.  So, you find that what we are doing now is to constrain the computer only to give us 56 district codes, and by 14th December, the registers will be at every polling station for display. After the 10 days, the register will be picked - we are going to work through X-mas - so 24, 25, 26, 27 we bring back the register and we shall clean it and the final register will be a clean register that will be put at the polling station.  So, the constraints are both technology and manpower, so bear with us as long as we can give you a clean text to use.

Let me go to specific questions.  My understanding simply as a peasant of the law, why do we need to debate here matters that are before the IGG?  In my understanding, the IGG is a quasi court - I am a lay person so that is how I understand it - so I have protected myself so that you do not indulge in discussing - you will re-discuss the IGG’s report when it is presented to you.  I am not denying you to discuss the report, but I am avoiding to discuss it because -(Mr Ayume rose_) - unless the Attorney General wants to say something.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Francis Ayume):  The position is that – if I understood my colleague right, my answer would be that legally even if the IGG is investigating, you could still proceed to discuss.  It is not the same thing as when a case is in a court of law.  But for purposes of good management, one would really expect a report to come out and when the report is made public, then that would facilitate and enrich the debate on the subject matter.

MRS. MUKWAYA: I am glad that the lay person was very careful. So, most obliged Learned Attorney General.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we have had this as a problem but Parliament made these laws.  Ugandans decided that while I may not be a Ugandan, but I reside in Kololo; so matters to do with my village, I am concerned, the roads, mosquitoes, thieves, nuisance of the dogs that stray on the roads; I am entitled to debate these issues. I am not going to debate politics and other national issues but matters concerning my village. Even if I am a Libyan or what, I must participate.  So, at LCI, every member of the village must participate in village matters. That is why we separated registration of LCI from the national register that will be used to vote LC III as a Government, LC V and Councillors, Parliament and the President. It is us who decided that way. 

So, when you come to this register that we are cleaning that we are going to display, if the tribunals did not help, how could Kasujja and the Electoral Commission seated in Kampala verify citizens or non-citizens in Lubaga really?  We have given tribunals; the parish chiefs are there.  We assume that the LCIs know the people and they can help us at that level to distinguish citizens from non-citizens.  So, we have given them all the power, and if they cannot do this, I think it will be very difficult for somebody sitting in Kampala to tell who is a citizen and a non-citizen. 

What we can assure you, and I think that has been the cry of many Ugandans, we exclude people registering more than once.  Come LCV, the clean register will have no duplicate of anybody who has registered more than once. And we are even moving further. By 2006, the system will be even more purified so as to use a thumb print and backhand on top of a picture.  So, for now you go and mobilise our constituents to be vigilant because this is really the crux of the matter.  

Why did we have nominations three weeks ago?  Because we had to get pictures and these pictures have different variations: women, people with disabilities, councillors, chairpersons, and we have to get a ballot paper printed out.  So, we did not want to be disorganised. The ballot papers are now being printed while we display the register.

Declaring when the meetings will start, that is Kasujja’s lubengo, it is not mine.  So, I hope that he will announce soon and he will tell the contestants when to start the meetings, and we have no intention in the Electoral Commission to stifle anybody. People will have time to talk, and they are already talking and we are not refusing them to talk – (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) – if I may finish! Let me appeal to you, hon. Members, if you have heard anybody stopped from talking, let us talk in the corridor, we shall solve that off the floor; I will give you time. 

Hon. Ndeezi this is news to me, but I will bring it to the attention of the Electoral Commission.  I thought that also people with disability had a programme. This is news and I will draw the attention of the Electoral Commission to it.

In Arua, yes, let me hope that your chief administrative officers reported to the Commission, and if they did report, I have seen some bags, what we call late delivery, probably they have done something but I will put it to the Electoral Commission to find out what will actually happen because that is an administrative matter.

Suppose the IGG finds out that the tender was wrong, what will happen to the culprits?  Mr. Speaker, it was decided by Government that the IGG continues with the investigations and whoever will be found to be in the wrong will be attended to. Our Constitution is very clear, even when you have left office, you will always be brought to book to make good the loss.  

An hon. Member here told me that he was not warned. We had hoped that if an ideal situation existed, during LC 111 elections we would have the voters’ cards. We were all keeping our fingers crossed, hoping that an ideal situation would present itself. It has not presented itself, so we have to use these receipts. Short of the receipts, Kasujja will announce, because I cannot give you a solution. This is Kasujja’s mandate. He will see how best to manage the election, and he will tell us as he normally does.  

Why did the other people who were nominated use the old voters’ cards? I think people have used those cards, which you used for Parliamentary elections, as identification cards. I do not know whether the rules requested them to use the voter cards, because that is a detail. But I will find out from Kasujja. I do not know what they were requested to do. I know they were requested for pictures, money, and their certificates and signatures were appended to a form. But I will find out and report back.  

I said this and let me repeat it for fear of contradicting myself; first of all, it is illegal to use a non updated register. You cannot do it. The law is very clear that at every national election, the register must be updated. The register that you are going to use is that register which will be displayed, cleaned and sent back.  

I have already explained the difference between LC 1 registration and national registration. I want to assure my colleague whose cameras were robbed that the cameras, at the time of transportation, were empty shells. The diskettes, the actual software that will be used -(Interruption)   

MR. OKUTI: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for giving way. My clarification was not related to my colleague, the Woman Representative for Arua. 

There were some flukers who came from the different constituencies of the district but registered in the municipality in order to upset the voting in that area. The Electoral Commission assured the people of Arua Municipality that these culprits would be identified during the display period, when the voters’ cards come out with their photographs. But now that the cards are not there, and we are going for elections, how shall we ensure that the election will be fair and free? That was the clarification I sought. Thank you.

MRS. MUKWAYA: I thought I had answered that. First of all, let me assure you that the old register had about 10.9 million people. The cleaned register now has 8.2 million people, minus those people who deliberately did not go to register, who may be something like 0.5 million. The one million ghost voters have been cleaned. At least we are at that stage. That is why I made an earnest appeal to you to make our people vigilant. 

I do not know whether it happens in your villages, but people come one by one to see the registers, and the tribunals are sometimes not there. But this time around, anybody who is concerned about a clean register should mobilize so that the tribunals are there at the polling station. Make sure that people go in a group to check, especially for the names of those who have died, so that they are weeded out of the register. We trust the LCs, and we trust your supporters and other peoples’ supporters to be vigilant and help us clean the register.  

I was saying that at the time of transporting the cameras back to Kampala, the cameras were empty shells. Each diskette for a village had between 100 and 150 pictures, and the diskettes were protected and sealed from the rain from grease and so on. The software travelled alone, and the cameras travelled alone. So, the software is clean. If we did not have the software, we would be short of something like 0.5 million voters from your area.  But the forms that we sent out, 8.2 million, are the same pictures that we have in the database. So, your voters will be on the register.  But I will go and check.  

I think those were the questions.  Once again, let me thank my colleagues for the support -(Interruption)   

MR. SITENDA SEBALU:  Madam, I did ask you about a public outcry that we have. The wanainchi who did the exercise of registering using photographic filming have not yet been paid up to now.  What is their plight?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not know whether the hon. Minister is talking with reference to what is on the ground, notably in Kampala. The LC 111 candidates in Lubaga were supposed to kick off their candidates’ meetings on Thursday last week. The candidates’ meetings have not kicked off, and yet the Minister has talked about the constitutional deadline; by the 4th of January 2002, elections will have been carried out. 

Are you not giving a disservice to these candidates whose hope lies in the candidates’ meetings, which are deliberately stifled? If so, why don’t you let them independently run their meetings, like we did in the case of Parliamentary elections and campaigns?

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, what hon. Lukyamuzi is asking of me he would have brought up when you were making the law. You are asking something of me that I cannot -(Interjections)- yes you made the law. You decided that these people should have candidates’ meetings and not independent meetings. You now want to cause an amendment to the law that you graciously endorsed? I am not going to do that.  

I want to assure this House that the Electoral Commission will give candidates enough time to go to every parish to address the people. I know that in my sub-county the candidates are already doing kakuyege, and we have not refused them. I cannot stand here and tell you to go.  

I want to warn hon. Lukyamuzi. I am glad that you have given me notice well ahead that in January you are going to have a peaceful meeting. You have given me notice. That is the law. Now you want me to tell these people to go and hold candidates’ meetings when I am not even the one supposed to tell them?  Kasujja is aware.  We are working. He will let these people get to every parish because that is the administrative unit where we normally have our meetings.

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform hon. Lukyamuzi as well that when these meetings are going to be held, the Police must be notified.  Thank you. (Laughter)

MRS. MUKWAYA: Thank you hon. colleague for reminding me.  These elections are really hot, and we must provide security both for the candidates and the voters.  So, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is organizing along with the Electoral Commission, and when they are ready, we shall declare the timing.  

For my colleague, you are aware that we came here; I requested for something like 11.9 billion over and above the budget that the House approved.  So far that money we have not got, but I am meeting the Minister of Finance this afternoon.  So, we are trying to do our best within the resources that we have, and we have already talked to our people in the field, that let us do civic education; let us have the clean register; let us have the ballot papers; let us transport the register and bring it back.  After we have had a free and fair election, we shall pay you.  I am managing with little resources, so I want to appeal to everybody to go and convince my officers at the village and sub-county that we shall pay them.  We are committed to pay them, but let us produce an election, and when it is out of the way, we shall pay them.  Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE AMNESTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read the Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.  Proceed.

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Amnesty Act, 2001 to provide for the prosecution of persons who, after being granted an amnesty under this Act, continue to engage in acts of war or armed rebellion against the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  

The Amnesty Act was passed by Parliament last year 2000, and it was assented to in January, and the Amnesty Commission was put in place and it started its active work in July 2000.  The amendment before you, hon. Members, focuses mainly on those people who, after benefiting from the amnesty, go back and engage in rebel activities, which they had already denounced and on which basis they had been granted amnesty.  

In our discussion with the Committee and other Members, the question, ‘Why do we need this amendment at this time?’ has been recurring, and I wish to inform Members here, the reasons mainly why we are bringing this amendment.  Mr. Speaker, I would like Members to note that section four of the Amnesty Act, allows a reporter or someone wanting to benefit from the amnesty to report to the nearest Army unit, Police unit, a Member of the Executive or directly to the Amnesty Commission offices.  Many people, especially those that were caught in the act or have been arrested by mainly the Army or security organizations, chose to apply or to ask, because they were entitled that they be pardoned under the Amnesty Act.  There are also people who reported voluntarily to the Army units, especially in those areas where the Amnesty Commission did not have or has not yet established offices.  Currently there is one headquarter, this is at Kampala, for the Amnesty Commission, and so far there are also four upcountry stations, that is in Gulu, Kitgum, Arua, Kasese and so on; there will be one in Mbale.  

When the Army receives these people in areas where there are NGOs ready to receive them, for instance, in Kasese, they hand over these people to such organizations.  For instance, there is ‘Give me a chance,’ an organization that has participated actively in rehabilitating those that are benefiting from the Amnesty Commission.  In those areas where there are no such organizations, the Army carries the returnees or the reporters, as they are called under the Act, through an induction course, and then educates them on the benefits that they are taking as a result of accepting to apply for amnesty, and then they are released to society.    

We, therefore, seek that this House approves the amendment, which will empower Government in such a way that, when such people are re-arrested, they do not benefit from the amnesty, but instead are punished according to the law.  This amendment was sought early during the first months of implementation of the Act, when we realized that there was that loophole, and in fact, His Excellency, the President, who is also the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF, brought it to our attention.  He, therefore, specifically requested that this loophole in the law be sealed immediately, so that we separate those who are seriously desiring to benefit from the amnesty and those who just take it, especially after they have been arrested, they ask to have the amnesty so that they are released, only to go back into their acts of lawlessness.  

Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform this House that other amendments to the Act will follow because we have already noted them.  In fact, they are in the process of being worked on, but we felt that this one has to come because it was considered urgent, and in the process when we had already worked out this amendment, the Amnesty Commission, after implementing the Amnesty Act, found out that there were other loopholes and they therefore came up with other amendments.  But the process of getting those amendments to the House is not a short process, so we felt that this amendment should go through the House, while the other amendments are also being worked on.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Gen. David Tinyefuza): Thank you. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I present a report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Amnesty (Amendment) Bill 2001.

Introduction:

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs scrutinized the Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001 in accordance with rule 99 (5) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. 

The methodology:

The Committee discussed the Bill with the following: 

1. The Ministers and officials from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

2. The officials from the Amnesty Commission.

3. The officials from an NGO group known as African Rights.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Amnesty Act, 2000. Maybe before I proceed, this report is what I am talking about. It was circulated two weeks ago. It is the Committee report, but there is another report which one hon. Member circulated, where he is seeking to introduce some new amendments. I see many Members reading that report. That is not the report I am referring to.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Amnesty Act 2000, to provide for prosecution of persons who, after being granted amnesty under the Act, continue to engage in acts of war or armed rebellion against the Government of Uganda; and work as a deterrent to acts of reverting to armed activities after being granted such amnesty. 

Observations:
 
It was observed that the Amnesty Commission was finding it difficult in implementing the amnesty due to inadequacies in the amnesty law. Indeed, the Committee alluded to this fact on page 6 of the Committee report on the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs policy statements for the Financial Year 2001/2002. The Committee mentioned that the Amnesty law is silent on the following areas:

1. Individuals under the Presidential pardon. These are not covered.

2. Treatment of non-Ugandans who connive with Ugandans and wage war against the Republic of Uganda. These are not covered, yet we have very many incidences of these people, especially in the case of Sudan and Congo, and in the case of ADF and so on. 

3. Members of armed forces in the past regimes who served in the Police force, Prisons service or state security agencies, who by their past activities would be liable to prosecution for criminal offences. These are also not covered. 

The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill 2001 only seeks to amend the Act by inserting a new section, 6(a), to read as follows:

“A person granted an amnesty under this Act who, after the grant to him or her of the amnesty commits an act mentioned in section 3 - 

(a) shall not be granted an amnesty for that act; and 

(b) is liable to prosecution for that act.” 

It was observed by the Committee that the principle behind the proposed amendment is a justifiable principle.  Individuals who abuse the amnesty accorded to them should not benefit from the amnesty once more otherwise it is going to be a perpetual abuse of the Amnesty law.

Recommendations:

The Committee recommends that the Minister comes up with comprehensive amendments on the areas the Committee has observed in 4.0. Those are areas which remain uncovered.  

However, the Committee notes that this is an urgent matter which needs redress, to cater for cases where people abuse amnesty and again engage in rebellion against the State.  It is in that spirit that the Committee made its conclusion that it recommends to this House to support the proposed amendment to the Amnesty Act.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Maybe before I proceed, when you say ‘prosecuted for that act’, which act are you referring to? Is it the act for which he was granted amnesty or for the new act?

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Speaker, the spirit is that there is in essence one act under this law. When a person is being granted amnesty, we are not talking about the specific acts they committed in the past, but it is the act of committing rebellion against the State. Once somebody renounces that act of commission of rebellion, what is talked about here is if he reversed that act of commitment –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Subsequent?

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Yes, subsequent.

THE SPEAKER: But was there anybody who thought that if you are granted amnesty for a past act, you are forgiven for life? Was that what they thought?

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Speaker, the situation we have noted, in the actual implementation of the Amnesty Act, is that very many people who surrender and renounce these actions of banditry or rebellion are re-arrested for the same acts of banditry. And they again ask for the same amnesty as happened in the first case. It has become a vicious circle.

THE SPEAKER: Agreed, but does it really require enacting an amendment of this nature? If I was pardoned for treason I committed yesterday or two months ago, does it mean that if I commit treason in two months’ time, I assume that I had already got amnesty? Is that what they thought? Does amnesty cover you for life? Well, I just wanted clarification and I have got it.

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Speaker, what is being handled under this Amendment is a specific problem which is technical in nature. Although the Amnesty Commission handles the actual integration of these people, there are many other agencies of state which actually handle some of these activities, to such an extent that at times there is even lack of coordination. 

You find that a person who has surrendered in Mbale third division is committing the same acts of terrorism in Mbarara and he claims to be forgiven under the Amnesty Act.  The issue is, shouldn’t we have a law in place to determine such cases when they come to be known? Right now there is that hazy area of how to coordinate our activities, and it is undermining the implementation of the Amnesty Act.

THE SPEAKER: I thought it would really be a question of evidence; in a sense that you are granted amnesty for what you did in September, but what we are charging you for is what you have done in October. They are not related at all. Unless actually the law was to say, if you are granted amnesty and you then repeat the same thing, we shall prosecute you for what we had granted you amnesty for. That is really what I think.

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, without being seen to oppose what the Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am not opposed to anything.  I was just seeking clarification, because, personally my understanding was that, you will not be punished for what you had been pardoned for, not things which you do in future, because, if you do things in future, that is a different situation and you should be punished.

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, let me clarify this way.  The Amnesty Act seems to be based on the principle, like there is in the Bible that, ‘we forgive seven times, times 70’.  So that if somebody benefits from the amnesty and he comes to us and says, ‘I want to have amnesty’, the actions are just evident to show that this person, yes, was engaged in this act and is entitled, because they have come to us, they have confessed and they are ready to go through the process of amnesty, and therefore, we shall grant them a certificate.  But there are those who, after being granted the amnesty, they go back and commit the same acts, and for us by the fact that the Amnesty Act tells us to grant amnesty to everybody who asks, we must grant amnesty to that person.  

Therefore, we are saying that, if somebody comes and he is granted amnesty under those terms of the Amnesty Act, surely that cannot apply, at least we believe that the community of Uganda has suffered so much under terrorism.  We are not going to apply the Biblical principle of forgiving seven times, times 70.  Therefore, we want that person now after committing those acts again, and we establish that he had originally benefited from the Amnesty Act; we now treat him as per the law.  They get arrested and they are carried through the laws of this country and they are tried as such.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, let us hear from the Attorney General. It seems he wants to say something.

MR. AYUME: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was trying to examine this amendment in light of what you have raised against the fact that, the Act provides for certain offences.  They are referred to as ‘acts’. In Section 3, if a person who has committed offences described in section 3, voluntarily reports and gives an indication that he or she would like to repent and would like to take advantage of the Amnesty Law, then the Commission would consider and grant that person an amnesty.  Now, what this law seems to be aiming at, is to deal with a situation where, for example, the very same person goes to commit one of those offences listed in section 3, in respect of the amnesty granted. The law is saying that, although under that section, the offences listed there would entitle him or her to be granted amnesty, but in this particular case, he or she having been granted an amnesty, as a result of having committed the offences listed in section 3, then he cannot now say, ‘look, under the law, under section 3, my conduct fell within that section, I am therefore, applying for an amnesty’.  Now, this seems to be the idea as far as I can understand it.  But, I am still trying to examine whether the word ‘act’, if it were replaced by ‘an offence’, would it make any difference.  I am still examining that.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from the honourable Minister. I will come to you, honourable Members.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to appeal to honourable Awori, to realize that you only switch on the microphone when you have caught the Speaker’s eye -(Laughter)- Mr. Speaker, I am a lay man, but a politician.  This law is about politics, and we are dealing with certain types of people.  When a person enjoys the benefits of an amnesty, they have not gone through the process of law, of being prosecuted, convicted, punished but forgiven.  It is an administrative process.  This is a person who can even dare turn round and say, ‘by the way, I never committed that offence’.  Because they have not gone through rigorous prosecution and cross-examination, and we are dealing with people, Mr. Speaker, who can be as slippery and unreliable as you can imagine (Interruptions).  Yes, that is my opinion.  I am entitled to it.

THE SPEAKER: Please, Proceed!

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a society.  Our people ordinarily might easily be betrayed into thinking that, if you have enjoyed an amnesty, you can still enjoy the same, like children who come home, you forgive them, tomorrow they come home having committed the same offence, and you forgive them.  So for avoidance of doubt, there is nothing harmful, if this proposed amendment is going to make- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are saying that, for avoidance of doubt.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Yes, for avoidance of doubt, everybody must know that, if you have been forgiven, it is clearly understood that you must never commit the same offence again.  If you do, you, your relatives, and your political supporters, must know that you are liable to prosecution and punishment.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker -(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Member for Soroti.

MS. ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am quite saddened that we are failing to decide on whether we want to continue forgiving people or not.  I am not a lawyer, but I am also a preacher of forgiveness, and I think, if we are talking about genuine forgiveness, genuine reconciliation, it means unconditional forgiveness and it seems to me that the moment we introduce conditionalities to this forgiveness under the Amnesty Commission, then we are shifting from amnesty to something else.

I think that as of now, we may not have a line up of people whom the Amnesty Commission will genuinely tell us this evening that, ‘so and so was given amnesty and they ran back into the bush and they have committed atrocity a, b, and c’. So, it becomes very worrying to me if at the end of the day we claim to be forgiving people and yet creating another platform in which those people can be witch-hunted and scared of coming back. In any case, we are forgiving them because –(Interruption)

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to stand in this House and give the impression that the amendment we are bringing is for witch-hunting, when I have said and the chairman has said that the purpose of the amendment is to handle those people who do not genuinely seek to benefit from the Amnesty?  

I have already mentioned that the majority of those people have been arrested by the army. When they are arrested, they say ‘oh, by the way, may I benefit from the amnesty’, and the Amnesty Commission or Government has to grant them amnesty under this Act. Should those people really continue to be allowed to terrorize Ugandans in the name of forgiveness?  Surely, is the hon. Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the problem came because the amendment was misunderstood. From the clarification, hon. Member, the purpose of this Bill is to make sure that once you have been granted the amnesty and then you go and repeat the same act for which you have been granted the amnesty, the provision of the Bill will not be open to you.  I think that is what they are saying.  

The other issue that caused the problem was part 2, which says that you will be prosecuted for that act. But if one has committed an offence, he has to be punished!  He has to be prosecuted. I think that is where the confusion arose. But this Bill is to make sure that you cannot be granted the amnesty twice. I think that is the purpose. I hope that makes it clear to you, hon. Members. So, please, debate in that light.

MS. ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just wish to continue with what I was trying to bring forth. I actually used that word ‘witch-hunting’ in the context that somebody, whom you offended before you were given the amnesty, could probably come and say, ‘this one killed my relatives’, and fabricates something and you will be apprehended again.  That is the context in which I used that word ‘witch-hunting’.

This is still my plea. If the genuine spirit is that you will be victimized for what you do again after amnesty and not what you did before, probably that is it. That will be secure. Otherwise, this thing is very threatening to the people who wish to genuinely come out. You know, once you are out there and you feel insecure, you will definitely not come out. Thank you.

MR. MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, there is one microphone on and there is another too. The whole system will be damaged.

MR. MUZOORA: It is the hon. Awori who will damage the whole system - (Laughter) 

MR. AWORI: Is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to impute bad motives on my part, that I destroy electronic equipment, when in actual fact, I had a right to draw your attention to me so that you could give me a chance to contribute to the motion? How else can I draw your attention to me, Mr. Speaker?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is in order in the sense that he was speaking and then you switched on a microphone, and as a result our machines may get damaged.

MR. MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like, through this clarification, to give an example, so that the Member can clarify on this matter. I will give an example of a situation where a terrorist set a bomb here in Kampala, he was arrested and taken to Luzira, and he was released. The same rebel was got in Jinja, and now he is in custody. 

I want clarification from the Member. This person was got on the first offence, he was forgiven under this Amnesty Act, and actually under the Presidential pardon, which is now being brought into this Amnesty law. This fellow has now repeated the same act. Is the Member saying that we should punish him according to the new offence or the old offence?  Thank you very much.

MR. RWAMIRAMA: I would like to be clarified. When you are a terrorist and you are given amnesty, tomorrow if you are got again, does it extinguish the charge of treason? Can’t we take you on charges of treason? Even those who are pardoned, doesn’t the State have the prerogative to pardon them or not to pardon them?

MR. JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. This is an opportunity where we should seek to applaud the Government for the effort it is taking to fight the question of insecurity, which has messed up our people and their proper rights.  

We are discussing an amendment to the Amnesty law, and this amendment has raised many issues. We do not want those issues to be mixed with other issues that we might think of. 

Questions have been raised. First, on the question of the offenders, the situation we are talking about is not only in the Amnesty Act. We are discussing this proposed amendment as if all the amnesties granted were governed by the Amnesty Act, which is not the case. And I wish to draw the attention of the hon. Members to these facts.

The Amnesty Act was passed as a remedy to the outcry of the public, and also to give voice to the Government policy of reconciliation. That is why it was passed. It has elaborate procedures on how people can access amnesty. The procedures are there.  

What does this Bill seek to do? What this Bill seeks to do emanates from the President’s statement, and I am sure he made it in the State of the Nation Address.  He raised the issue that there are re-offenders. There are people who, after the grant of amnesty, go back and re-offend. How do you deal with these people?  

Unfortunately, the Bill, as it is now, does not address that category of people squarely. The evidence laid before the Committee, evidence which I am privy to from the Amnesty Commission, is to the effect that all those people who have been referred to by the President, the Minister and everybody in this country were never objects of the Amnesty Act. Not one of them had been granted amnesty under the Amnesty Act.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these people were a category of people who had benefited from the Presidential pardon and that distinction should be made so that when we are discussing the Amnesty Act, we discuss it properly.  Now, that is the background to that Bill.  Does the Bill clearly address that issue?  My answer is no.  Why?  It makes the provision so blunt that it even takes into account people who are not the target.  The people who are supposed to be targeted by this law actually can still apply for amnesty under this law and succeed. 

I give you an example, the person referred to by hon. Reeves Muzoora actually was a person who benefited from this Presidential pardon, not the Amnesty Act.  That person is not the one now targeted by the Bill because that person hon. Reeves Muzoora is talking about can actually still come to the Amnesty Commission.  He is not prohibited by this amendment.  He is not.  That person who benefited from the Presidential pardon and that person, who has continued to commit acts of terrorism in this country, can still benefit from the Amnesty Act.  Unfortunately, he escaped from this amendment.  It is not broad enough, Mr. Speaker, and that is why at an appropriate time, I would be seeking the authority and your permission and your indulgence to move a few amendments to take care of those people who could have benefited from amnesty.  But due to circumstances out of their own control and desire and intent, proceed to be under some - which are compromised under the law and called an offence or an act prohibited by this law.  I would be seeking at an appropriate time to make this amendment, Mr. Speaker.

Another point I wanted to raise, which has been raised by the Chairman of the Committee is that this particular amendment has been hurried for nothing because the whole of the Amnesty Act actually needed review.  It is due for review.  It is an Act that has existed only for six months and has to be reviewed. In that sense, all the amendments, all the revisions that are necessary for the proper functioning of the Amnesty Commission, should have been brought now.  But now they have just singled out because the President cried out about this matter.  So, it is brought out even ignoring the very problems the President was seeking to prevent. That is my disappointment, Mr. Speaker. There is certainly need for further amendments.  As I said, I will be bringing this out clearly at an appropriate stage.  

But for now let me say that as a country, we are reflecting on old methods that will be desirable in curbing what has been a problem to this country. And it is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the rain that has fallen this afternoon will wash away the desires of terrorism, all acts of aggression or any acts of vengeance that we use to solve our problems.  It is my prayer, Mr. Speaker, that this rain that has fallen this afternoon will be a precursor that this august House will always focus on consensus on matters that affect the peace and security of the individuals and their property in this country. It is an issue which would never be mixed.  

The Committee has come up with these recommendations: They have adopted en masse without any amendment the law as proposed by the Minister of Internal Affairs and that is where I have a problem with the Committee, because the Committee was privy to information which should have guided this House on what amendments are necessary at this stage, even to this particular provision which has been brought to the floor.  They have ignored this with impunity and that is why, Mr. Speaker, I am seeking that you allow me later to put this law in a proper perspective that will help this country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to first concur with everything that hon. Oulanyah has put forward.  But I want to seek clarification and make my point in regard to the offender, what the amendment brings in part (a), which talks about not granting for the second time the amnesty to a person that commits the same act.  

I come from the Northern part of this country where the people have been abducted and my concern is that, what about if someone was abducted, and has benefited from the amnesty, then when that person goes back home is re-abducted and goes back to the bush and wants to seek the amnesty again.  What will this law have in place for this particular person?  Because what we have realised now is that the Lords Resistance Army, is now seeking and hunting for those who have got amnesty because they are saying these are the people who are tarnishing their name, so they are hunting for them to re-abduct them.  How will this person who will have again escaped and wants to seek amnesty benefit from this amendment?  This is a concern for my people who are hunted because they have benefited from this amnesty.

Secondly, the issue of prosecution, which says the person, is liable to prosecution again for the act.  I thought the law already exists that after getting the amnesty, if you commit an act, then other laws will apply.  So, I do not see at all the necessity of part (b) of this amendment in this particular circumstance.  That is my concern.  Thank you.

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think both Parliament and the Executive have a duty to ensure that the lives of our people and their property are well taken care of.  I see no problem with this proposed amendment.  All what the Government is saying is that, you can only benefit from amnesty once and that should not be used as a time for criminals to go and re-organise themselves to cause more havoc to the people of this country.  Government is acting out of experience.  People have benefited from the Presidential pardon - and if we are talking about genuineness, even before God, if you are going to confess, you must be ready to renounce the sin for which you are confessing. If you are going to confess today and you are going to be involved in the same sin, I do not think the forgiveness will stand. In the same way, Mr. Speaker, I think – (Interruption)

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion. Following rule 44 of Rules of Procedure, I seek your indulgence to move the following motion that the Bill entitled: “Amnesty Amendment Bill, 2000” be suspended until a comprehensive law on the Amendment Bill is put in place.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can’t you bring the amendments to improve the law?

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the debate; we have listened to the position of Government; we have listened to the position raised by hon. Oulanyah and the Chairperson of the Committee. I can only say one thing, that this debate and this Bill we are discussing will not solve the problem.  It is not a remedy to anything at all with regards to the situation we are trying to solve.  So, I have a belief and I think many Members here do, that we actually throw out this Bill and Government comes with a clear position.  We suspend this Bill until Government comes with a position which covers all sectors of society, including, those pardons which are given through presidential pardon and those that are in the armed forces and so forth, so that we discuss a comprehensive law, which will cater for all sectors and all forms of pardons which are granted in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the debate has just started. We started with points of clarification to understand the policy behind the Bill, and I think I have only had two people making contributions, namely, hon. Oulanyah and hon. Member for Apac.  There has been a motion by the Minister for it to have the second reading, then the report from the Committee and two contributions.  Why don’t you hear other contributions and suggest how to improve on this law, so that we proceed, infact many people actually want to contribute on it?  So, I think we proceed!

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we should seek to stop debate on this important amendment.  To the best of my knowledge, there is no law that is so comprehensive that it needs no amendment.  Law is amended according to the situation with which that law is supposed to deal with.  That is what is called, the mischief rule.  Now, if any Member in this House has any imagination that he will come up with the law, which will be so comprehensive and will be cut into stone like Moses’s law, then that is a deception!  I wish therefore, to appeal to all hon. Members to support this amendment.  Let us get it out of way and give time to other Members to deal with the amendments, which they so wish to move at the appropriate stage of the debate.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me thank the Committee, plus the Minister of Internal Affairs, for the efforts they have put in to get rid of terrorism.  However, Mr. Speaker, I wanted the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify to me or to help me, because, we have some people who were wrongly arrested, incarcerated in Luzira and other places which they used to call, “safe houses”.  How does the situation on the ground come up to assist those people who are being held and incarcerated, and how does the Amnesty Bill come up to address the plight of those people, whom the Minister may say, ‘they are carrying out terrorist activities or banditry activities’, when they were wrongly arrested?  We have the Tabliqs, who in fact have refused to apply for this amnesty.

Secondly, how does the process take place?  Does somebody walk to the Commission and then surrender himself or herself, or is it a blanket sort of amnesty, where you walk out and go back to your village and then you are free?  Because to me it seems terrorism is everywhere.  What is the modus operandi of surrendering the culprits?

Then, I am concerned, -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Member, maybe you have not read the Act itself.  The Act provides the procedures on how you get the amnesty.  Maybe, it is good that you get a copy of the Act and then you see how this is done!

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you for that one, Mr. Speaker.  Lastly, what happens if a person has been given amnesty and then government re-deploys him, like Commander Benz?  How does this amnesty come to arrest him, if again he is captured on the other side, because government is also using the same people to carry out what we call, the acts that they were involved in originally?  What is the position of government towards those people who come in to surrender and they are covered by the amnesty, again they are re-deployed by government itself to carry out activities, which perhaps to me, I would call bordering to terrorism?

MR. HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Members of Parliament for your prayers and support when I had a terrible accident.  Thanks for your prayers!  I am now fit and I have checked every bit of my body, it is working so fine.

Mr. Speaker, I am representing a constituency where the insurgency has been there for over ten to fifteen years, and the situation on the ground is a little different from what the amendment is trying to cover. 

The amendment here basically is targeting those who are using amnesty law as a fashion, as a tactical move to again shift from one point to the other, and really continue to perpetuate the insecurity and terror on our people.  I think along that objective, it is right!  But we have a unique problem in the North, where we still have the Kony element of insurgency prevailing. Very often, they come to your home without any invitation and they can carry away anybody they want.  I, for one, know for example, one time they came and camped at my mother’s home for the whole day and made her cook for them.  Suppose she was one of those who had been granted amnesty, what would then happen?  The government would come and say, “Well you have cooked for them, you are collaborating, no more amnesty”, the Act is there, I do not know what the law says in that Act, on punishment.  It could be firing squad!  I think it is worrying, Mr. Speaker!

Let us get a law that is thorough enough, to cover those scenarios. It is not a big one. I think there are intelligent lawyers here in the House, the likes of Oulanyah, and our Attorney General who can really protect those who did not voluntarily give in themselves. They have been abducted, and when the army captures them, they are treated as rebels. And once they have had that amnesty before, automatically they are entitled for prosecution.  We need some element to cover that aspect. Otherwise, I fully support the law against those who are using amnesty as a tactical move.  I fully support the law along that, but we should improve on it to protect our people who actually are involuntarily caught up in the act of terrorism.  Thank you very much.

DR. FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora county, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are all desirers of a conducive development atmosphere and a prerequisite to it is peace and security.  I really urge the House, Mr. Speaker, that let us take issues objectively without having connotations or imputing that there could be witch hunting or framing.  Let a Presidential pardon or amnesty be applied once so that people do not take chance of the law. However, I quite wish to agree with what hon. Oulanyah and hon. Eresu proposed that we would need to come up with a complete amendment that would address some of the issues. For example, the Committee observed in Roman 4(iii) that members of armed forces in the past regimes who served in the police force, prisons service, State security agencies, who by their past activities would be liable to prosecution for criminal offences should also be addressed, and an amendment might have to come from the Minister concerned.

I would like to react to that observation and recommendation of the Committee. First of all, I would like to distinguish who belongs to who.  The UPDF, the Uganda Police force, the Uganda Prisons service belong to the Government of Uganda, not to a regime. That is my understanding and therefore at the end of the day, if that particular regime ceases to be, I do not see how you can start following up everybody because they were doing State duties at that time.  

I would like to bring to your notice here that actually what happens if somebody is in the bush - let me use that example - he calls a State security agent an Adui, the State security agent similarly calls the one in the bush an Adui. Now, we would like to differentiate a situation here.  The one who makes a coffin usually does not want to use it; he just sells it off.  I hope tomorrow we shall not come up with a law that would expose all of us to problems!  This is my observation, Mr. Speaker. We have to honour and respect the services that our State security agents are doing; they are doing it in the name of the State, not in the name of a regime.  That is my understanding.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

PROF: TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I marvelled at revelations by hon. Oulanyah that the Amnesty Law has actually not been of benefit to rebels or to the categories for whom it was meant.  What was the job of the Amnesty Commission?  Who has been coming to the Amnesty Commission? – (Mr. Oulanyah rose_).

MR. OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  What I said was that the amendment as it is proposed does not target those it is intended to target.  On the performance of the Amnesty Commission, if you look at the handout that we managed to circulate, they have handled over 1300 cases successfully, and the people in the villages are benefiting from this.  I thought I should give you that information.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much.  In the light of that, I think the amendment can benefit those people.  As far as I am concerned, there are two things. One is the basis of amnesty.  Amnesty was demanded and put in place because the gun as an instrument of revolving rebellion was inadequate.  Recognising that some people are abducted, they are forced into the rebellion unfortunately, and this has happened not only in Uganda, it has happened in Angola, it has happened in many other countries of Africa and indeed elsewhere.  People get abducted and after a very short time of indoctrination, they become enemies of society. Therefore, shooting at them all the time, although it looked inevitable, was an inadequate method of solving the problem. So, you come in with amnesty.

Now, amnesty has conditions.  I am surprised that one could say amnesty should not have conditions.  Even with the case of the God’s law, when you are forgiven seven times, at the last minute when you die and you have not been forgiven, you go to hell. So, this question of perpetual forgiveness is not even there in the house of God, and there is purgatory where you may go and burn a little before you are purified.  So, I think the issue of giving amnesty has good justification and it recognises those situations where a person is taken under force but indoctrinated to become an enemy of society. 

Now, society however tolerant, however forgiving cannot afford to have somebody who comes to destroy it. If you are forgiven once, I think in our circumstances of human society, I think it is reasonable that you are prosecuted for the next act. I thought that (b) in the amendment to say is liable to prosecution for that act, already provides that the law takes its own course and therefore a person who has been re-abducted can plead – (Mr. Eresu rose_) - can you hold on please – that actually he has been re-abducted and that he was not acting in his own volition. That could be a defence presented in the process of the prosecution. 

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Kabwegyere for giving way, and I ask him to give me the following clarification.  He has stated that forgiveness cannot be done more than once even in the house of God, I agree. But in the amendment which we are trying to put in the Act, the Committee has reported that the Act is principally silent on individuals who have got Presidential pardons, on members of the armed forces and prisons, and on those who have served in that category in the past regimes.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, why don’t we really address the policy behind this matter. What problem are we trying to prevent? I think the problem that is being prevented here is that people are granted amnesty and after that they repeat the same acts. Is it the Bill’s intention to deter them from repeating those acts for which they have been granted amnesty? Is that what we want to prevent?   

Covering a Presidential pardon is easy; you can even include it. But the Constitution of 1995 changed the President’s ability to grant pardons. Once somebody has been convicted, the President can say that he has pardoned him.  Apparently, it seems that a person must be convicted before the President can exercise this right. So, the situation changed. The President’s powers were narrowed. That is the position.  

If you want to include it in this Bill, maybe you can also do it. But I think this was dealing with the Amnesty Act and not the other general amnesty granted by the President. But if you want, if you think it is proper, why don’t you come up with an amendment to also include it.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I had not finished, I was coming to my point.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Could I get the Floor back, Mr. Speaker? I think I am being derailed. I think hon. Eresu is trying to derail me and push his point, and you have ruled several times on that matter. I would request that he gives me back the Floor, which he has done.

THE SPEAKER: I want to give you this information. In certain jurisdictions, somebody can be given a light sentence or be imprisoned outside the confines of prisons. But if they repeat this act within a certain time, then punishment shall be imposed on them. Maybe you should think in those terms.  

REV. DR. SEMPANGI: Thank you for giving way. Mr. Speaker, Members have referred to the forgiveness of God. St. Paul was forgiven but he never asked for forgiveness. He was forgiven under God’s amnesty, because he did not ask for this forgiveness and he did not go back and persecute the Church of God.       
 
PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for that Biblical aphorism. No, we are really not talking about St. Paul. We are not talking about someone who had that revelation and his whole character metamorphosed. We are dealing with people, the majority of whom have actually been forced into rebellion and into senseless killing, and therefore, there is room for amnesty. Many of them are pushed into doing what is not really in their own interest and even contrary to your own interest.  

I would like to conclude by saying that I sometimes get a bit worried that somehow, somewhere the rebellions that we have suffered are in some way justified. That sometimes tickles my mind, especially when I listen to some people. And I would like to believe that there are certain rebellions which can be justified, but there are others which cannot. Rebellions which are destructive of human beings - innocent, unassuming, very ordinary human beings- not even aimed at the State, are purely anarchic.  I have difficulty in justifying those anywhere, and we have had some of these in many parts of Africa.  

If we are looking at a disintegration of society, I think it is our duty to do everything possible to make sure that society is not destroyed. And I think sometimes we must define which side we are on, a disintegration of society or a continuity of society.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am worried. My worry is in connection with prosecuting those who jumped over this amendment, and then they emerged, sometimes at a later time, saying that they are liberators after the struggle.  Will this law stand to prosecute them or we are talking when this Government, which they tried to topple, is still in power? What happens when someone managed to come and he was given amnesty, and then he went back to the bush and came back as a liberator? Can this law still prosecute him or not? Thank you very much.

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have been cautiously following the debate, and the issues I am going to put forward have not been raised at all. 

Before we sanction the amendment as proposed by the Minister, one needs to ask the following question: how come only few people have responded to amnesty? I was mandated by my constituency to pose this question - (Laughter). Is it because when they are granted amnesty they go back to where they have been? Is it enough to say that those who repeat acts of insurgency should not be granted amnesty? I see a scenario here which needs to be addressed –(Interruption).

MR. OKUTI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Member for giving way for the information I want to give him. He has asked, ‘why are there few people who have benefited from amnesty? ‘Is it because they go back to the bush?’ 

I have some experience. In West Nile, I know of a number of people who took up arms against Government. They were pardoned in Luzira and they went back, but because of the past mistakes, which were not covered under the amnesty, they again went back to the bush in order to hide from the law. So, that is a very fundamental question that you have asked, and which I think the Minister responsible should also take into consideration. 

We shall not solve the problem if we only look at handling the problem that we are facing now and forgetting the past.  There are still people who had made those mistakes. They go to the bush in order to hide from the law. When they are arrested, they are forgiven under this particular Act, but the first mistakes are not forgiven. So, they continue to go back, and therefore, it forms a circle. Thank you.
      
LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Member from Lubaga South that what he is telling the House is not entirely correct. By asserting that very few people have actually taken advantage of the amnesty, that is a misrepresentation of what is happening on the ground, and I would like hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to come up with the statistics he is basing on to make that allegation.  I will give him a few of mine.  In Western Uganda, during the month of August to the month of December, that was 2000, 162 people had reported to Kasese town alone.  In the month of February 2001, this number had risen to 1,213 in one area.  Now, in West Nile region, the number of people who have come to utilize the Amnesty Act is 3,623 as of mid June this year.  Therefore, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, your assertion is not correct.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, among those numbers he has quoted, how many rebels are from Maseruka, because these people have refused on a legal technicality to accept your amnesty?  How many of them have you included in your figures?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Chairman for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is trying to defend the hierarchy.  I am not surprised, because at one time he almost became a prospective beneficiary of amnesty.  But matters being as they are, we can understand.  

The Chairman has been talking in terms of 2000, 160, when we all know that the force of ADF goes beyond 10,000 people.  If anything vivid is happening on the ground, how come that nearly in every region of Uganda, you have camps stationed.  Harbouring who?  They do not harbour insects; they do not harbour animals; they harbour people.  So, there is a cause of discontent, which should lead to the issue of amnesty, and this is what I am trying to address this afternoon. 

As I speak, those who are angels today, tomorrow they are satanic, and those who are satanic today, tomorrow they are angels do you know why that is so?  We must all know that not many of us have capacity to measure what should force people to go to the bush and what should not force them to go to the bush.  Usually in my view, after looking at this situation of Uganda, I have noted that people are hiding the facts.  There are reasons why people are going to the bush.  People are going to the bush because of discontent in Government.  Why don’t you talk the realities?  Why are these people in the bush all the time?  I welcome the issue of the amnesty law, but parallel to amnesty law, we should also talk about a round table to enable those who are disgruntled to address the matter about the phenomena of Government; about the phenomena of justice; about the phenomena of democracy; about the phenomena of multi-party politics.  These are matters which you must not ignore.  

So, it is important before we overwhelm ourselves with amnesty law, to look at the environment in which this amnesty law is going to work.  There is discontent about the sale of parastatals; there is discontent about the sale of UCBL, so many things –(Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi.  Hon. Lukyamuzi has stated that people go to the bush because of discontent, and yet the hon. Member has used all his time here without going to the bush.  Does he tell the people of Lubaga South that he is fully contented and that is why he has not gone to the bush?  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, to borrow the words of Shakespeare, ‘there are many ways of skinning a cat.’ Those who want to skin the cat by going to the bush are there.  I want to skin the cat by using the microphone, and I think it is proper. 

So, I want to end my submission, Mr. Speaker, that while it is proper to invest in the amnesty law, I do not think it is necessary to overwhelm us with the amendment saying that those who err should be extra punished.  Before you punish them on an extra note, what have you done to ensure that you cause them to address a problem on the ground?  So, as an environmentalist, I still think that we should exploit the content of the environment.  Even if it means talking to the rebels in Paris, let us talk to them.  Thank you very much indeed.  

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am a little bit taken aback that this simple amendment to the Amnesty Bill, appears to be causing us some problem.  First of all, I would like to remind you about the provisions of the existing law regarding amnesty.  Section three of the Act provides as follows; “Amnesty is declared in respect of any Ugandan who has at any time since the 26th day of January 1986 engaged in or is engaging in war or armed rebellion against the Republic of Uganda by doing the following:

(a) Actual participation in combat.

(b) Collaborating with perpetrators of war or armed rebellion.

(c) Committing any other crime in furtherance of war or armed rebellion or assisting or aiding the conduct or prosecution or the war or rebellion.”

Now, those are the offences or conduct in respect of a person who comes out boldly, genuinely and says, he has repented, then the provisions of this particular law will apply.  The first thing is that the individual will be forgiven, resettled and provided facilities within which to use in order to be integrated into society.  Some of those facilities may not be available, but this is really the background and objective of this particular law. Therefore, the objective of the amnesty law, and therefore, the role of the Amnesty Commission is to promote reconciliation between willing and genuine people who surrender or reporters as they are referred to in the Act. 

The Government is supposed to play its role to put up facilities and structures such as the Amnesty Commission. The question is, if people are pardoned or if people are granted amnesty under this law, they are let free or they are re-settled, and for some reason or another they get out of where they have chosen to be and go to engage in these very same acts, which are provided in section 3 of the Amnesty law, what do you do with them? Let us ask ourselves, what do we do with them?  

Obviously, someone could come up and go to the Commission and say he is applying for amnesty under section 3 of the Act. He would probably tell the Commission what he has been involved in, and it is possible that he may have involved himself in any one of these acts or activities listed in section 3, or all of them. 

What this amendment is really seeking to do is a very simple thing. A person like that one is not truly repentant, he has not genuinely surrendered, and he is therefore not prepared to benefit from the Amnesty law. 

Even if we say the Amnesty Commission, without knowing more about him, gave him an amnesty, and it later on discovered that actually this individual had been there before, the question is, what do you do with him? I think this is what we should ask ourselves. That is why this amendment is providing that this particular person cannot now claim amnesty, because tomorrow he will do the same thing. You cannot trust him. What do you do? You refuse him or her amnesty, and what else do you do according to this amendment? The idea now is that apart from denying amnesty to this person, he should now be prosecuted for whatever he has done. That is what the amendment is seeking. 

When you talk about the Presidential pardon, there is a provision, both in the Constitution and in the general law, on how the Presidential pardon is treated. First of all, the manner in which it is granted is provided in the Constitution. And as you pointed out, Mr. Speaker, there are certain grey areas, even in the Constitution, relating to this. For example, if the committee on prerogative of mercy has recommended a particular course of action to the President, there is the issue as to whether he still has the option to reject or accept. And the other change in the Constitution is that the person must have been tried and convicted before he can apply for the prerogative of mercy. So, I suggest that when it comes to the issue of the Presidential pardon, we allow the relevant law to apply. 

This particular Amnesty law was intended to pardon, was intended to deal with people who had engaged in acts of rebellion and warlike activities, so that they can come back home. And they can also be assured that when they do renounce rebellion, renounce warlike activities, they will be welcome home, they will not be prosecuted. But if they go on repeating those acts, they will not only be denied amnesty, but they will also be prosecuted for those acts.  This is really what the amendment is seeking to do. Thank you.

MR. AUGUSTINE NSHIMYE SEBUTULO (Mityana South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to support the policy behind the proposed amendment, but it is not very clear to me. Perhaps, I could seek clarification from the Minister and the Chairman of the Committee as to whether they have people who were granted amnesty, and they have committed acts which are forbidden by the parent Act, and the same people have come to the Commission seeking to be granted amnesty for a second time, so as to justify the introduction of this amendment. I do not know whether this is done in anticipation that in future they would get such people. I need clarification on this matter. Otherwise, the policy –(Interruption)

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether every Member has received this report, which was read by the Minister of Internal Affairs. In that report, under item 3, it clearly states that the Amnesty Commission says no one to whom it has granted amnesty has re-offended. It is very clear. I hope this information will help the Member.  Thank you.

MR. NSHIMYE: I am very grateful to the hon. Member for the information. In a way, it is re-enforcing my point that, although the policy is good, perhaps at this point in time, the amendment might not be necessary. 

Going back to the amendment, I think the mischief for which the amendment has been proposed, is aimed at such people who have gone through a very elaborate procedure, have been granted amnesty, and then they go back and commit the same offences. 

Perhaps, when we come to the Committee Stage, we could erase the fears of hon. Amongi Betty about people who may be abducted, or people who may find themselves in the same situation when it is not of their making. I would perhaps propose that the amendment says, “A person granted an amnesty under this Act, who after the grant to him or her of the amnesty knowingly or willingly commits…” This would take care of such people who would be forced into the act not entirely out of their own wish.  

I look at this proposed 6 A (b) as being redundant, because if a person commits an offence, you do not need to state in a law that this person should be prosecuted. It is quite obvious that this person should be prosecuted. I will not support this other paragraph 6(a)(b).  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and honourable Members.

MRS. ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the Committee for bringing this report; it is a small report and I think it is as small as the Bill itself.  But, having received another report, I do not know the author, because, I think he has not been identified.  I find it very, very important that the Committee has to consider some of the very useful information given in this report.  I appreciate that the object of the Bill will be just to get those particular persons who have committed the offence again.  But I also -(Mr.Gagawala Wambuzi rose_)

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Is the hon. Member of Parliament for Kampala District, in order to start proposing to us that these comments were made genuinely by hon. Oulanyah, who suggested that he will move at Committee Stage his proposals for amendment, whereas hon. Oulanyah is very prepared this evening to move these amendments on the Floor, is she in order really?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is a question of misunderstanding, because, maybe, the Member was not here when hon. Lt.Gen. Tinyefuza introduced the report of the Committee.  It was clearly stated that, what you call a report is not a report, but it is proposed amendments which the Member will move when we go to the Committee Stage.  So, we only have one report namely, the report of the Committee.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thought I heard that very clearly, because I have both reports.  If this one is a report, I thought these were comments from -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is only one report.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, and that is why I was referring to them as comments, and I certainly said that, I did not know the author, because, I did not find them addressed, but I acknowledge that hon. Oulanyah owns them.  I wanted to say that, it would be very prudent, if some of these observations could be critically looked at.  If I could raise the issue of the status of the children, which has been raised -(Interruption)

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I have tried to resist standing up, so that I wait until l give my final comments.  But I think Members of the House with your permission, need to be reminded that, I said we brought this amendment for a specific reason.  But there are other amendments, which the Commission itself came up with.  As a result of its application of the law on the ground, it was found that certain things indeed need to be amended and we have looked at those amendments with the Commission. We are still carrying them through the process of getting to this House, namely, that you write all these papers, you go before Cabinet, there is the process of Parliamentary Counsel and all these things, and that process is not a short one.  But this particular amendment came up a long time ago, as soon as the application of the Amnesty Commission started, this need to amend the Amnesty Act was brought to our attention by His Excellency the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief.  As we have already said, people can report to an Army unit and there were people reporting there.  So, as soon as we got that amendment, we started working on it, carrying it through the process, but in the meantime, as the Amnesty Commission also went on applying the law, they identified these other amendments which are needed, and we are going to bring them to this House.

Just like the Local Governments Act or any other laws that we have enacted in this House, we have taken them to the ground to be tested, and they have been found short and they have been brought here.  As far as I know, we have amended some of these laws more than once, and we can do that with the Amnesty Act.  But we are asking this House to approve this amendment, so that the loophole is sealed as we continue to carry through the rest of the amendments that we have found needing.  Thank you.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for the information.  But, she should also note that, once a Bill has been opened, definitely it will be liable to all sorts of amendments and instead of getting unguarded and an internalized kind of amendments, it will be very prudent for this Committee to study in detail some of these amendments as they are being brought.

THE SPEAKER: No, but hon. Member, you see, our Rules are very clear.  After this general debate, we go to Committee Stage.  If you support these amendments, you can make your proposal; we shall consider the amendments, and maybe pass them and then we incorporate them in the original Bill.  So, we still have time and hon. Oulanyah will definitely bring his amendments, which will be considered and incorporated.  So there will be no problem.

MRS. ZZIWA:  In that respect, Mr. Speaker, then I will go on to support the motion and we can now go to the Committee Stage and have these amendments brought, we shall go with the amendments.

MR. TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From the explanation given by the Member of Parliament from Buikwe North, and the explanation given by the Attorney General, and the explanation given by the Mover of the amendment, I do not see much to be debated.  Laws can be reviewed when a situation warrants it.  It does not mean that, if we make an amendment today on this Amnesty Bill, it ends there, and the Minister concerned has repeated this.  So, the point where I would doubt the Committee’s presentation is, what prompted this Bill to be brought to the House, since it has been said that nobody has been granted amnesty and breached it?  So, on that one, I need some clarification.

Secondly Mr. Speaker, laws are put in place as deterrent measure, and if people have raised this objection to this amendment, it means that the law will be effectively observed on the ground.

Three; this law seems to be creating fear; I may want to be clarified by some Members those who have talked vehemently like my brother, hon. Oulanyah, why they think it creates fear. If you have committed a crime as specified by the Amnesty law, you have been pardoned, I think you are registered and if you commit again the crime, they go to the register, they find they had forgiven you and this time you have to pay for it.  So, as I have sat here for these three hours, I do not see the reason for the hullabaloos about this amendment. Lastly, I support the amendment.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Whereas I thank the Committee for the good work done, I would like to seek the following clarification:

What would happen if someone is convicted of acts that are described under Section (3) of the Amnesty Act?  He is convicted and then he gets a Presidential pardon.  What would happen?  Would he be entitled to go to the Commission and get pardoned or he would go without, because I don’t see him being covered here.

THE SPEAKER: No, there are two situations here. The Amnesty Act is different from the Presidential pardon.  The Presidential pardon only comes after the conviction.  If somebody is convicted and the President pardons him, he is not doing so under the amnesty.  The amnesty, which is the subject of this debate, is by this Act, the other one is constitutional.

MR. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO: The argument is that this fellow has committed the same acts like the one who went before the Commission committed.  He has been convicted and pardoned.  Now, since he did not go through the Commission, that means he is still entitled to go there although he was pardoned earlier.

THE SPEAKER: But why should he go when he has already got the Presidential pardon?

MR. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO: What I mean, Mr. Speaker, is that after the Presidential pardon he commits other acts as described under Section (3). Would he now go to the Commission, because he has not –(Mr. Lule rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  There is a motion.

MR.UMAR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that we proceed to the Committee Stage because there are no new ideas coming on this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, what is the motion?

MR. LULE: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE AMNESTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

(Clause 1 agreed to)

Clause 2: 

MR. JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Mr. Chairman, I have looked very carefully at the provisions as provided in the amendment under clause 2, I have also listened very carefully to the contributions from the House. Mr. Chairman, in light of that, I beg to move an amendment to the Bill as proposed to the following effect: I beg to move that the current provision marked (6) (a) be renumbered to read (6) (a) sub-clause (i). And I beg to introduce four new subsections after subsection (i) proposed in the Bill.

Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a new sub-clause (ii) be created to read as follows:  

“Where a person mentioned in sub-section (i) of this Section demonstrates to the Commission that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the provision of sub-section (i) (a) shall not apply to that person”.

(iii) “Where a person named in sub-section (i) of this section is a child, it shall in the absence of contrary evidence be presumed that exceptional circumstances apply”.

(iv) “In determining the existence of special circumstance, the Commission shall take into account all relevant factors including the nature of the act, circumstance in which the act was committed, and the age of the person”.

(v) “Where a person to whom sub-section (i) applies, indicates that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the court before which he or she is being tried shall adjourn the trial and refer the matter to the Amnesty Commission”.     

Mr. Chairman, also arising from the debate in the House, I now also propose an amendment to what would now be (6) (a) (i) that a person granted the amnesty under this Act, Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert “or any other law in force”. So, it will read as follow: 

“A person granted an amnesty under this Act or any other law in force who after the grant to him or her of the amnesty commits an act mentioned in Section (3) . . .” and the rest continues.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you have heard the proposed amendment, anything to say?

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Gen, David Tinyefuza): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members.  I have listened to the proposed amendments from the honourable Member from Moro County; I do get the rationale why he is moving these amendments. But as I am going to highlight, I have the following reservations about them, especially as they had not been discussed in the Committee that dealt with the amendment. And Members really had occasion to visit this Committee and present these additional amendments, since they have far reaching effects, as I will elaborate.  

It is in the same vein, as the Minister had said, that the Committee did appreciate that there were many areas that needed to be revised under the Amnesty law.  However, Government has not yet come up with an exhaustive version of these required amendments. And in this report, it has been ably noted, on page 2, that these include cases of individuals under the Presidential pardon, non-Ugandans who come in and wage war, members of the armed forces in past regimes, and also including other areas which the hon. Members have mentioned here.

As the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs has mentioned, there are other amendments being worked on in an exhaustive way. And it is the hope of this Committee that Members will be invited to give their contributions in an elaborate way, to enrich that debate. 

I think that hon. Oulanyah’s amendments, if just taken in on face value, would seem innocent, but I find them very pregnant. And they could actually undermine the intention of the intended amendment, and even the effectiveness of the initial Act. 

I will begin with his latest proposed amendment, 6 A (1), where he says, “A person granted an amnesty under this Act, or any other law in force…” How? That is very dangerous! Here we are targeting people who are given amnesty for rebel activities as specified under this law. Immediately you open it up to include other laws in force, you are going to give a blanket absolution to criminals, and this is absolutely dangerous. And that is not the intention of this Bill. 

The intention of this Bill is limited in application and in intention. Therefore, to give it that elasticity would be tantamount to abuse of this very law. Therefore, I would not support that amendment as proposed –(Interjections)- Well, I am reacting to the proposed amendment. Later on, I will move in my capacity, which I think should happen on these proposed amendments. I beg to proceed, Mr. Chairman, if you will allow me.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is an amendment by hon. Oulanyah, and you have received the views of the chairperson of the Committee. He is opposing the amendments.  Now the debate is open.

MR. ERESU:  Mr. Chairman, I think this is a very critical stage in considering what is before us.  The chairman of the Committee, together with the Minister, earlier on stated that there are other amendments which are forthcoming. 

We are at Committee Stage and the Act is now open for review, and an amendment has been moved, which is equally very important. And the chairman of the Committee has, as you have said, stated categorically that he does not accept these amendments. At the same time, when I look at the Bill before us, according to me, it is redundant. Records show that actually those who have got amnesty have not committed any crime again in that direction. In other words, we are making a law to cover a non-existent situation. So, the question is, why do we hurry? Why don’t we suspend – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, is that a procedural question?  You can legislate before an act so that we take preventive measures. So, there is nothing wrong with enacting a law before something has happened. What we have to do is to debate the merits of the amendments.  You have heard the position of hon. Oulanyah, and you have heard the position of the chairperson. You are free to make your contribution, and then we shall pronounce ourselves on the proposed amendments.

MR. OULANYAH: Mr. Chairman, I simply moved a motion. I was not given an opportunity to justify the motion.  

THE CHAIRMAN: What I had really done was to ask the Minister. Normally, when an amendment is brought, when there is a Minister in charge of the Bill, you ask him or her what they think. If they have no objection, then you proceed. Now you have heard that there is an objection.  

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I just want to assure Members that I agree with the Chairman on the Committee’s proposals.  

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Chairman, I thought I was still holding the Floor. I had just made a comment on only one point, and I wanted, in a successive way, to comment on all the points which hon. Oulanyah has just commented on. I want to give brief reasons as to why I think these amendments cannot be accommodated in the current fashion as proposed. That does not mean that they cannot be taken back and considered, and be brought in the exhaustive amendment, which is due to come.

The second amendment proposed by hon. Oulanyah says, “Where a person mentioned in subsection (1) of this section demonstrates to the Commission that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the provision of subsection (1)(a) shall not apply to that person.”  

While this proposed amendment is well intentioned, it is like opening up a pandora’s box. First of all, this amendment does even tell us what these exceptional circumstances are. Supposing exceptional – (Interruption)

LT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Chairman, as the chairman of the Committee is making some remarks, I think it is very important for hon. Oulanyah to scribble his amendments on a piece of paper so that we can read them and internalise them. Exceptional circumstances are very serious matters. 

Before he makes a defence of the amendments he has moved, we would want to read them, because these are very serious matters and they have legal implications.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, do you have copies of these?

MR. OULANYAH: Mr. Chairman, the copies that were made were left on the table, including the short notes that we made explaining circumstances why we propose this amendment.  They were left on the table for honourable Members to pick.

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unfortunately, even me I found my own version of his amendments just here.  So, I do not think many Members have them.  Mr. Chairman, if I could be allowed to proceed, these exceptional circumstances are not stated clearly as to what constitutes them.  When you are dealing with issues like terrorism, issues like waging war against the State, issues like rebel activities, for you to legislate in such a hazy manner leaving gray areas, I think will even defeat justice itself. Because I think these exceptional circumstances, if they are not to be abused, they need to be specified, especially when we are tasking a body which is not even a court of law; because a court of law has standards which are specific. How does it determine the exceptional circumstances? 

This is a Commission of Presidential appointees or whatever, politicians and so on, with different interests in applying this law, and you are telling them to determine on exceptional circumstances! They are going to use subjective measures, not objective measures, while courts tend to use objective mechanisms in determining circumstances because they are specified under the law.

So, Mr. Chairman, I will not also agree –(Prof. Latigo rose_)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am just seeking clarification from the Chairman of the Committee, because my knowledge of the Commission is that it is being chaired by a High Court Judge. And I believe that the appointment of a High Court Judge meant that the requirement of membership of that Commission was that the people involved were people of high integrity.  Why must we use the law to doubt the Commission, which is put in place by the law?

MS. ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to know from the Chairperson of the Committee, as he refers to terrorism, does this particular Bill we are debating do away with the need for the Terrorism Bill?  Is it a perfect substitute?  Because we are discussing amnesty and he is referring to terrorism. Does it do away with a need for Terrorism Bill?  Thank you.

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Chairman, thank you.  First of all, let me answer what one hon. Member here has just asked about the essence of having a High Court Judge as a Chairperson.  You will note that, this is really intended to promote the status and the integrity of the Commission. But it does not in any way implement, for instance, Rules of Procedure of the High Court.  It does not, for instance, use the rules of evidence as the courts of law do.  Therefore, they are not bound by these rules of evidence when they are adducing these other so-called exceptional circumstances, and as such, it is open to abuse.

Now, if I was to tell you from the Parent Act, it says – this is Section 8, Mr. Chairman, Part 3 of the Amnesty Act – “The Commission is chaired by a Chairperson who shall be a High Court Judge” - and this is important.  So, it is not mandatory that it is actually a High Court Judge – “or a person qualified to be a Judge of the High Court”.  Now, even that one is open and it goes on “six other Members who shall be persons of high moral integrity”.  Now, this absolutely does not at all impose on them what rules of procedure they should use when they are really dealing with this type of situation. And I think they are incapable of adducing these exceptional circumstances.

Mr. Chairman, if I may proceed –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: But you have limited time really.

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Sorry, Mr. Chairman.  Maybe, I should not have given my time to these people.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member suggests that we do amend to include the section which includes a child that has been found participating in these activities.  Mr. Chairman, while I appreciate the logic and the rationale behind this, I also want to caution the Members that we would rather go back with these amendments and scrutinize them after internalizing them - (Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, I am talking about the proposed amendments of the hon. Member; not the clauses we have already voted on.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, as I see, the intention was only one.  These are details spelling out the exceptional circumstances.  They are not independent really with each other. The amendment is one, but the other ones are dealing with circumstances that should be taken into account.  So, the point is, that you are opposed to this amendment.  I think that is the position.

LT. GEN. TINYEFUZA:  Mr. Chairman, I am opposed to this amendment and therefore, I propose that let it be thrown out.  But before that, I am talking about the proposed amendment by hon. Oulanyah specifically. For instance, here a child is one below 18 years.  But for purposes of waging war, we know that children of 15 years, 17 years and so on, commit acts of terror, even 12.  They handle guns and they throw bombs. I want also to inform hon. Members that in law, it is not uncommon to say that for purposes of this act, the age shall be this. It is not uncommon!  Therefore, for purposes of terrorism, we need to specify the age. 

We cannot treat terrorism as age of consent, like a girl, that she must be 18 before you sleep with her, no.  Terrorism is different, therefore, here age is not specified, Mr. Chairman. Who is a child under terrorism law?  Who is a child?  

Therefore, I do not think that the current law under 18 suffices for the current purposes of terrorism Act.  I think we should ignore this.  

Another point, Mr. Chairman, is where hon. Oulanyah talks about – in fact it is in 4 and 5 – “In determining the existence of specific circumstances, the Commission shall take into account the relevant factors”.  But in 5, Mr. Chairman, it says that when a Court is even listening to a case, and it is indicated that exceptional circumstances exist, in this case, a Court before which he/she is being tried shall adjourn the trial and refer the matter to the Amnesty Commission.

Now, this is giving new functions to the Commission, which were never intended.  Because, Mr. Chairman, if you look at Section 9 of the Amnesty Act, it is specifically provided for.  What are these functions, Mr. Chairman? To monitor the programmes of demobilisation or integration, resettlement of reporters, co-ordinating programmes of sensitisation of the general public, consider and promote appropriate reconciliation, and perform any other function in the execution of its functions as stipulated.  Nowhere does it give the Commission adjudicating powers.  Therefore, this Commission is not adjudicatory in nature. It does not dispose of functions of a court of law.  

Immediately you start saying that the court should suspend what it is doing and it reverts the matter to the Amnesty Commission in order to adduce exceptional circumstances, the Commission is taking on a different role. It is not the role it has now. Its role is purely administrative, co-ordination. It is not determining the availability of culpability; the two are different. Whether a person is culpable or a person should be integrated, those are different. 

For that, I call upon the hon. Member to withdraw his amendments and the Committee actually considers these amendments. We shall take advantage of his information and forward it to the concerned Minister to come up with other amendments. Otherwise, I propose that we go with the original amendment as proposed by the Minister. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN: Normally, when an amendment of that nature is brought, you ask the Minister whether he agrees or he does not. Once that is done, if he or she agrees, then it really makes the matter simple. But it seems now it is complicated. A debate will come up. I will give opportunity to the mover to defend his amendments in detail so that we can see what to do with them.

MR. OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is a pity that now both the chairman – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Oulanyah, I hear from Members that they do not have copies of your amendments.  I thought this was a very simple amendment, which we would have dealt with within 30 minutes. Now it is taking the whole day. What do we do?

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. In view of the circumstances surrounding this amendment, I have stated here, and the Chairman of my Committee has already stated that we have brought this specific amendment, but we are aware of the concerns that hon. Members have as far as the actual parent Act is concerned. We have taken care of those amendments and they will be brought into this House. We have even discussed with the Committee and agreed that we can actually bring those amendments.  

In view of all that, I wish to propose that we pass this amendment brought by Government, and then we shall go ahead and bring the other amendments, which are already in the process. This is a specific amendment that is asking you to seal a certain loophole; other amendments will follow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is that a Bill was brought by the Government to be considered by the Committee. We have gone through the Second Reading and now we are at the Committee stage. A Member is free to bring an amendment to improve on the original text of the Bill. What do I do with this amendment? There is an amendment over which we started the debate, so we have to dispose of this amendment before we can proceed, unless the mover withdraws the amendment. The mover has brought his amendment and it has to be disposed.  

The only problem is that the Members are saying they need to see the detailed amendments. In this case, I think the best we can do is to adjourn so that copies are given to Members so that they can fully consider it. 

I had thought that we would deal with two Bills, but this is just one Bill. I thought within 30 minutes we would have finished it, but apparently it is greatly involved, so we have to adjourn.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Namusoke): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

 (Question put and agreed)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled ‘The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001’ and has passed clause 1 of the Bill and Clause 2 has been stood over.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

 (Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: We had another Bill. We expected to deal with two Bills today.  

PROF. KAYONYERA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I stand on a question of procedure. When this House established Committees, they were meant to expedite business of the House. It also meant that any business before the Committees should be thoroughly dealt with in those Committees. Rule 161 of our Rules of Procedure allows non committee Members to participate fully in the business of those committees.  

The way the debate has been going on –(Interjections)- I beg Members’ indulgence, including hon. James Mwandha, who is an experienced Member of this House. I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, whether our Committees do their work properly. Because I have seen here, Members are debating this amendment in its originality. Members who are interested, like my Friend hon. Eresu, it appeared never even at one time attended the meetings of these Committees.  They are allowed. I have said Rule 161 allows Members to attend.  Please read your Rules of Procedure; if you are interested in any subject, you are allowed to attend and contribute to the debate.  So, hon. Members, I beg you should be serious, if you are interested in any subject, go and attend the proceedings of that Committee, so that this House can be helped to expedite its business.  Otherwise the purpose of the Committees will be negated and totally defeated.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I entirely agree with what you have said that we have the Committees and the Committees are open.  But at the same time, we must have Committee reports presented to the House, and when they report to the House, we have to debate the reports, and when we debate the reports, which we have done, we have the second reading, then we go in the Committee and in the Committee, any Member is free to move an amendment relevant to the Bill.  These are our rules.  

But at the same time, I must say we are still reviewing our Rules.  If it will be the feeling of the House that the Rules be changed, that we do not debate the reports, then that will be different.  But as far as I am concerned, for me, I did not think that we would spend so much time on this one clause.  I did not, and that is why on the Order Paper, we had put two Bills for consideration.  I had hoped that within 30 minutes we would have disposed of this Amnesty Bill.  But, apparently, it seems Members had many ideas on this, that is why this debate has taken long, and that is why we have not been able to complete this Bill and start on the Inspector General of Government Bill.  But there it is!   I think the Rules allow Members to move their amendments and the Member has moved an amendment, we cannot just throw it away without considering it and voting on it.  

But Members have been unable to contribute on this amendment, because they say, they want to read it, internalize it and be able to make contributions.  We have suspended the Committee stage.  What I will ask the Member is to give copies to all Members, so that tomorrow we do not spend much time on this Bill.  We deal with it, then we move on to The  Inspector General of Government Bill which has been pending for quite long time.  So accordingly, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow, at 2.00 p.m.   Try to be here at 2.00 p.m. so that we can deal with as much business as we can.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 12th December, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)   

