Tuesday, 18 December 2007

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Abdu Katuntu.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Normally, the sitting arrangement in this Parliament is that the front bench is for Cabinet ministers and shadow ministers of the Opposition side. I do not know when hon. Katuntu was –(Laughter)

Well, honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this sitting and in particular, I want to welcome our new member, hon. Abdu Katuntu, who was recently elected. Hon. Katuntu, you are most welcome and we hope that we will benefit from your presence in this House. (Applause)

I know you have been through the campaign that ended a few days ago, but you are now a Member of Parliament for that constituency; you are representing all the people in that constituency. So, forget the differences you might have faced during the campaign and serve all people including those who stood against you. You will be assigned a committee to serve on. Please, liase with the leaders of your side so that you are given a committee to serve on; but you are most welcome.

Honourable members, before I conclude my communication, I want to inform you that today we will be sitting for a very short time because there is another urgent meeting I have to attend at around 5.00 O’clock. So, we should be brief. 

We had expected to sit up to Friday but I have been informed that tomorrow is Idd Adhuha, which is a public holiday and we have to be with our people to celebrate that day. Therefore, tomorrow, we shall not be able to sit and we will be remaining with only one day and that is Thursday. I find it unfair for somebody who has gone to Gulu or to Kisoro to celebrate Idd Adhuha, to come back just for one day. So, at the end of today’s Business, I will have to adjourn the House for Christmas recess, which will end sometime in January.

Another thing that I thought I should mention is that there are two stories, which featured in the newspapers yesterday and the other day, which I thought I should mention. One story was a very sad one; it is about the death of seven people in a car accident that involved a train where four of them were members of the same family. It is very sad; we have been talking about these accidents and I do not know what solution we are providing to reduce the carnage on our roads. I am very sad about this loss.

Another one was a good story, but what affected me was about the reaction of a man whose wife gave birth to five babies. There was a picture of the mother and the father of the babies, but the father was weeping for the birth of the five children -(Laughter)- when people weep because they have lost a dear one, it is understandable; but this was a case where five people joined the family and the father was weeping. I believe this is a matter that the government should address, because I think the father was weeping because he cannot afford to look after these five children. These are part of us; they are our citizens. 

There are many incidents where we have had mothers who dump children on the streets or they kill them, because the fathers have abandoned the family. So, Prime Minister and honourable members, this is a matter that Government should address to help this family. It is our duty to help this family, so that these five people can live. 

2.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise, and this is the third time I am doing so, to welcome a new member to the Parliament of Uganda, who is a Member of this Parliament, but more importantly for me a member of the Opposition, my former colleague in the Seventh Parliament, Hon. Abdu Katuntu –(Applause) 

Mr Speaker, just as you have read in the papers, there are so many comments that followed the declaration that hon. Katuntu had won the by-election. I want to start by assuring the members who do not know hon. Katuntu -(Interjection)– the members who do not know him in case there are any, that in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Katuntu was a very accomplished legislator and we welcome him particularly to strengthen the work of Parliament. 

But also, it is a good day for many of us, and all of us in the opposition are very happy that we have proven to this country that when people are left to make their decisions, our messages reach them very effectively –(Applause)– and this in particular is even more revealing. I would like only to appeal to our colleagues that these things happen –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, since the general election, I stood here to welcome the new Member of Parliament for Bukonjo East, who is an FDC member. I again stood up to welcome the Member of Parliament for Oyam County South, who is a UPC member, and today, we welcome hon. Abdu Katuntu, who is an FDC member. We also stood here to welcome two Members of Parliament on the government side - (Interjection)– yes, that is from Ntoroko and one from Masaka - Kalungu - [Hon Members: “What about the women?”] - No, those were not by-elections; I am talking about by-elections. So, as far as the judgement of the people based on previous contexts is concerned, I think the country has been very fair and I am very happy that hon. Katuntu has joined us. 

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to thank and put on record my gratitude to the members of my party, the members of the opposition. It is not true that we got assistance from members on the government side. But I definitely can vouch for the fact that members of the Opposition, FDC, DP, UPC, JEEMA and CP applied themselves to support hon. Katuntu –(Applause)- and they did so because they thought that that was the right thing to do, and they did so within the law. 

We do hope that from now onwards, the difficulties that have faced our elections will begin to diminish and I would like to say – [Maj. Gen Otafiire: “Why is Besigye demonstrating?”] – Hon. Otafiire, you will have a chance to speak. I would like to say this because even the group of Kakooza Mutale, whose previous record was very bad in the last election, were in Bugweri but their activities were confined to non-violent activities, and that was good. (Applause) 

However, in containing them, there were still excesses to which I raised the matter, and I do not know, Mr Speaker, whether it would still be of any major interest for today to ask for the government statement on the other matter. But should it come, we will be able to respond. Otherwise, we are satisfied that we fought a good fight and that a very good person has come to this Parliament, who will actively debate matters on this Floor and will actively contribute to getting Parliament to appreciate where they should make decisions. That is a fundamental difference and hon. Katuntu; you are most welcome –(Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.01
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Mr Speaker and my colleagues the members of Parliament, I want to appreciate the government commitment by recruiting the SPCs to improve on the security of the IDPS. But our SPCs for the last five months have not been paid and I want the Leader of Government Business to tell us when they will pay our Special Police Constables. 

It is a very good commitment because the voluntary return of the IDP’s is going on normally, but there were some cases of bad incidents: One happened two months ago where one SPC got involved in a criminal act; he shot two people who were humanitarian workers and in his testimony, he said he did that because that was the only way he could survive. Therefore, can the Leader of Government Business, please, tell us when these SPCs are going to be paid? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not expect further debates on this. He had indicated to me that he had a question for the minister. As I have told you, I have very limited time today to transact a lot of business. Since you did not notify me, I do not see why I – no, no, no. I think this is a question to the minister: “When are you paying the people is talking about?” 

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. The Minister of Internal Affairs who should have answered that question is not around and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is on leave. Princess Kabakumba, who is the acting Minister of Internal Affairs, is going to answer that question. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of order. I am really perturbed because this afternoon I met the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and I raised the same matter to the minister, not about the SPCs but I raised the matter on the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU). They have also not been paid for the last five months and the minister was here in Parliament. 

The minister advised me to raise this matter on the Floor and that the Minister of State for Defence would answer today. I am just wondering whether the Prime Minister was not informed that actually the minister was around and that the Minister of State for Defence can effectively answer this matter. Is it in order for the Prime Minister not to involve the Minister of State for Defence to give us a true picture of –(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. members, as I told you the only member who approached me that he had something to say after my communication was the one who raised the question about non-payment of these people and I do not know whether it is the Minister of Defence or Minister of Internal Affairs who is supposed to pay. Can you, please, tell us that? As for assignment of ministers, that is the work of the Prime Minister.

3.06 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, it is true the Minister for Internal Affairs is out of the country and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is on leave, which ends on 7th January 2008. However before the Minister of Internal Affairs left, he delegated to the Minister for Defence to hold his portfolio and in his absence, the government Chief Whip takes up his duties. I can confirm that the Minister of Defence is not available but I have information that the ministry is considering the issue of payment. There were problems but I have confirmation, Sir, that their payments are being processed and a full report will be presented to this Parliament when we resume. 

About the SPCs, because of various commitments there were budget cuts here and there but now Government, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, is sorting out the issues of paying the SPCs and immediately we resume a report will be given to this House about the progress on the payment of the SPCs and ASTU, Mr Speaker. 

MR BANYENZAKI: I would like to be guided, Mr Speaker, so that I am not confused in future. In the event that a minister goes on leave, is it the minister who allocates who should be in his place or it is the Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: As far as Parliament is concerned, normally the procedure is that when a minister intends to go on leave, it is upon him or her to write and say he or she has assigned his duties to so and so. In case this is not done, then the work of making assignment is with the Prime Minister. (Mr Okumu rose_) On the same issue?

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question of community Police is a very sensitive one, especially that of the special police constables who were recruited in the areas affected by war mainly for the purposes of allowing people to return home and begin the restoration of the rule of law. 

I, therefore, find it extremely unacceptable that if there is a budget cut, that becomes an area where Government cuts funding because it is not only in terms of payment, Mr Speaker. Even the vehicles, which were bought by donors for the Community Police in every county to patrol, have actually been taken over by the district leadership and they are not doing their work in the respective counties. We find that this is undermining the process of resettlement. 

Therefore, the clarification I would like to get from the minister is whether Government does not prioritise the return of internally displaced persons to their homes, or whether Government is interested in postponing the return of our people home because what they require is at least some degree of law, order and maintenance and the community police are the ones providing that. So, withdrawing their vehicles and subjecting them to non-payment is really something that will not be taken lightly by the people affected by this conflict and by the people who have lived in these protected camps for all these years. So, may I get this clarification from the minister, Mr Speaker? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, let us get a supplementary from hon. Okello-Okello.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am perturbed by reports that the incumbent minister is on leave, the minister of state is abroad and the minister left to act is not available. A Government system must work all the time. A minister does not carry the office wherever he goes. The office must remain here to serve the people of this country; that is unless this Government has got a different system where everybody goes with their offices wherever they go. I think the Leader of Government Business should assure us that we shall not stop getting services because a minister is on leave or abroad. I think this is not satisfactory, Mr Speaker.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The ministers have not gone with their offices and that is why I am here to answer your concerns. However, some of these problems or issues have been with us and you have, time and again, advised that they should be raised as oral answers so that we can give comprehensive statements. I doubt whether if the minister was here, he would be able to give you all the details that you want; you have just raised these questions on this floor. However, hon. Felix Okot interacted with the minister who is on leave, he gave me this information and said that he was going to compile detailed information about the issue. Therefore, ministers do not go with their offices. 

About the return of the internally displaced persons, this is a priority of Government and it is the government that I serve that has encouraged and cleared members of the IDP camps to go back to their homes. Even those programmes that have been put in place to resettle these people are by Government. I am not aware and neither is Government aware that the vehicles have been taken over by districts. 

I want to appeal to colleagues who have this information and the districts that are affected to give us more details so that we can follow up these cases. The vehicles were supposed to be used for facilitation and ensure that there is security when the IDPCs’ return. Therefore, it is a priority and we want to see all our citizens living in their homes and not in the camps and that their homes are secure.

THE SPEAKER: I would suggest that when you make those reports you give the Office of the Speaker a copy so that I can also follow it up.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to welcome hon. Abdu Katuntu –(Applause)– to Parliament. He is extremely versatile and focused -(Laughter)- and I will try to persuade him to come over to the NRM party. I thank you.

3.14
MR AMOOTI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. members. You will recall last week that we debated an abstract from newspapers about the issue of a research that was done by the African Leadership Institute and you guided the House that members should not debate an abstract from the newspapers but that members would rather wait for a report that was going to be launched the following day, last week. All of us agree that we received these copies in our pigeonholes and I believe you could have also received your own copy in your office. I would therefore like to propose that we form a small select committee of members as you had guided so that we look into this report and then report to Parliament as you had guided us last week. I beg to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. members, as I told you last week I had not received a copy of the report but yesterday I received the copy. Personally, I have not studied it and therefore I have no comment to make on it but since you say you have received the copies, I don’t know what you want to do with them.

3.16
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have received the copies but I am not comfortable with the suggestion of my colleague, hon. Otada. They have given us these copies but I don’t think that as members of Parliament we should put it on our Order Paper to discuss the outcome of this NGO report. Let us just ignore it and continue with our work.

3.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Anybody demanding that we debate this report should cool down, compose himself and reflect on why he is here. We are here for a programme; we have a lot of items that are very critical to our people on the Order Paper and I don’t think that we should waste our time and Parliament’s time and discuss this report. If you are not satisfied, ignore it. This is a newspaper matter; you can also go to court if you are not satisfied. There is that other option other than wasting our time. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: May I take it that the view is that you let it go?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

3.18
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I have a different issue. Two weeks ago, I raised an issue to do with Mayuge sugar factory. I raised it to the Prime Minister and he promised to answer it last week but up to now I have not heard an answer. May I hear from the Prime Minister as to what has happened to Mayuge sugar factory that is being gagged after the court ruling that said the sugar factory must be in Mayuge but up to now these people have been stopped from constructing this factory? The Prime Minister promised to give me an answer and I need to report to the people who sent me.

3.19
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. member for reminding the Prime Minister about the statement he promised to make. The Office of the Prime Minister received the judgement last week and dispatched the judgement yesterday to the Office of the Attorney-General for his interpretation. The Attorney-General is expected to come to the House and guide the House on the effect of the judgement. That is the information I have from the Office of the Prime minister.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I have not had the benefit of receiving a copy of that communication to the Attorney-General. But I would like to assure the House that the moment I receive the copy of the judgement, I will look at it and advise appropriately. However, I hasten to add as follows: That the matter between Mayuge Sugar factory and Kakira Sugar Works is a matter between two private parties. The Attorney-General’s Office is not a party to that case.

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, the circumstances under which the Attorney-General came in were that the court had resolved the dispute between the parties but in spite of the pronouncement by the court, the government went in to interfere to deny what the court had given the party. That is why the Prime Minister is in.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let us study the judgment and get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should take this matter seriously because the rights of a party are being affected by the government. What you are being asked is that under what circumstances are you, Government, coming in when the court has resolved the matter? This is the question.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I thought I would not belabour this point any further until we had come up with a more researched position. However, there is the application which sought injunction that Mayuge should not operate within a radius of 35 kilometres. That application that sought an injunction was arising from the main case, which had been filed by Kakira Sugar Works, which is not yet heard and determined. However, I would be surprised, and that is why we actually need to come back here so that if the injunction application has been heard and determined and there is a ruling that they should operate, if Government is certainly involved in making sure that that they do not actually operate, then certainly that would be outrageous.

THE SPEAKER: So the position is that Government is not ready to make a statement on that issue. That is what it is and, therefore –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our Government policy is that we are a private sector-led economy. We have a fully fledged minister for investment and yet we have investors here, in this case, being frustrated.  

You are aware that we even have the Investment Authority in place and that this Parliament has appropriated massive funds towards attracting and protecting investors so that Government creates an enabling environment for investors. Under these circumstances, where our colleague, an honourable Member of Parliament is saying that an investor within his region and within Uganda is being frustrated, this is a serious matter. It is so serious that even the Minister of Investment should come and tell us why this particular investor is being frustrated by Government and somehow -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague for giving me this opportunity. I was actually shocked by the Attorney-General when he said that that is a matter between two private companies. The information I want to give to you is that today the Prime Minister, on behalf of Government, invited the Acholi Parliamentary Group to discuss matters concerning investment by private companies, and I thought that that should be the spirit; that Government should always come in with all this interest. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But where are we going with this debate? The matter was raised for a statement from Government and the answer is that they are not ready to give you that statement. So, the status quo remains.

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  What is happening in Mayuge is the same thing that is happening in Lango. Government has stopped many cotton buyers from buying cotton and they are allowing only one investor to buy cotton from Lango and yet these other companies have invested a lot of money in promoting cotton in that region. But right now a letter from Government – directive from Government - has stopped other private investors from buying and dealing in cotton in Lango sub-region. This matter is very serious because it seems there is preference. Some companies are preferred to others; some are being supported others are not supported. The people who have been with the people in Lango in the production of cotton have been with us but when newcomers come, those who have been with us are stopped. This newcomer is being supported by Government while others are being stopped. Is it fair, Mr Speaker?

MR BANYENZAKI: So, given the fact that the circumstances are leading to the frustration of investors, should it not be the Minister of Investment to come and explain why the investors in this country are being frustrated and why they are being favoured selectively? This should be the Minister of Investment to come and tell us why investors in this country are being frustrated.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, what I do not want is my people to go on the streets demonstrating against bad actions. I wanted to follow the right procedure but it seems I am failing because there are people whose judgment was in their favour and now they say the Attorney-General must give a statement and the Attorney-General is not ready to give a statement. So, what do you expect the people of Mayuge to do?

BILLS
FIRST READING

PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2007

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have district councillors from Kapchorwa, led by their speaker, Mr Paul Majinja. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

3.29
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2007 be read for the first time. Accompanying it is the Certificate of Financial Implications as stipulated by Section 10 of the Budget Act.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, seconded. Now this Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament namely, I think it is Internal Affairs, no Defence Committee. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 40/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

3.31
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): “Is the Minister aware that the drugs especially for Malaria and HIV/AIDS worth Shs 1.2 billion were due to expire, at the National Medical Stores?

What mitigation measures has the ministry put in place to avert such losses?

How does the ministry coordinate procurement, storage and distribution of drugs and other medical supplies in the country?”

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this question has been with us for quite some time now and we have been ready with the response. Now I am glad that we have been given a slot to answer it. 

You may recall that during the course of last year 2006, my ministry changed the protocol for treatment of Malaria from a loose combination of Chloroquine plus Sulphurdioxide Pyrimethamine, commonly referred to as Fansidar, to a more efficacious and effective fixed dose Artemesinine based-combination therapy, ACT in short. This change was prompted by the then unacceptably high levels of resistance of the Malaria parasite to Chloroquine and Fansidar across the country. This change took immediate effect. The resultant effect of the change was that we had to abandon use of all stocks of the then existing medicines for treatment of Malaria. As a consequence, these medicines gradually expired as they were either already in stock in big quantities or on the high seas destined to Uganda. This explains why there were expiries of medicines earlier bought for treatment of Malaria but not currently in use. 

While as a country we have done very well in containing the HIV/AIDS pandemic, we had to scale up massively the treatment of those HIV/AIDS patients who needed ARVs. We worked hard to surpass the WHO 3x5 target for Uganda by the end of 2005 and as we talk we now have actually more than 100,000 people on ARVs. For this to happen, we needed support. We, therefore, opened our doors to all partners who were willing to support us. As a result we had an overwhelming response to scale up. This led to some coordination problems in the logistics component of the response to HIV/AIDS and led to expiry of some ARVs within the National Medical Stores. 

The most affected ARV products were the children’s preparations. Although we prepared relatively accurately for the children, a number of partners responded overwhelmingly to support pediatric HIV/AIDS treatment. Most importantly, direct care provided by our partners to different parts of the country through their own resources played a big role in some of the expiries at the centre. We are now set to improve the coordination of interventions as this did not only affect the ministry but also the partners. 

Sir, my ministry is now in constant consultation with the partners together with their technical agencies in ensuring that the expiry of ARVS is mitigated as much as possible.  

The second part of the question: what mitigation measures has the ministry put in place to avert losses? My ministry is working with its partners, the National Medical Stores and the National Drug Authority, to establish a database for monitoring the different players and the flow of products in the country. Specific committees and working groups have been established and rationalised to optimally address the different aspects of the provision of care particularly in the areas of Malaria and HIV/AIDS. The Ministry of Health is strengthening the pharmacy unit at the centre from a section to a division and ultimately to a department to provide for the necessary capacity required to effectively support the coordination and management of medicines and health supplies countrywide. 

In the meantime, an agreement has been arrived at to integrate and harmonise health logistics to facilitate the National Medical Stores. As part of this and in line with modern trends in logistics management, both the National Medical Stores and the Joint Medical Stores will be supported to strengthen their IT infrastructure to support their operations linkage and information exchange with the ministry and the local governments.

The third part of the question: how does the ministry coordinate procurement, storage and distribution of drugs and other supplies in the country?

Mr Speaker, the ministry has had a challenge as I have alluded to as a result of the need to scale up the number of fronts with respect to Malaria and HIV/AIDS. We have now developed a three year rolling procurement plan that includes inputs by all partners. This plan will serve as the frame for the co-ordination of procurement, storage and distribution of medicines and health supplies. 

The pharmaceutical section will take full responsibility as a focal point and clearing house for all inputs related to medicines and health supplies for all health programmes to avoid future over-supply and mitigate under supply. We shall stick to the provisions of the plan to strengthen the procurement, storage and distribution functions of the National Medical Stores and the Joint Medical Stores. Concurrently, we intend to double our efforts in building capacity in the two institutions where there may be need in order to have an optimal and reliable national capacity to procure, store and distribute medicine and health supplies. 

National Medical Stores has been here as a subject of debate before. The Social Services Committee of Parliament reported widely on the same subject. I consulted my colleague on the other side as to whether he wanted more information after the Social Services Committee of Parliament had reported to this House. He then informed me that there are new developments. But I think the new developments he is referring to are what appeared in the Saturday Vision newspaper. The report referred to -

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, I think I want to draw your attention to rule 38, in particular that the answer to a question should take three minutes.

DR NDUHUURA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

3.40
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my honourable colleague for giving precise answers to the questions raised. However, I also want to observe from the minister’s own response that one of the reasons he asserts are responsible for the expiries of drugs in stock in the National Medical Stores was the change of protocol for treatment of malaria from Chloroquine and Fansidar to Artemesinine based combination therapy. But you are saying that that change took immediate effect. As of now, are you aware that Chloroquine and Fansidar combinations are still in use?  

Secondly, the Artemesinine combination therapy, which Government procured for use for treatment of malaria, popularly known as Coartem, ideally was supposed to be free medicine. Are you aware that the government procured Artemesinine combination therapy have found themselves in private clinics and are being sold contrary to policy?  

Mr Speaker, I also would like to observe with dismay that Government could just open doors to any partners; opening doors without diligent supervision or coordination of such partners and besides allowing the partners to have a parallel procurement system; the same partners were also allowed to handle –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait, I expected supplementary questions.

DR EPETAIT: That is what I am coming to. (Laughter) I am just giving it. So, Mr Speaker, I would therefore want to find out - the minister says that the pharmaceutical division will take full responsibility; in my opinion, the minister should take political responsibility on this matter. What checks and balances have you made now on the control of those partners to whom you opened all doors and allowed to go to the ground?  

Lastly, the minister has just talked of having developed a three-year rolling procurement - for purposes of information to all honourable members, we would be happy if Members are availed with such information so that we keep a close-check on what is going on with the ministry to avoid further losses. Thank you.

3.44
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, let me set the record straight. When the minister said that the report was presented here by Social Services, it is actually the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises, which dealt exhaustively with the affairs of National Medical Stores. And early last week, we also reported that Government has started acting on some of the possible culprits. Investigations have been instituted and we are only waiting for conclusive decisions by Government.  

But arising from the minister’s response, I have not heard, as earlier on reported to us that one of the causes of large stocks not moving in and out of National Medical Stores was the involvement of third parties in the procurement and distribution of medical supplies. I do not know whether the minister still reaffirms that this is part of the causes of the expiry of drugs in the National Medical Stores.  

Secondly, the other reason was the Navigation Software Package, which will not be able to indicate –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odit, again I expect you to just ask a question.

3.46
MR OTADA AMOOTI (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mr Speaker, very recently the president commissioned a factory, which is supposed to manufacture ARVs and other drugs, in Luzira. I have information in regard to part three of the question.  I am just asking a supplementary, sir. I have information that among other things, Government has guaranteed that that factory will be in position to buy the drugs that will be manufactured by that factory. I would like to ask the minister if that sort of arrangement does not flout the procurement rules of this country. Thank you.

3.47
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to ask two supplementary questions to the minister. First, whether he is aware that there are expired drugs in health units, including health units level three and two. Is he aware that these drugs could be a danger to our population? How did these drugs find their way to the health units and what is his ministry doing to try to withdraw those drugs in health units?

Secondly, he told us this afternoon that ARVs expired while in the stores. Why did ARVs have to expire in stores yet there is an overwhelming demand for ARVs by patients of AIDS? Thank you.

3.48
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make some supplementary questions to the honourable minister. First, I do not know whether the minister is aware that the sensitivity pattern of plasmodia in Uganda varies from area to area and therefore some drugs, which have been actually left out, are still effective in some areas.

Secondly, I wonder whether the minister is aware that in many health units, the Coartem he is talking about are not available. In addition to that even the drugs, which are expiring in the National Medical Stores, which are still effective in some areas, are not available in these areas.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.50
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a supplementary question to the honourable minister, whether the monitoring of the central medical stores has filtered down to the hospitals. There are quite a lot of medicines that are expiring in the district hospitals as well. Not only that that goes there is already expired but even that that gets there when it is not expired actually expires there. So, I do not know what we have put in place to make sure that we do not get that loss.

On the other side, I do not know whether we classify condoms as medicines but they also expire in health centres. So, what can we do to make sure that they get distributed and they do not expire or get distributed when they are expired? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is my question to the minister. Is he aware that as the drugs are expiring at the National Medical Stores, there is no substantive chief executive? I think it is about eight months or so since the general manager, I think, was axed – I do not know his exact fate, was it an interdiction?

The second question is: What are you doing in order to harmonise the donors, third parties and the National Medical Stores stockings, which are actually parallel? As I am aware, whereas National Medical Stores stocks for sale, there is parallel stocking by third parties and this actually explains expiry both on the side of National Medical Stores and on the side of third party stocks. I thank you so much. 

3.52
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also have supplementary questions. The first question to the minister is that, we operate a pool system with regard to requisition of drugs and other sundries. So, what capacity has the ministry built at the local Government level for the health workers to be able to quantify and estimate what they need so that they only requisition for what is necessary for them so as to avoid expiry at community level?

Question two, related to what hon. Mukitale was raising, what efforts are being put in place by the ministry to reduce the third party procurements by the various development partners so that maybe National Medical Stores or Ministry of Health is the only party which procures so that you know what you are procuring into the country instead of everybody procuring without adequate co-ordination? 

Lastly, the honourable minister said that over 100,000 Ugandans are on ARVs, and that represents a half of those who are eligible to receive ARVs. So, what steps is the minister taking to ensure that the about 200,000 Ugandans who are eligible for ARVs immediately get access to ARVs? Thank you very much. 

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank colleagues for their questions. 

Now starting with hon. Epetait, it is true and I am aware that Chloroquine and Fansidar are still being used and are still effective in some areas as indeed some colleagues have pointed out. But when we started on the new policy of using A.C.T, it drastically affected the use of other drugs and therefore the demand definitely fell and thus leading to some expiries. 

Am I aware that some of the Coartem that is procured by Government finds itself in private clinics? Yes, I am aware and this is a very big problem. Because when you talk about corruption, when you talk about pilferage from Government stores, this is a big problem. Now, what is the Ministry of Health doing about this? As indeed I stated, Mr Speaker, this is a very big problem and it is not going to be fought by the Ministry of Health alone. Therefore, as we continue to fight corruption and as we continue to put into place measures that will reduce corruption, this is one of the issues that will be tackled. We, therefore, see it also going down but I want to appeal to all of you, Members of Parliament, to come in handy as Government tries to fight corruption in all areas be it in the health units, be it in the ministries, be it anywhere.

Hon. Epetait would also like to know whether the minister is going to take responsibility of co-ordinating the various partners with Government. I think in my response, I was very clear that we are trying to strengthen the pharmaceutical division. It is now a division but we want to strengthen it so that it eventually becomes a department. And this is the area in the ministry that will be co-ordinating procurement such that if our health partners want to bring in supplies and medicines, this division will be in the know. First of all, the division must know what our requirements are so that whoever comes in fits in with this requirement so that we do not have shortages or over supplies, which will lead to expiries. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I wanted to propose that in order to avoid overzealous pilferage of drugs and Government drugs finding their way into private clinics, could Government not undertake to emboss all these drugs clearly say, “FREE, NOT FOR SALE” and let the public be informed that in case you find such a drug in a clinic or anywhere, it is free and not for sale. I think in that way somehow those who have the overzealous appetite to divert Government drugs for sale would shy off a bit.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you start an argument with your doctor that do not sale me this because it is not for sale?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Epetait. Hon. Epetait happens to be a Member of the Social Services Committee of Parliament, and this is an issue we discussed and the ministry has no objection to this. So, we believe that in the near future, we will have it implemented -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you not think that you have to make a statement over this particular subject of expired drugs and put it in the papers, and say all the main things you are trying to do so that the public is aware of what they should do?

DR NDUHUURA: No objection, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Odit, sorry for mistaking the Social Service Committee of Parliament with your committee; I know you did a very good job and we are very grateful. 

Now, hon. Odit wanted to know whether what we have put in place will block all expiries. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform the House that whatever measures we put in place, we will still have some expiries because at times you anticipate that you have some diseases for which you procure drugs and you end up not having these diseases. So, the drugs, which you had procured, obviously will end up expiring and you cannot say I will not procure these drugs because some of these diseases can appear any time surprisingly. So, we will have to have these stocks; you cannot avoid expiries 100 percent, honourable members.  

Hon. Otada is wondering whether the commitment we have made as Government to procure drugs from the new factory in Luzira will not violate the procurement rules. I do not think that this is so. We have talked to the PPDA and we think that we shall not in anyway violate the procurement rules. I want to assure him on that. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to say that this is a very new factory and we need a statement in this House on how we are going to deal with the factory. So, rather than getting clarifications or seeking clarifications, I want to pledge to this House that we shall make a statement on the new factory in Luzira specifically. 

Hon. Amuriat wants to know whether – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he feels comfortable making a special statement on this particular subject of Luzira and he will give us copies of the statement and maybe the public will know. He wants to make a comprehensive statement.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The clarification I wanted to seek from the minister is that 95 percent of the resources we use for HIV/AIDS in this country are external resources; 85 percent are from the USA Government through PAPFA and then 10 percent from the rest of the development partners. The ARVs, which we get in this country, are largely procured using donor money from the USA Government, the World Bank, Global Fund and they have their own conditionality on how they procure drugs. So, the clarification I wanted to get from the minister is how you are going to condition these development partners to procure from Luzira. So, if you are not able to answer that one, I wanted you when you make a statement to be very focused on that and also assure us.  Thank you.  

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, that is a very pertinent question but I want to assure the House that even as of now as we speak, Government has already identified funds to procure ARVs from its own budget. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, hon. Amuriat wanted to know whether I am aware that there are some drugs expiring at the health centre IIIs and IIs and hospitals as one of us said.  Yes, we are aware in as much as drugs expire in the National Medical Stores, some of these drugs expire at the health centres. But, this does not mean that the National Medical Stores sends drugs that are already expired to the health centre IIIs. There are some items, which move very fast; there are items that do not move as fast, so they will definitely end up expiring at the health centre IIIs and any other health unit.  

Why did the ARVs expire in stores when there are patients -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I think this is a very serious matter, not only do drugs expire but they are being dispensed to the population. They are being given as a curative measure for Malaria. I think this matter, Sir, should not be swept under the carpets; under your noses. This is a matter, if you would like another appropriate time, I will lay these expired drugs on the Table of this Parliament. We should not gloss over this issue, it is a serious matter and it affects the lives of the people. These drugs are being given to our population. I need an appropriate answer.  Thank you.  

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I thought the answer I had given was very appropriate. If there are any expired drugs being dispensed this is very unfortunate because it is very unprofessional and we would definitely take action. This is not being done under our noses as he is saying because we can never accept such a thing and I would really want to challenge him –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA Mr Speaker, you did alert us that you have up to 5.00 p.m. for this sitting. Looking at our Rules of Procedure, Rule 38(6) and (7) –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Rule?

MS KABAKUMBA:  Rule 38(6) and 38(7). And Rule 38(6) says, “Without prejudice to answer a question, no Member shall address the House upon any question nor in asking the question shall any argument or opinion be offered.”  And (7) says, “When any question has been asked and answered no debate on it shall be permitted.”

Mr Speaker, I have been patiently seating. The honourable minister did answer the question that was put to him and Members are continuing to debate, is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: I have realised that this is a very important subject over which the question was put –(Applause)- and I appreciate that it may not be easy to make a very comprehensive answer to satisfy all the issues involved with it. First of all, drugs expired; they said, “Why did they expire? Why didn’t you control the procurement?” Because there is a third party and the fourth et cetera.  Now these expired drugs are scattered all over the country in grade three, in grade four as the case may be and they continue to be dispensed to people who do not know anything about them. 
 
So, I would personally suggest to the minister that having heard all these supplementary questions, he goes back to the office and writes a very comprehensive statement informing us that, yes, he admits there are expired drugs. He also tells us the control that is being given so that the expired drugs are not dispensed et cetera. This will help us to understand the subject and see what to do rather than these ping pong questions which are really coming in. Personally, this is what I would suggest. If the minister accepts, he should go and sit down, address the issue of expired drugs and then give us copies of a very comprehensive statement and maybe even the public be informed.  

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of expiry drugs has been coming here a number of times. So, I am not so sure that even when I come with a comprehensive statement, that that will cease and that is why these questions keep on coming. Because like now, there is the question of the appointment of the general manager; some one here brought it up. Then tomorrow, even when we have made a statement here, maybe there are counter issues that will need to be pointed out and then I will have to come again. So, I really do not know.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not only the members of Parliament that are interested in your answer. The population of Uganda is interested in your answer -(Applause)- and therefore we are just telling you the best way to communicate to the population of Uganda, which is 30 million. 

DR NDUHUURA: With your guidance, Mr Speaker, I accept and as soon as we resume after Christmas, I will make a statement to the House and to the press. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, even during the recess you can make that statement and the public can be informed rather than waiting for us to come back and then make the statement.

DR NDUHUURA: You see, Mr Speaker, there is a problem with your new microphone. So some of the words do not really come out and I know you are a very good communicator –(Laughter) - but then there is a problem with your microphone. 

THE SPEAKER: Sorry!

DR NDUHUURA: So, I had really misunderstood your concern and in that case, Mr Speaker, we have no problem with informing the public even before the end of this week.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

DR NDUHUURA: We have no problem of informing them about what is happening at National Medical Stores. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Alaso. Honourable members, we expected to handle a Bill on Local Government. But I do not know whether in view of the time which we have, because at 5.00p.m. I have to – because it will mean a general debate on the report. Is hon. Wopuwa here; is it a very brief report or? 

MR WOPUWA:  We have reports, Mr Speaker, and it is just one page. It can be handled in that time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Then hon. Alaso you have been standing now and then, what is the problem? 

4.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I had indicated earlier on in the week, I had a wish to raise something during communication and in view of the fact that we are going on a Christmas recess, I would still like to raise the matter of the pensions as I had indicated to you earlier on.  

Mr Speaker, you recall that the House passed over Shs 200 billion this financial year for payment of pension arrears to the distinguished senior citizens of this country. About four months ago, the Ministry of Public Service outlined in the print media names and persons and amounts for each beneficiary. Since then there has been a lot of concerns and a lot of complaints from pensioners with most pensioners saying first of all, they were left out. Then there also names of pensioners who had benefited much earlier and being reflected in that batch that was indicated for payment in the print media. Then there were also pensioners complaining about amounts that were less than what they were actually entitled to.

Then there was a promise by the Ministry of Public Service that they would provide information on when the remaining batch of pensioners would be paid. Mr Speaker, as we go for Christmas, these pensioners will have waited another whole year some of them without receiving their pension arrears.

Then two, there are also those irregularities that the Ministry of Public Service should have addressed. I would like to find out whether the Ministry of Public Service did actually notice that there were irregularities in the proposal to pay out these pension arrears? Two, whether they actually ironed them out and thirdly, when they hope to release the money for the batch that they promised they would release that was not stipulated in the information that went out in the print media? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you answer this and tell us what you are doing? 

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PUBLIC SERVICE) (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have noted the question and I think that we shall provide a detailed response to the concerns she has raised, which are very serious concerns and I do not think we should just respond to them.

We shall provide the answers, but let me say that the amount of moneys were not put in the papers - and we shall put it in the papers- because that is personal resources for individual payees. Secondly, we are all aware that Government releases funds every quarter. Those payments were made on the quarter release for the second quarter of the budget and when we get the third quarter, which is most likely in January we shall continue to pay the claimants. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is that. The minister has promised to give a comprehensive detailed response to your inquires. I think let us hope that this is coming out soon. How soon? You see, this information can be given to us if you have a comprehensive statement explaining. I think that could help, instead of saying “resume” because I see when we are going to resume, it is not a week’s time it is not two week’s time. But if you can give the answer then give a statement. I think it helps.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, we are going to prepare a comprehensive report and make a press statement to the nation because we have already received some concern about those whose accounts they did not reflect the money, and we are investigating that. They were on the list but the money was held because most likely the information was not adequate. So, we shall make the statement.

MR OKOT OGONG: I want to give Parliament this information. My electorate died in 1997. And since that time, a former headmaster of a school, my voter, has not got his gratuity. I am talking about death gratuity for the late. And secondly, he has since that time not got his pension. I have moved from office to office. 

If a Member of Parliament like me can fail, what about those people in the villages? So, this matter is very serious. The minister must come out with a serious statement and we are here waiting for you. If it is not okay, you will go back and come with another one. (Laughter)

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I suggest, hon. Minister, if possible, you can make that statement first week of January.

MRS SEZI: We shall do so, Mr Speaker.

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, I heard as if you were calling the Committee on Local Government to present a report. I am not aware of any report and yet it is the next on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I told you by 5.00 p.m. we shall have wound up the business of today. But then it seems there is the Committee on Local Government, they say there is a very urgent Bill. Is it two clauses? How many clauses?

MR GEORGE WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, just one page only. We have copies and more copies are coming.

THE SPEAKER: Hon members, this is a Local Government (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2007. It has four clauses. Could we concentrate on that and then call it a day? You think within that time we can be able to handle the general debate and then committee stage after which we deal with this Bill? I want to get your views. Opposition, what do you think?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, Sir, I agree that this is a very important Bill, which Bill has held a lot of offices, the lower levels of governance at bay. My worry is only one. This is a law, which is going to be in our law volumes for some time. It, therefore, calls for serious concentration and attention and the participation of all of us together. Depending on as to whether you could adjust your time to go beyond 5.00 p.m. I will have no objection to having it tabled. My concern is only looking at the time. We are left with only 35 minutes. If all those stages can be exhaustively attended to within the 35 minutes, I have no objection. On the other side as I said earlier on, if you are able to have some laxity on your programme and probably go up to 5.30 p.m. it is fine on our part. The ball is in your courts.

THE SPEAKER: No. The other meeting is equally important and this Bill, if I can recollect, is a result of a court judgement which was in the Supreme Court, or was it Court of Appeal? So, we must be very careful when we are handling it. If we rush it then we may also have that problem. But at the same time I am aware that Government wants to have these elections of the administrative councils as soon as possible. So, I do not know but should we rush it or we take - (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely agree with your ruling and I would also beg Members to understand the complexity that is involved and the type of power we instil in the laws that we make. When you make a law, it has serious implications, particularly when it goes into being interpreted by courts. Let us give it this holiday, go and look at all these matters and come when we are prepared. I beg to move.

4.26
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had the privilege of being a member of the Committee on Local Government when the original Local Government Act was enacted, around the 1990s. What I know is that this law is comprehensive and the original law has undergone many changes. Therefore, I entirely agree with you. When we are looking at these amendments, we need sufficient time to be able to make comparisons with the original and the various amendments that have been taking place. Therefore, I propose that we handle this matter another time. Thank you.

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill has only four clauses. It is a very small Bill and all Bills are equally important and are interpreted by Court. In light of the fact that this Bill is extremely urgent, I was counting on this House knowing that perhaps if we do not pass it today, we will pass it on Thursday. This House is going on recess and all of us know that when we go back to our constituencies, the first question we are asked is, “When are the lower administrative units elections going to be held”. I would beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that we start on this Bill now - we are ready to proceed and that we ensure that at least before we go for recess, we have passed this Bill to enable elections to take place. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the sentiments expressed by hon. Mwesigye, the Minister of State for Local Government. I also further appreciate the fact that we all need the lower councils to be in place and work effectively so as to make our work easy. But at the same time, a weakness on the part of the Executive in terms of their poor planning should not be seen as a weakness on our part. Parliament has been there all along, why should we rush such an important law at the nick of time?

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, hon. Wadri is aware that FDC went to Court to challenge the Local Government Act and he is the Chief Whip of the opposition in this Parliament. So, is he in order to have expected the Cabinet to bring a Bill here when the Court case was pending?
 
THE SPEAKER: I think he is saying that the following day after the case was settled, a Bill should have come. (Applause) But, I think we can agree that when we come back, this will be the first business to be handled by Parliament. So that we go through it, the Bill becomes the law and then we start preparing for elections. [Mr Ssekikubo rose_] Hon. Ssekikubo, you want me to adjust the Order Paper so that you put your petition? Okay adjusted. 
                                                            
PRESENTATION OF PETITION

4.31
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to present two petitions, one entitled: “Petition by Paragon Hospital Kampala Ltd” and moved under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The humble Petition of the critical medical services providers represented on their behalf by Ssekikubo Theodore, MP- Lwemiyaga County- Ssembabule District, states:

“That Paragon Hospital Kampala Ltd is an indigenous investment effort and has responded to Government call for increased investment in the health sector with over Shs 10 billion in ultra-modern 400-bed hospital;

That the mission of the Paragon Hospital is to establish a fully-equipped, integrated, ultra-modern hospital delivering effective and efficient services to its clientele and the general public; 

That  Paragon Hospital has a 2- phase plan, the first of which was the establishment of the key infrastructure namely:
 The purchase of  six acres of serviced land on plots 6A-7A Luthuli Close ;
Construction of the first phase of the hospital that comprises of: A general  out- patient  department, a paediatric  out-patient department;
50 bed facility for in –patients;
Three operating theatres;
Fully equipped diagnostic and investigating units;
Ultra – modern safe motherhood department with six fully private delivery suites;
Intensive care and high dependency units;
One-dental and ophthalmology units;
Importation of equipments and facilities, among others:-
15 intensive care patients monitors;
eight equipments for specialised operating theatres;
A CT scan; 
Eight Ultra sonic scanners;
10 kidney dialysis machines;
Five dental units;
The importation of five purpose built fully fitted ambulances to support the ambulatory services for the under community outreach programme

That these accomplishments and state of the equipment, made Paragon hospital to be credited as one of the emergency response hospitals for the recently concluded Commonwealth Heads of Governments meeting (CHOGM2007)

That the investment accomplished in this phase is very supportive and consistent  with the President’s Election  Manifesto for modernisation of the healthcare industry and the national economy

That Paragon hospital has faced a lot of investments uncertainties due to the short and unpredictable tax exemption period of only three months at ago that does not sustain the planning and execution period. For instance the tax exemption granted in March 2007 expired on 30 June 2007 long before the 240 feet containers was ordered could be cleared. This makes it difficult to get favourable lending terms by financial institutions;

That  Paragon hospital is aware of the current 10-year  tax holiday regime offered by Government to manufacturers of finished goods for exports and would  therefore request that the same be extended to the hospital. This would then  promote greater investments as well as allow stabilization of operations and accumulations of retained earnings. These earnings would then go  along way in self- financing the project as sustainable basis;

Noting that the current power supply at the hospital is erratic, unstable, leaving lot to be desired. This puts lives of patients as well as the equipments at a high risk  of damage. Mitigation therefore is installation of a self – regulating voltage stabilizer whose cost is US$ 100,000;

Noting further that Government has extended tax free diesel to manufacturers with generators of more than 100 KVA, we request that in the same spirit the same consideration is extended to the hospital generator of to enable stable power supply to critical areas of the hospital like theatres, intensive care units and blood /vaccine refrigerators

Now therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, your humble petitioner seeks to be entreated of your honourable House and pray that in view of the circumstances and predicaments faced by Paragon Hospital, Parliament be pleased to prevail over the responsible ministries to respond to this material cause without any delay. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
Managing Director 
William Orwoki Larobo”


PRESENTATION OF PETITION 

Mr Speaker, the second one is a petition by Kampala International University. 

The humble Petition of the critical training and medical services providers on their behalf by Ssekikubo Theodore, Member of Parliament for Lwemiyaga County- Sembabule District. It states:-
“That Kampala International University is a government licensed and privately owned non-profit making institution of higher learning, providing private, public skills and health services; 

That the mission statement of this university is to respond to the societal and education needs of the community in the Great Lakes Region by developing and delivering academic programmes that are responsive to the community and society. 

That the university has two campuses namely, Kansanga and Bushenyi with the latter comprised of the school of health services offering courses in medicine, pharmacy, nursing and dentistry; also the teaching hospital of 1,500 beds serving pre clinical training while at the same time offering medical services to the community. Right now, the first phase of 400 beds has been completed.

That currently there are over 600 enrolled students at the university pursuing a variety of medical related courses, degrees and diplomas which include: Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery, Bachelor of Nursing Sciences, Bachelor of Clinical Medicine, Bachelor of Pharmacy, Bachelor of Science in Laboratory technology and Bachelor of Science in Bio-medical Science.

Noting that in August 2006, His Excellency the President directed that the ministries of education and health assist the medical university with equipment and secondment of consultants once it is satisfied that the quality of the university is up to the standard; 

Further noting that all courses and programmes have already been accredited by the three Medical Regulatory Bodies namely: the Kenya Medical and Dentist Board, the Medical Council of Tanganyika and the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council on 27-August-2007;

Now therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, your humble petitioners seek to entreat this honourable House and pray that in view of the circumstances and predicament faced by this medical university, Parliament be pleased to prevail over the responsible ministries to respond to this material cause without any further delays. And your petitioners as duty bound will ever pray.  Thank you."

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Ssekikubo. I gather from the two petitions that the subject matter falls under the social service committee. Therefore, I think it is proper to direct these petitions to that committee to consider and report as soon as possible.

Honourable members, we now come to the end of today’s business. I want to use this opportunity to wish you a Merry Idd Aduha, Merry Christmas, end of year and Happy New Year. I want to thank you for all you have been able to accomplish this year. I hope you come with greater energy to embark on a number of items that we have not been able to dispose of. We are now going for Christmas recess, which will end towards the end of January 2008, the Business committee will decide. After that we shall have the Ester recess towards the end of March and then Parliament will be prolonged around mid-May. So within that period, we should try to do as much as we can. Sorry, I have to give chance to the technical people.

MR MUTULUUZA: I did not hear want you were saying, Mr Speaker. That is my concern!

THE SPEAKER: So you want me to repeat want I said? Okay, I said that today, we are starting the Christmas recess. I want to take this opportunity to wish you a happy Idd Aduha, Merry Christmas, end of year and Happy New Year. That is what I said.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have risen here on one or two things and particularly in the manner in which we sit in this Chamber. A few things were proposed during the last Business Committee meeting. I remember that at that time, we proposed that we should once again relocate our pigeonholes from where they are to their original place. What has happened of late is that many of us have lost documents within this short time because of the exposed nature of the present arrangement. 

Secondly, much as we are grateful that a few improvements have been implemented to improve facilities in this Chamber, in the old arrangement the Speaker had a very conspicuous elevation, which somehow gave decorum to the Chamber. We feel so sad when we see our Speaker talking through a microphone that is so low and he has to bend. 

In fact the other shade you had over you, Mr Speaker, was an insignia of authority. So, I am of the opinion, if Members agree with me, that we restore that position so that when a person comes here, he or she knows automatically that we are in an institution with an insignia of respect – that was the beauty of our Chamber.

MS MWESIGYE: Thank you Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Wadri for giving way. The information I would like to give hon. Wadri is that some of the most modern parliaments are arranged this way. The only improvement that we need is to raise the microphone; otherwise, this is the most modern way and I do not believe my brother is so much of a conservative.

THE SPEAKER: Well, on this matter, we shall consult with our contractors and other agencies of Parliament so that we can decide on how to do it. Since we are going on recess, we shall consider your views on this. Sorry, there was an important statement to be made, this being the last day we need that statement to be read.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Otiam Otaala): Mr Speaker and honourable colleague, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to update you about the status of the Ebola epidemic in the country especially now that we are going home for the December recess.

Honourable colleagues, you will recall that on the 29 November 2007 this year, the Ministry of Health declared an Ebola epidemic in Bundibugyo, and I subsequently presented the measures that the ministry was taking to contain it. This information-paper is aimed at updating you on the current situation pertaining to this epidemic. 

During the past few weeks, the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the districts and communities has mounted a national response to contain the Ebola epidemic by reinforcing the following interventions:
1.	Public education, information and community mobilisation.
2.	Heightened surveillance for early detection of cases and contacts
3.	Establishment of isolation units in Bundibugyo, Kampala and Kabarole for effective management of cases.
4.	Distribution of standard operation procedures and essential supplies to limit infection in health care centres.
5.	Establishment of a laboratory capacity at the Uganda Virus Research Institute Entebbe.
6.	Training and sensitisation of all regional hospitals, medical superintendents and district health officers in the districts neighbouring Bundibugyo
7.	Provision of personal protective equipments to isolation facilities in Bundibugyo and all the eleven regional referral hospitals to cover at least 20 patients in the unforeseen event that the Ebola virus is detected outside Bundibugyo.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am pleased to inform Parliament and the general public that the measures taken so far have limited the spread of the epidemic to only the district of Bundibugyo in which five sub-counties out out of 10 are affected. These include: Kasitu, Babukwanga, Bundibugyo Trading Centre, Busaalu and Harugare.

Mr Speaker, presently, a cumulative total of 127 cases of suspected Ebola have been reported of whom 35 have died including five health care workers.

On a positive note, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to report that there are 39 patients who have recovered and discharged, including six healthcare workers. There has also been a general decline in the number of new cases; for instance, during the last four days there has been only three new cases and no deaths reported.

I would like, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, to take this opportunity to thank the general public and honourable members for their heightened vigilance. I am saying this because, despite some unnecessary panic and stigmatisation of suspected cases and contacts, Members of Parliament and the general public remained vigilant. This thinly veiled prejudice has been quite remarkable against people coming from Bundibygyo. In some cases, buses and even people from Western Uganda have been subjected to unnecessary spraying with detergents. I appeal to the general public to show understanding sensitivity because such measures are clearly in excess in our recommendations and have no justification whatsoever.  

It is also unfortunate, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, that some of our border points have been closed without any restrictions of international travel to Uganda by the World Health Organization. 

I would like to thank the majority of the Mass Media for the cooperation they have demonstrated. I would like once again to reassure honourable members and the general public that there was no deliberate cover up by Government of the outbreak of epidemic because several international, national and district teams investigated it. 

In addition, the investigations were carried out in credible reference centres in Kenya, South Africa and the USA where investigators could independently have disseminated the results of such a serious disease. More importantly, Mr Speaker, it was the Ministry of Health that initiated the investigations and sent samples abroad for further analysis. The information on this epidemic has and will continue to be regularly shared in the multisectroral, national and international arena with openness.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to reassure the general public that Government is committed to the containment of the epidemic and has earmarked adequate resources for the containment of this out break and others in different parts of the country.

Mr Speaker, despite some progress, the public must remain vigilant and avoid large gatherings especially during this festive season when we are still handling the Ebola epidemic.

Furthermore, I encourage honourable colleagues and Members of Parliament from Bundibugyo to send out massages to their constituents to discourage circumcision until the epidemic is over. We are working hand in hand with them to see how we can facilitate them to reach out there with relevant information.

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank all our development partners and stakeholders who are collaborating with us to contain this public health emergency of the international concern and the table there gives a summary of the number of cases that we have handled. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to update honourable colleagues and the general public. I wish all of you a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to thank you for the statement and efforts made by Government and your ministry to contain this disease. Let us hear from the Shadow Minister.

4.49
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable Minister of State for Primary Healthcare for keeping Parliament updated on the Ebola epidemic. 

However, allow me to make a few observations or points of clarification. On page 1 (3), the Minister has talked about the establishment of isolation units and among other places, he mentioned Kabarole, but we are also informed that in Kabarole, residents, allegedly on incitement by the local leaders, attacked and demolished an isolation unit. May we get to understand what the circumstances down there are now?

Secondly, the Minister also talked about having provided personal protective equipment to isolation units in Bundibugyo and 11 regional referral hospitals. Does the minister therefore envisage that all Ebola suspects are only taken to the regional referral hospitals? What will happen to other health units? I thought the personal protective equipment should be availed to all health centres so that the health workers therein can have some protection just in case they are confronted with an Ebola-like suspected case.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Ebola Control Task Force, Dr Okware, while on Vision FM, commented that any extra necessary protection would be welcome. In my opinion therefore, the comments by the Minister that spraying of people from affected areas with detergents is unfortunate and was uncalled for. I think that we should not wait until an epidemic breaks out. These public transport vans should ordinarily be disinfected regularly; it is good for the travellers; I do not want to call it unfortunate.

Lastly, let me comment on the issue of closure of borders. The minister said that the closure of some border points was also unfortunate. But to me, that is also another extra measure. We do not want to take chances and in my opinion, this should not be interpreted as unfortunate. We should take all precautionary measures to contain the epidemic rather than just keep all border points open with people moving in freely. I think those are the issues I wanted to react to. Thank you.

4.53
PROF TARSIS KABWEGYERE (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last time this matter came up here, we were told that this disease is dangerous because of its spread, but it is not true that it kills too many people. [Hon. Members: “How?”] Yes, I think let us be sober on this issue. Today as I stand here, I am sure since morning there are more than 35 people who have died in Uganda of other diseases but it is this excitement that creates panic. For example, since August we have had 35 people dead - Now we start saying all buses should be sprayed -(Interjections)- you can call me to order the way you want -(Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness knows that under the Constitution of this country, it is important that nobody is deprived of life. It is clear under the Constitution. What that means is every body including what you might call the most minute human being, so long as he is a citizen of this country, under the Constitution, is important. 

Is the hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, a Professor of Sociology, MP in Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and a Minister in order to even suggest that 35 people, a whole 35 people, citizens of this country, we should not care as Parliament, that these 35 people are few in number. Is he in order to contravene the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and to bring Government to shame? 

THE SPEAKER: This is quite a question of assessment.  He said this disease does not kill, that is why the number is 35 as of now. I think that is what he was talking about. His assessment may be faulty but my assessment may not be his assessment. But what you are saying is that he should not have said that the number is as low as 35.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, hon. Kabwegyere was very clear while making his submission. He actually even went ahead to say that even as we speak now, more than 35 people have died of other diseases. This to me was to mean that the other 35 people who died of Ebola are really insignificant in the vocabulary or understanding of Prof. Kabwegyere.

THE SPEAKER: Could we really go to the point, because I am about to close?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker- (Interjections)- leave me alone for the time being. Ebola is one emergency we have had in the last six months. We have had floods and we have been assessing the impact of floods, there are more people who have died of floods than have died of Ebola. So, what I am talking about is as leaders, if you say -(Interjections)- let me first clarify. If you say that we should spray buses that is okay -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, our Rule on clarification is up to the person holding the flow to give you an opportunity. If he does not, it means he is not taking it. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Please, information, if you are not ready to listen to me, I do not see how information can even enter my head because what I am talking about, unlike what hon. Amuriat was saying, I am not saying death is good. I am saying that we cannot say in Uganda we should undertake to spray all buses. You do not know how many people you would probably kill with these sprays, and we don’t know the contents of these sprays. So, what I am saying is that Government has taken cautions, we have been informed, but let us at the same time not say that for example in this House there is Ebola. Let us not – there are many things -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not going to agree. He has taken a position; you have also taken your position. Honourable members, you have noted a statement of the Minister on the situation of Ebola and that is where it is and this concludes our debate today. Please take note of the statement and this is the end of this particular subject. I want to inform you that all members are now invited to the end of year party organised by AMANI Uganda at Parliamentary Gardens. I wish you a happy Idd Aduha and happy New Year. The House is adjourned. You will be notified.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)


