Thursday, 19 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for turning up this morning and participating in the inter-denominational prayer for peace in Northern Uganda. This was a good gesture, which shows that you are people who are concerned about the entire country, and not people who talk about the problem in Northern Uganda as a problem for the people living in the affected districts but as a national problem. 

I trust that the prayers that were said today will continue to be said by you, and they will help us solve that problem, so that the entire country is peaceful. You are going now for the Christmas recess, so you should take the same spirit of prayer to the people you represent. They should also realise that the problem in the north, or anywhere in Uganda, is a national problem, so that they advocate for peace and love. With this, we shall get peace and stability in the entire country, and this will enable us to prosper. 

As I said, I wish everybody a happy Christmas and a better and prosperous new year. Please, carry the message. (Applause)

I have an announcement. I have just received communication from the Young Parliamentarians Association (YPA), to the effect that they had their Annual General Meeting and they held elections. The following leaders were elected:

1. Hon. Sulaiman Madada – Chairperson.  
2. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey – Vice Chairperson. 
3. Hon. Jessica Eriyo – General Secretary.
4. Hon. James Kakooza – Treasurer.
5. Hon. Margaret Komuhangi – Development Co-ordinator.

The regional co-ordinators are:
1. Hon. Epetait Francis – Eastern.
2. Hon. Kabonesa Juliet – Western.
3. Hon. Margaret Ateng Otim – Northern.
4. Hon. Lule Mawiya – Central.

I want to congratulate you and wish you a good term. I also want to thank the leadership that has been steering this association for the last year. I thank them for whatever they have been able to achieve, and for the assistance that they have rendered to the entire Parliament and the country at large. I commend your spirit. I commend the way you have practised democracy by holding regular elections. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, the National Youth Council Bill was read for the First Time, but there was a problem because of the certificate. I want to assure you that I have now received the relevant certificate in accordance with the Budget Act.

Honourable members, you have received the Order Paper, but I want to adjust it. There is an important statement that affects our health, and I will allow the minister in charge of that sector to make the statement. So, I adjust the Order Paper accordingly. Thank you very much.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, you have been getting visitors - High Commissioners and Ambassadors, but I rarely hear you telling us what happens in those meetings.  Could they be of socio-economic importance?  

I remember last time we had a meeting with a representative of the South African Commission. He came in to promote agricultural produce, like passion fruits and pineapples, in Ntenjeru. But these days I do not know the procedure. I would have thought that you would give us a clue on what pertains in those meetings.  

Why am I bringing this out? I was watching T.V. one time and I heard that the Danish Embassy was cutting some aid to Uganda. I do not know whether such things occur in such meetings. They said they did it because we went into the Congo, and they were going to be more concerned with the environment.  

Recently, the Minister of Health – it is good he is here - talked about introducing DDT, that is, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, which is hazardous. He has not explained to this Parliament how he is going to import and use this chemical.  

Maybe if you have such meetings and you inform us, we shall know the impact of such things and perhaps also react accordingly. Because now, if he uses DDT without informing us - the other time in the Sixth Parliament, Government never informed us and then the issues came up and the ambassadors were concerned. I wish that you would communicate, once in a while, so that we get to know the socio-economic impact of these things. 

It is good the Minister for Health is here. He talked about using DDT, and yet we are part of AGOA. This has got environmental effects. If they use it and we are not informed, and then the ambassadors come and say, “we are cutting aid”, this is going to affect the AGOA market, because of the residual effect of the chemical. Otherwise, I wanted to know the procedure. When do we come in, as members, to welcome such visitors and get such briefings? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you are combining two things; you are combining ministerial statements and courtesy calls on the Speaker. 

It is true the Speaker gets courtesy calls from ambassadors, and we exchange views. Whenever there is something that I think a relevant committee of Parliament should know, I brief them. In cases where I think the plenary needs to know, I definitely give them the information. I should not come here after every courtesy call and say, “today I met so and so”. But whenever I think it is necessary, I will do it. Thank you very much.

Maybe what I forgot to say is that, during the prayer this morning, I realised that I was missing a chaplain here, in the name of Cecilia Ogwal. She really demonstrated her ability as a preacher.  Thank you very much! Actually, I was wondering whether the rules would sometimes permit me to adjust this prayer in the rules, so that I can call upon some of you to lead us on one occasion. 

I now realise that hon. Ogwal is very good. And also our Imam, hon. Sebaggala, did very well. The other day, I also heard hon. Eriyo Jessica. I have the talents here, so I will try to use my powers to adjust the rules so that we get some prayers from them.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on a matter of proceedings in this House but rather on a sad note. I see in today’s press that one of my great friends in this House; somebody I have enjoyed doing battle with, is no longer a member of this House, in the name of hon. Amama Mbabazi. Mr Speaker, could you guide me whether he would still be available as a minister in this august House, so that I can continue to do battle with him?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you will appreciate that when I declare a vacancy, it is through the Clerk. I do not do it simply because I have read in the newspapers, or I have heard it on radio. There is a procedure used to inform me of a vacancy. As of now, I do not know about a vacancy. You may be right that there is something that has happened, but the person concerned will write and explain and then I will declare a vacancy, or the Clerk will inform the Electoral Commission of a vacancy in the affected constituency.  

As to whether he is still a minister is different, because the appointment of ministers is not a matter for voters. It is the prerogative of the President to select whoever he wants to be a minister. Until the appointment is revoked, I suppose the person continues as a minister, but that is not within my powers.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way things are happening, especially within Government, creates a lot of worry.  Today in the Monitor newspaper, I read, “MP’s query NHCC sale”. According to the PERD Statute, we all know that privatisation has been sanctioned. We know that whenever any sale of any property is effected, it is common that Government reports to the representatives of the people in Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, not very long ago we read in the papers that ESKOM, of South Africa, had signed an agreement with the Government of Uganda for the purchase of UEB. We also heard that very soon Mandela Stadium will go. All this is being done as if the Uganda Government does not know that we should be briefed first before any sale of any parastatal is carried out.  

I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business whether they know that Parliament must be briefed before any sale is effected. Otherwise, as things stand right now, I can see a possible application of Article 118 of the Constitution in regard to the energy sector.  We have been ambushed yet we own the power; we must be consulted!

MR SPEAKER: Well, I do not know who is supposed to answer this query. I do not see the Minister in Charge of Privatisation, but the Prime Minister is here. He may assist us if he wishes.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me first of all say that we do not fear Article 118. We do not fear censure at all. When we are doing our work, we do it regardless of any consequence. So, we do not accept these empty threats. I repeat; we shall not accept empty threats! 

With regard to the question raised, I want to inform the honourable member that this question should have been put to the relevant ministry, with sufficient notice. Although we are functionally versatile and we try to answer certain questions on the spot, there is a problem of giving you an answer, which is not well researched. 

Mr Speaker, I have no hesitation in recommending the honourable member to put those questions to the relevant ministry. I thank you, Sir.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your indulgence. I am the Member of Parliament of Tororo County, and the whole country is aware of what is happening in Kenya and the recent El Nino announcements. 

Early this year, the RDC of Tororo and I had a meeting with hon. Muruli Mukasa. We informed him about the suffering of the women, especially those in the sub-counties of Kwapa and Mera, as a result of lack of power in that area. The community around that place crosses a river to go to Kenya, in order to grind or do other things that require power. As a result of the political situation in Kenya, the people in that place can no longer cross easily to go and grind or do anything that requires the services of power.  Water has even now filled that river.  


Mr Speaker, the Minister of Energy agreed in principle that they would install power in that place, and the community of that place were given a grinding machine by an NGO called Plan International. The situation is very bad. Some few women who try to cross are raped, and the information is there with police. 

I am seeking the indulgence of the Leader of Government Business; what kind of message should I take to the people of Mera and Kwapa, especially the women who were promised a service? Thank you. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am saddened to hear what hon. Ekanya has said. And I have no hesitation in asking hon. Okot, since the Minister of Energy is not here, to ensure that the problem is handled within a week from today and an answer is given to you forthwith. I thank you.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to understand the working of various committees of this House, particularly in respect to delegations that go out of the country to represent Parliament.  

You are aware, Mr Speaker, that you and your deputy have led several delegations to represent this House at various functions and to various foreign countries. I believe there are other members of Parliament who have also done the same. But we have never formally received reports that they come back with from these delegations. I have a feeling that they are sitting on very valuable information, which could help this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I am just humbly asking whether it is a matter of us not defining our method of work properly. When we go in the name of Parliament, we must come back to Parliament and report. So, can I be clarified? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We have to look at our Rules of Procedure to provide for the laying of reports from delegations. Otherwise, at the moment in our structure, there is nothing like that. But I think it does no harm if we can look at these reports that are made in respect of these visits. They can be availed officially in the House so that members can read them, and then if they have anything to say, they say so. I will liase with the committee concerned so that this can be done.  

Honourable members, today is our last day of meeting. I would want to allow you some time, after communication, to put forward some issues. But taking into account the fact that we have a lot business, including the statement by the minister and the interest indicated yesterday that many members wanted to contribute to the debate on the main motion by the President’s address, I appeal to you that we proceed with the business at hand so that we can complete.  

Again, as I told you, at around 5:00 p.m we will end so that we can bid farewell to this year in the Parliamentary Gardens. So, I appeal to you to allow the Minister make his brief statement and then we proceed further.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.  But I seek your indulgence to just say something about DDT, which the honourable member from Kawempe, hon. Sebuliba, raised.  

First of all, I would like to state that I never intended to use DDT without the approval of Government and this House. 

Secondly, this matter has been misrepresented through the press. What we have been talking about is a possible shift from treatment of diseases to dealing with the vector, killing the mosquito that spreads malaria using insecticides, including possibly DDT. The issue is, should we sit back and not fight the mosquito like America, Europe and South Africa, or like Mauritius did recently. And should we continue to spend a lot of money treating malaria, losing 347 million US dollars per year on the account of malaria?  

I intend to raise a debate as to whether we should not use the cheapest and most effective insecticide called DDT, which has never been banned anywhere in the world, as has been said. DDT was banned for agricultural purposes, where they used tonnes of DDT in Lake Superior and after decades, they have started seeing the effects of the tonnes of DDT used. 

But DDT has never been banned as a disease control insecticide. It has never been banned! It is being used all over the world, except here where we are concerned with the environment, which we share with other people but we do not share with them the problems of malaria. That is basically what I was talking about. 

I have accepted to go on UTV on Sunday and receive calls and explain this matter. So, the answer is that there is no policy that has been declared to use DDT yet. We agreed with other Commonwealth regional countries to consider seriously using DDT.  That is the situation as it is, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

Today’s statement is on cholera, which has also been a subject of debate, and which concerns the health of our people. And also, a very short comment, of two lines, on the use of mosquito nets, which was also brought up in debate by an honourable member of this House.

Mr Speaker, in 1997/1998 El Nino had far-reaching consequences on the health in Uganda. The accumulated rainfall from October 1997 to May 1998, over a period of about eight months, was 2091.2 millimetres, compared to an annual mean of 1,615.5 millimetres normally observed over a long period of 12 months, according to NEMA reports.  

The increased rainfall led to outbreaks and upsurges of waterborne diseases, including bacterial diseases, especially cholera and malaria.  The cholera epidemic was first reported in October 1997 in Lolwe and Sigulu Islands of Bugiri District. It spread to Kampala City in early December 1997. 

Kampala in particular was severely affected, and a cumulative total of 5,814 cases and 132 deaths were reported in Kampala City Council alone in 1997/1998. Subsequently, the disease spread to 41 out 45 districts, which was 91 percent of the country, by August 1998.   

The total number of cases of cholera between 1997 and 2000, when it was contained, was 57,721 with 1,629 deaths countrywide. However, sporadic but localised outbreaks persisted in the districts of Arua, Nebbi, Hoima, Masindi, Bundibugyo, Kasese, Kabarole, Rukungiri and Kisoro, bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo. The spread of the disease was aggravated by increased and uncontrolled movements across border areas by internally displaced persons and migrant fishermen. 

Following meteorological reports predicting El Nino rains in September, the Ministry of Health worked with districts to avert and minimise the anticipated potential of health hazards. The national and district cholera task forces were established to co-ordinate epidemic preparedness interventions. There has been a systematic follow-up of epidemic and disaster-prone districts of Mbale, Sironko, Pallisa, Katakwi, Kapchorwa Kumi, Masindi, Hoima, Bundigugyo, Kasese, Rukungiri, Kabale, Nebbi, Arua, Yumbe and Moyo. 

The Ministry of Health, through the national cholera task force, put in place prompt measures for improved surveillance, case management, health education and sanitation, and promoting safe water supply. As a result of these efforts, we controlled cholera, which erupted in the districts of Nebbi, Arua, Hoima, Masindi, Bundibugyo and Kasese between June and November this year.

However, Kampala and Wakiso districts were the latest to report cholera cases, on the 25th November 2002, from Kitaka Zone in Natete. As of the 18th December 2002, a cumulative total of 82 cases, with two deaths, have been reported in Kampala. All affected cases are now being treated at the newly re-established Cholera Treatment Centre in Mulago Hospital.  

The first case in Kampala was a boda boda cyclist, and subsequently his family. Initially, Lubaga was the most affected, but an increasing number of cases are being reported from Kawempe. A joint Ministry of Health and Kampala City Council task force has confirmed the following risk factors in Kitaka Zone, which could also apply to other areas:

• Overflowing toilets in wetlands.

• Two out of three reported springs were contaminated, that is at Nakampi and Nakawuka. It was very disturbing, Mr Speaker, to find that toilets in these areas were unplugged and emptied into open drainage channels.  

• The team also established that this sewerage eventually contaminated the nearby sugarcane plantation. 

• The team has also investigated the locally produced and packaged juices and water, and they confirmed faecal contamination in tested samples.  

In view of the above, the Ministry of Health has instituted the following measures:

• Ban of sale of cold drinks and juices locally prepared and packed by vendors in buvera.

• All water collected from springs must be boiled before use.

• The contaminated sugarcane in the swamp in Kitaka Zone should not be eaten.

• The bad habit of draining toilets by emptying them into open drains should be stopped immediately.

• People should report suspected cases of cholera and assist them to seek treatment at the Cholera Treatment Centre, re-established in Mulago.  

These measures, Mr Speaker, take immediate effect. I am requesting local leaders to ensure that the above measures are implemented. The following activities are planned, or are on-going:

• Continued social mobilisation, health education in various parts of the district, to increase awareness and sanitation promotion.

• Strengthening capacity for proper case management among health workers, both in public and private health facilities.

• Continued follow up of all the suspected cases, and support implementation of preventive measures at the household level.

• Strengthening clinical and laboratory surveillance in all major hospitals in the district and at high-risk communities, to conduct risk assessment.

• Water quality monitoring is ongoing. There is provision of safe water by National Water and Sewerage Corporation as well as water chlorination at community level.  

In the meantime, I am urging the public to observe the following, and I request the leaders to support promotion of the following measures:

• Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water before preparing and serving food.

• Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water before eating food.

• Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after using a latrine.

• Boil all drinking water.

• Eat food when it is still hot.

• Dispose faeces, including children’s, in a latrine.

• Wash vegetables and fruits with clean water before eating them.

• Avoid locally prepared and packed cold water and juices packed in buvera.

• In case of death due to cholera, bury immediately and avoid feasting.  

• Those involved in handling the dead body should wash thoroughly with soap and water, where possible, use Jik solution.

Mr Speaker, that is the statement on cholera. Thank you.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as you may recall, recently there were reports about a statement made by a member of this House on the use of mosquito nets. Over the last two weeks, there has been some controversy raised by the honourable Member of Parliament from Lubaga South about the safety of insecticides used on bed nets to control mosquitoes. 

I have consulted widely on this issue, and I wish to confirm to you that the two insecticides used namely, Icon and deltamethrin, are harmless when used in recommended doses. Both drugs have been recommended for use by the World Health Organisation for bed nets and indoor residue spraying. The drugs are not harmful to the environment, as they easily break down into harmless substances in the soil.  

I have personally invited hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to discuss his concerns with my technical team, and the safety of the insecticide has been explained to him in detail. I am therefore, appealing to the general public to continue using insecticide-impregnated bed nets to control mosquitoes at home.

The above should be taken seriously, as malaria is responsible for up to 40 per cent of our disease burden. Economic loses due to malaria are extremely high; as I said, they are estimated at 347 million US dollars per year. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t it fair that I start with Lubaga, the area that is affected by cholera?

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I would pray for you, because it would have been absurd if you did not start with me, since my name was mentioned.   

Mr Speaker, I am glad that the honourable Minister of Health, Brig. Muhwezi – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But please limit your contribution, honourable member, because of the business we have.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I will be very brief.  I am glad that the honourable Minister of Health, Brig. Muhwezi, when referring to the impregnated nets, did not mean what he said. There are two types of insecticides. My reaction to the nets was not totally bad. 

I said that a good number of my people in Ndeeba, Natete reside in very tiny rooms, sometimes not sufficiently aerated. In that atmosphere, about three people are sleeping under such a net treated with insecticide, with poor aeration. I would not have encouraged them to use insecticide treated nets because in my view, as an environmentalist, they are not environmentally friendly. 

That is the statement I made. Otherwise, I am not against the nets for as long as they can be used in an area that is sufficiently aerated.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my honourable colleague. I rise to give technical information. Icon and the other insecticide, which is used for these nets, have nothing to do with the space in your room. 

In 1983, I was lucky to be a participant in testing the effectiveness of insecticide-treated bed nets using Icon, in Gambia. We found out that even if five people crowded in a room, because of the nature of these insecticides, in most cases it only repels. The next effect would be to paralyse. In other words, it affects only mosquitoes, which are endophagic and exophilic. Since that time, a number of tests have been done in over 15 houses. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you soften your technical terms? (Laughter)

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, it affects mosquitoes, which after biting a human being, rest on the wall. There are two types of mosquitoes; some bite and then fly out, those are endophagic. Exophilic mosquitoes are those, which bite outside the house but within the vicinity. But if they smell any of these insecticides like Icon, they fly away. And Anopheles Gambiae, the commonest mosquito that causes malaria in this country, depicts those two characteristics. 

For an honourable member of this august House to deprive, particularly our children and pregnant mothers, of this important proven technology, that should not be welcome. I have given the information. I rose to say that consultation on these technical matters is crucial before we tell those people out there. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the Professor has assisted me. First of all, he admits that there is some toxicity in the insecticide. As an environmentalist, I urge you to avoid that toxicity, no matter how negligible. So, I advised the people I represent, namely those in Ndeeba, to ensure that their houses are sufficiently aerated with ventilators before they used them. Otherwise, as an environmentalist, I still argue and maintain that I would rather use mosquito nets, which are insecticide free.

Lastly, if I were the Minister of Health, I would have persuaded the likes of John Ken Lukyamuzi to understand why we have to use these mosquito-treated nets. Otherwise, I could also argue that while I am fighting the mosquitoes, I should fight them in an environmentally free and friendly atmosphere. Why do you want to kill the mosquito as an individual is sleeping? Why doesn’t the mosquito die on its own? Why don’t you pursue the source of the mosquito? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have very little time left.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Lastly, Mr Speaker, is the Minister of Health aware that the use of DDT for disease control cannot be distinguished from its use as an agricultural vector controller? The two uses have huge environmental connotations. 

Is the Minister further aware that Uganda is a signatory to a number of environmental-related conventions and protocols? One of these is called Bamako, which stops the trans-boundary movement of hazardous waste, and DDT has already been pronounced as a source of hazards. Is he aware? 

If he is aware, should Government not act to protect our international name? We have already ratified those treaties and you are preaching the use of DDT, which has long been outlawed. I do not know what is happening. Thank you very much. 

MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Minister has told this House that there was sewage that was let into a channel that led to a sugarcane plantation, and they issued a statement to advise people not to take sugarcane from that plantation. Couldn’t the Ministry afford to destroy that sugarcane plantation and pay the owner? Because there is no guarantee that that person will not take his sugarcane to the market, because that is his way of survival. He planted it as a cash crop.

Secondly, this morning when I was going through my mail, I got a letter from the chairman of Lubaga Division. He was complaining to the Ministry of Water. Using our LGDP, the funds that we get, many taps have been connected. This was especially done with the view that El-Nino was around the corner. So, two or three months back, that work was contracted and finished, but the National Water and Sewerage Corporation has not connected the people. So, the people still run to these channels to collect water. The so-called protected wells in Kampala: there is no single protected well which is not infested with faeces. I do not know what the ministry is doing about that. Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am worried that there is no way you can escape cholera in Kampala if you do not observe the recommended standards of cleanliness in this city. 

In the past, we used to have health inspectors who would go around all the time to check on the cleanliness in the homes and in the environment. But these days, I am quite shocked to see people urinating in almost every corner of Kampala -(Laughter)- and if you dare go to some of these places in town, people actually defecate there! Surely, how can we escape cholera when we live in such conditions? 

I thought we would get some law enforcement officers to apprehend people who urinate in almost every corner. I will give you an example, Mr Speaker. You go to Wandegeya, that stage as you come from Mulago is a urinal; it is a place where they defecate. It is in front of pharmacies and it is near the Police. I thought policemen should even assist us to apprehend these people, but this is where actually people urinate and nobody bothers -(Rev Bakaluba rose_)- I will take the information.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told you we have this item and some other business to transact. Why don’t we really conclude?

MR KALULE SSENGO: So, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the authorities in the city council to do something about those people who go on defecating and urinating everywhere. If need be, the city council should find ways of putting up more of these convenient places so that at least we save the lives of our people in Kampala. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to commend the Minister of Health for the steps he is taking to cope with problems of health.

We know very well that prevention is better than cure. And I am sure that if Government put in place preventive measures, the amount of money that is required for curing people of diseases that arise out of poor hygiene, lack of garbage collection and things of that kind, would not have been as much as it is.

So, Mr Speaker, my appeal to the Minister is maybe to convince his colleagues in Cabinet to improve the sanitation in urban areas. It is the only way we can actually cope with the problem of cholera, mosquitoes and so on. 

As my colleague has just mentioned, in the past, there used to be people who would move from home to home to see places where mosquitoes would be laying eggs, and advising people to ensure that they keep their places clean. These days nothing of the kind happens; not in Kampala, not in Jinja, not anywhere. So, this matter must be tackled from the very cause rather than waiting for the Minister to struggle with curing people of diseases which could be prevented. Thank you.

MRS MARGRET ZZIWA (Woman representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Minister of Health for this statement. Most importantly, I want to salute him for the steps he took when the problem of cholera was sighted, namely, the abolition of the sale of juices and water in polythene papers. It was a very important step, and I think the vigilance should keep on.

I want to also mention that the teams which are out in the areas, should be supported a little more. I want to commend what you have talked about, the social mobilisation programmes, but I request that these programmes be tied to the secretaries of environment of every parish or every village. These people are there; they were elected but they are the idlest people. When you ask them what the secretary for environment does, they really tell you they do not know anything about what to do.  

May you kindly work out a programme and organise these secretaries for environment for every parish. They will be very, very useful in vigorously monitoring all these people who for instance do not have toilets. Many of the landlords actually have houses which do not have toilets. And some of the places we know are very good at opening their toilets in trenches, like in Katanga, Bwaise, Ndeeba and so on and so forth. I want to ask you to get in touch with the LC structure and let them assist us. 

I want to also echo hon. Kayongo’s call that the water aspect in Kampala District is still a problem, particularly in the peri-urban areas and even in the centre, in the civic business district. If you go to Naguru Katale, Kamwokya, you really feel embarrassed that our people still draw this kind of water which is contaminated. 

At one time I stood in this House and I requested the honourable Minister, because when His Excellency the President visited Kampala, he made a pledge –(Interjection)- he is always in Kampala, but that day, he specifically visited Kampala. He went to Nkere in Makindye and there was such an embarrassment, considering the kind of water the people take. He made a pledge that in two years, he was going to ensure that every parish has a connected water kiosk. But I think this effort has not been followed up. It has been left to the profit aspect and the capacity of an individual to get water.  

May we now get continued collaboration between the Minister of Health and Minister of Water to see to it that at least this effort of connecting all the people of Kampala on piped safe water is achieved, at least maybe within about three to five years. 

Related to that is the aspect of the rates, particularly in the institutions. You may be surprised that some people leave the piped water because of the rates and they go and draw the dirty water. So, I think that is also another area to look at closely.

I want to thank and salute the Minister, and I want to tell him that I will give him full support in my constituency of Kampala.  Thank you.

MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to echo the same sentiments, that the Minister of Health is really hardworking. We would like to appreciate that.  However, on mosquito repellants, I would like to suggest to the honourable Minister that there are medicated soaps which when used act as mosquito repellants. Maybe that could also be considered alongside the medicated mosquito nets. 

Coming to cholera in Kampala, I do remember that about 10 years ago, when I was still Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, this situation prevailed particularly around Ndeeba, Masaka Road. The reasons were that people were drawing water from wells which were just next to pit latrines, and when people go to help themselves, it filters through into those wells. Indirectly, they are drinking their own faeces. Of course some people term it “minerals”, maybe because of the saltiness. But that is a harzard of using protected wells within a crowded city area or a heavily populated area. 

Underground water is never safe in these areas where people are overcrowded, so that must be discouraged forthwith. How to do it is to get the urban water supply authority and capacitate them to expand the water systems  

National water supply in Kampala as of now, with due respect to the Minister of Water if he is here, covers only less that 50 per cent of our population. Only less that 50 per cent of the population of Kampala, get piped clean water. Most of them draw water from these wells. 

The water production capacity of Kampala should have been doubled by the year 2001. Up to now, nothing has happened. We are requesting that Government looks into this seriously; double the capacity of water supply in Kampala, increase the network, particularly address the problem of the crowded poor population of Kampala, because that is where the diseases originate. 

Those who live in Kololo think the diseases remain there. Your house servants, your guards come from there to your house. They also bring the disease to your house. So, it is a general problem for the population of the country.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, would you like to comment and finalize this matter?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable members for taking interest in this serious matter.

As regards comments by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I think he wanted to go on record in the Hansard, otherwise, we discussed this with him in our offices and we satisfied him. In fact, we –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Record is important.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: It is very important, I agree with you. I was not complaining, hon. Lukyamuzi. I agree with you that you put records correct, and I am going to tell you that we discussed in details.  Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was told that a child of two years old needs to eat 40 mosquito nets to be affected by that little drug that is painted on the mosquito net. 

The honourable member was also told that it does not matter whether the place is ventilated. There is no way that little drug put on the mosquito net was going to affect a person who can sleep comfortably in an unventilated room, even if there were two people.

On the DDT, I am aware about all the conventions Uganda has signed.  Fortunately, I have looked at them, and in fact I think at an appropriate time, I will make a statement on DDT and we shall put it in the press. The technical people are writing a reply to an article which was written by someone from Toronto, I think Opiyo Oloya. 

We are going to reply and really inform the public that we cannot think of anything that can cause problems to the health of our people when we are meant to protect them. So, there is no convention that bars Uganda from using DDT as a disease control insecticide. Mr Speaker, I have received –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, we have got your motion to discuss.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The minister has not answered my question on DDT.

THE SPEAKER: I think you will go to his office and get detailed answers.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, I said I am going to come back with a statement on DDT.  I have received messages about the sugarcane from honourable members who are concerned. They were asking whether sugarcanes should be decontaminated. 

What I should say here is that I have had a meeting with city council officials in the Ministry. As you know, honourable Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Health provides services through a decentralized system. We have got to go through the local governments. 

I agree with you entirely that we need to observe hygiene. If we observed hygiene, we would have no problem with cholera at all, even with only 50 per cent of the population using piped water. If only they could boil the water. 

It is true that when you transmit cholera, it means you are actually eating raw faeces. That is what it means; that you are eating faeces but eating them raw, because even if you boiled them, you would not contract cholera. It is that bad.  

So, Mr Speaker, we are discussing with city council to see that people observe hygiene, and in fact 49 per cent of all the diseases in this country are preventable. That is why the Government is thinking of a community mobilization law, which will, among other things, enforce public health observation. If the local government does not, the central Government should have the ability to come in and enforce that law, which hitherto is missing. So, I agree with members that we need to improve sanitation, of course funds being available. If there was better sanitation, there would not be any of these problems

I have taken note of the various recommendations members have suggested, which we are going to implement, including using secretaries for environment in the city, use of medicated soaps and so on. But again, we shall discuss with the local government, Kampala City Council, to implement these. 

I have also heard people saying that we should ban certain things like the eating of raw sugarcanes.  But we know very many people depend on that as the source of food. Perhaps we could provide assistance on how they can clean them up, and maybe cordon off the contaminated sugarcane. Anyway, I thank you very much for your solidarity and interest in this subject matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. I should not speak after the honourable Minister of Health, but I was excited by the statement he made that if you have cholera, it means you have eaten faeces. It is really true because cholera and typhoid are fecal-oral, and the commonest way of transmitting the fecal-oral diseases is these fingers. 

I want to add that probably, the law requiring that every food handler is screened and therefore educated must be practiced. The commonest person transmitting fecal-oral diseases is the person who handles food. With these mushrooming food rooms around Kampala, I think that is enhancing fecal-oral transmission. 

Therefore, the City Council of Kampala and other urban centers must start listing the food handlers, examine them, give them medical certificates and repeatedly look at their stool. Some people are carriers of cholera and typhoid, although they do not get sick. Most of those who have it are food handlers; they have it and yet they do not get sick but they can pass it on. So, all of you must join in that very important task. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE ALLEGED MANHANDLING OF HON. JACOB OULANYAH BY HON. LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE

THE VICECHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the alleged manhandling of hon. Jacob Oulanyah by hon. Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine. 

You may recall that on the 9th of May 2002, hon. Oulanyah, while making his contribution to the debate on the Political Organizations Bill, made a complaint against hon. Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine to the effect that the latter had mishandled him within Parliamentary buildings. 

On the 14th of the same month, same year, hon. Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine made a personal explanation to this House and he denied the allegation - (Interruption).

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, is it not the normal practice and procedure of the House that members should be availed copies of the reports of committees when they are being presented?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you do not have a copy, but others have. Let her read it, because if you look at the conclusion, there is not much. Let us dispose of this matter now. Proceed.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 15th of May, you referred the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The chairperson of the committee disqualified himself from the inquiry thus the deputy chairperson assumed the role of chairperson. 

I had intended to make a summary of this, but since some members say they do not have the report and it is a short report, I will endeavour to go through it. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: They are getting copies.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, we handled this inquiry in accordance with the mandate given to our committee as per rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure. We went ahead and developed our own terms of reference as well as agreeing upon the issues of the inquiry. 

We did discuss both the terms of reference and the issues with the parties involved, and we agreed upon them. We started the proceedings of the inquiry but at the same time we encouraged the parties to talk and, if possible, come up with an amicable settlement. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am pleased to report that during our last meeting, on the 18th of December, both parties were present. During that meeting, both parties mutually agreed to end the matter amicably. (Applause). 

The committee is happy to report that in the spirit of reconciliation, the matter has been resolved amicably. The committee was pleased by the turn of the events and thanked the parties for emulating the spirit of peace building, which it noted should be promoted by this august House.

Further, members noted that this reconciliation has promoted a good image of Parliament. 

The committee extends its profound gratitude to the parties for the exemplary conduct that was exhibited in solving the matter. 

Mr Speaker, we made some recommendations: 

1. Reconciliation should always be resorted to rather than engaging in lengthy battles.

2. This present inquiry should be used as a reference point in future cases.

3. The experience, which has been gained and shared, should be used in resolving the problems in Northern Uganda. (Laughter).

Mr Speaker, I would like at this juncture to ask for your indulgence so that we could invite the two parties to demonstrate the spirit of reconciliation that they showed us in the committee. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Granted! (Mr Oulanyah and Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine rose and embraced_). (Applause).

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, on that very happy note, I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable chairperson, members of the committee and honourable Members of Parliament, in particular Jacob Oulanyah and Lt Gen. Tumwine, I am very pleased with this report. It has come on a day when we had prayers for peace in Northern Uganda. (Applause). I think we have demonstrated in prayers and physically that this is possible. I thank you very much and I thank the parties for what they have done for us. I put the question to the motion so that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE NOTES WITH APPRECIATION THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 21ST NOVEMBER BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT REGARDING THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY IN GENERAL AND NORTHERN UGANDA IN PARTICULAR

(Debate Continued)

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important motion. (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: But you only have five minutes, please.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will try to observe the time limit. I will try to rush through. 

I also join my colleagues who have thanked you, Mr Speaker, for inviting the President to talk to this august House. I know this matter has come up many times, and as many times as we have brought it up, it has been lightly treated.

It is not the first time for the question of the war in the north to be brought up in this House. You recall in the 6th Parliament, I moved a motion to set up a select committee to investigate the causes, ways and means of ending the war. We spent over Shs 200 million on that project. The report was brought here and although it was adopted, there was a lot of resistance to it. 

I am glad to note hon. Nobert Mao’s speech acknowledging that there has been a general improvement in the attitude of the honourable colleagues towards the northern situation. 

Mr Speaker, it was through that select committee that this House recommended to the Executive to bring a bill for amnesty. As much as I support every effort towards restoration of peace in the north, I have serious doubts about the commitment of the State towards that end. Why am I saying so? This august House has said many times that this issue is not military. We have said many times that it is a political issue, and we have reasons to say so. 

The select committee recommendations, which were adopted in the 6th Parliament, said it was a political problem although military methods might facilitate the solution. They, however, acknowledged that it is a political problem and that is why they came up with the Amnesty Bill, which eventually became an Act of Parliament.

Why am I saying that I doubt the motives of the Government? The statements emanating from the Executive branch of the state are not very encouraging, only cosmetic. Occasionally they are strictly ornamental, to show that they are interested in the peace of this country.

To substantiate my allegations or concerns; not long ago, when His Excellency the President was pushed very hard to go in for a peaceful solution, he said, “Fine, if the clergymen want to talk to Kony, let them go and talk to Kony.” In other words, “I really do not care”. That is why I am doubtful.

Number two, you acknowledge the fact that this conflict is strictly political, but we are only trying to use military methods to solve it. This august House is a witness. We have a serious problem in this country. The problem is acknowledging the fact that democratic pluralism in this country has been outlawed by this august House. Why am I saying so? Because this august House twice passed such laws. The first time it passed a law illegally, and the courts of law confirmed it. This is in reference to the Referendum Act. It was proved in the courts of law that it was not done properly. Why? It was flawed.

Number three, this august House has again made it illegal for some of us to hold different political points of view, through the Political Organisations Act. That by itself is –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say that Parliament can pass an illegal law?

THE SPEAKER: Well, as far as I am concerned, there is no illegal law which was passed. The Referendum Act is a valid law in our statute books. It may not be the law you want, but I think it is a valid law. That is the point.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the correction. I take your guidance on a matter that I have perhaps overstepped. But essentially, the method, the way it was passed, was almost contrary to the Rules of Procedure, and that was confirmed in the courts of law. I insist -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What I can tell you is that that law was challenged in a constitutional court and the court ruled that it was a valid law.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your guidance and your rulings are always final. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not that they are simply final. Yes, in our rules they are, unless you challenge them. However, there are copies of the ruling by the court that declared the law valid. It was challenged even up to the Supreme Court, and the court ruled that they saw nothing illegal about it. It is constitutional.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. However, I still maintain –(Interjection)- no, I am not challenging your ruling.

THE SPEAKER: It is not my ruling. I am only telling you what the constitutional court said.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I still maintain that some of us have been denied our political rights. When I say so, I mean that as a member of UPC or DP I should be allowed to contest elections in this country, with my people supporting me. You cannot tell me that I have to always do it on an individual basis, when some people are being supported by the State.

Mr Speaker, aside from the politics. The methods of prosecution of the war are very dubious. -(Interruption) 

MRS ZZIWA: May I get clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori, who I know very well contested as a presidential candidate? He contested for the presidency of this country and he was fully supported by the Electoral Commission. He was even facilitated accordingly, with a maroon Nissan Patrol, which he drove around when I was escorting him. May I be clarified on how best he wants to be facilitated and supported?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague says she is seeking clarification yet she is asserting that I got full facilitation. I can tell you for you were not the candidate and I was. I will tell you what I got. The maroon vehicle, what was that? My number one rival had 32 vehicles when I had one. (Laughter). 

Number two, I had one helicopter, and he had three. 

Number three, when my helicopter finally got here, on the order of the Commander of the UPDF it was dismantled. For two days, I was totally disorganised - (Interruption). 

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, hon. Awori for giving way. Actually, what he is stating is very correct. At one time his chopper landed in hon. Kiwanda’s constituency due to lack of fuel so they got jerricans to go look for fuel. (Laughter).

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for this very strategic information. I am not trying to deny that information. It is true I ran out of fuel in Mr Kiwanda’s backyard. My flight plan was to pick up fuel from Arua or Gulu but I was ordered by the UPDF to fly back to Entebbe, so I could not make it because of the distance. 

I tried to fly under the radar but I could not. I had to land in his backyard. Fortunately, he was gracious enough to get fuel for me. As a result, since there had been no helicopter landing in the history of the area, and he is the one who assisted me, he got extra votes. That is why he is here. (Laughter).

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order in defence of the facts and truth that this House must receive. Hon. Aggrey Awori has stated clearly that he wanted to refuel in Arua or Gulu when he was coming form Mityana. He was advised by the UPDF to go to the nearest filling station, which was Entebbe, not Gulu or Arua. However, he even did not have enough fuel to take him to the nearest filling station.

Knowing that hon. Aggrey Awori has occupied a big portion of the time of this House and a lot more time of course of the press, is it in order for him to dwell on issues like “the Army was giving wrong information”, when it gave him the right information? Is it in order for him to impute improper motives on the UPDF, which was trying to save his life? Is it in order for him to try to commit suicide by trying to fly a helicopter that did not have enough fuel, and he comes to defend it here?

THE SPEAKER: Well, since I do not have sufficient facts to either agree or disagree with you, I cannot rule on that. Proceed and conclude.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since you have ruled on the matter, I do not want to repeat it. (Capt. Mukula rose_) There is more information. I would like to accept more information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude; do not get more information.

MR AWORI: On your ruling, Mr Speaker, I will continue. In conclusion, I am saying that even the prosecution of the war itself is a fraud. Why am I saying so? I have the following reasons:

Number one, the kind of equipment we are using is too costly to achieve the purpose. When we order equipment such as the helicopters of MI24 VOP, this is very expensive equipment.

Number two, the method of procurement of equipment in this country has been fraught with mistakes. As a result, war has become a growth industry for some people to make money at a fantastic rate. I could confirm this, if I had the opportunity of presenting the Sebutinde report on the helicopter saga. 

The Sebutinde Commission was set up for the purpose of investigating how we acquired equipment for prosecution of the war, in order to end that civil conflict. But since we are getting equipment in a manner, which is not correct, we are wasting public resources. Eight million US dollars has so far achieved nothing; that war can never end.

Number two is about the Commander-in-Chief. This issue of front-loading in terms of command, taking every officer of high rank to the frontline, I do not know in history of any conflict whether it has ever ended positively. We know also, Mr Speaker, that when you are executing guerrilla warfare, you do not use this kind of convention. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aggrey Awori, there are other members who want to make contributions. I gave you five minutes and you have taken 15.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, let me end here. I was very generous. I allowed other members to come to the Floor and as a result my time was blown. However, I am not seeking any compensation. But in the interest of a longer debate, I would like to support the motion as amended.

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. Over the weekend I conducted two focus group discussions in Kagoma County. I first of all explained to them what the President’s speech was about, his analysis of internal strife in Uganda in the last 40 years, and his recommendations as the way forward. 

The peasants from Kagoma County told me the following. I would like to report what they said, and their recommendations to this House.

First of all, they did not agree with the analysis. In their own analysis, they think that the problem in this country is that we have been trying to follow the multi-disciplinary theory of escapism. They said that even when we know the truth, we try to go aside and in the end we come up with different conclusions and solutions.

According to them, from 1964 when the Obote Government attacked innocent citizens at Nakulabye and killed many, they think that subsequent governments in Uganda have intended to behave like colonialists. Governments treat fellow Ugandans as colonised people and they think that this is a disease. Ruling groups are not fighting to liberate ordinary peasants but instead arrogantly follow their own programmes. That is why we have found ourselves in this problem. 

They think that the best we can do is to help Government to return to the calls of peasants rather than the calls of core-investors, et cetera.

In the interest of time, these were their recommendations to Parliament. There are seven points, and they are saying that if we try this, we might succeed with the problem of Northern Uganda:

One, have a two-pronged confidence-building approach, which consists of mobilising the ordinary citizenry not to fear the Movement Government.   They think that all previous governments have caused a lot of fear for those in power. 

They think that the people in Acholi should be mobilised to fight for their own cause, with the Acholi cadres. They also believe that Acholi leaders and other leaders in the northern region should be incorporated in the fight against Kony.

Two, they recommend that a government of national unity, incorporating all major shades of political opinion, be established. That we should avoid allocating minor political posts to people from the northern and eastern region in particular.

Three, they say that the President should continue to assure this country that he will not stand for elections in 2006, because already there are too many sycophants who are trying to spoil the work of the President, which he has done in the last 20 years.

Four, they recommend that we should reduce indoctrination in Chaka mchaka courses and instead focus on issues of socio-economic development.

Five, they propose that the Movement should plan to transform itself into a political party and –(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to thank you for the consultation you did. But I am wondering whether you actually told the peasants what you are consulting about, whether it was about the President’s speech or the constitutional review exercise going on.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I believe I am a sane Member of Parliament –(Laughter)- and that what I consulted the people about was the President’s speech on Northern Uganda.

Six, they recommended that this country should seriously embark on a programme for balanced development. As long as some regions in this country feel that they are not receiving sufficient attention, this is a serious condition for war in future.

Finally, they said that every effort should be made to rid the UPDF of corruption. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to thank the President for his speech, which was quite a landmark in the history of our country.  

This speech was so important, and I feel that as you try to lay a firm foundation for the way forward, it is important for us to lay that foundation on the truth. Therefore, I want to make some corrections to the President’s speech.

On Page 1, the President talks about NRA defeating UPC soldiers. Mr Speaker, by 1986 January, when the Movement came to power, UPC was out of power.  Therefore, UPC could not have had any army that was defeated by NRA. I know it would have been a sweet victory for them, but that was not the case. In fact, the Movement/NRA defeated its own alliance, which was agreed on in the Nairobi Peace Talks.

Secondly, on Page 3, the President talked about Acholi tribal chauvinism. He gave an analysis of this and he said that when he took over power, the people of Acholi were not harassed. I do not agree with that. I know that when this government came to power, people like Apollo Lawoko, Ambassador Francis Okello, Dr Ben Latigo, Tom Odoki – general manager of the wood industry, and very many others from Acholi and other areas in the north, especially Acholi and Lango, were thrown out of jobs. I do not think this talk of harassment was the correct representation of the history of this country.

I am just wondering what the many advisors the President has were doing. I ask the Minister responsible to see that these many advisors give the President correct information and remind him of the facts of our history, so that we can move forward genuinely and objectively.

Mr Speaker, we are concerned about the way forward, and the President, on Page 8, listed eight conditions why the war is continuing in the north.  I do not want to repeat them. We all know them.  Unfortunately, the President does not touch on the causes of this war. I think this was a very serious omission.

Secondly, the President just touched in passing on the matter of peace talks, of which he has appointed a ministerial team. In fact, he mentioned it during question time. I think this too was very unfortunate.

What I concluded from the President’s speech was that each solution was only militarism. But I know the initial analysis, which he tends to have forgotten, is that this Kony war has actually outlived many of its commanders. We remember Bazilio Okello, Eric Odwar, Lakwena, Odong Latek and so on. My analysis is, therefore, concentrating on eliminating Kony alone will not be a solution to long-term peace in our region. Therefore, there is need for us to refocus on what must be done.

Having heard the President and many people on the Government side, my worry is that there seems to be a problem of power. The views of those in power tend to be impaired by the glory and pomp of the office they occupy. Quite often they forget that the comfort they have is also shared by the people who are quite often oppressed. Therefore, they tend not to listen when people are putting forward proposals and ideas to solve the problem.  

Mr Speaker, I am very grateful, especially when you asked us to concentrate on the way forward. I think that is the right way to go. To me the root cause of this conflict, which once in a while goes into military conflict, is basically political. The issue of disparities in economic endowments and resource allocation in this country has its own roots in the politics of this country. 

It is obvious that many of us who come from the north do not subscribe to the philosophy of the Movement Government. It is wrong for me to be imprisoned, against my own wish, in a system that I do not believe in. 

Let us, as Ugandans, be realistic. Let us put ourselves in the position of those in the minority. Let us not just say, because we had this referendum, therefore the majority must oppress the minority against their own wish. Supposing you are the minority? Maybe some of us have already been in that position before. Maybe that is why we went to fight in the bush. Therefore, I think there is need for us to refocus on that. 

I also propose and support the idea that the question of national dialogue should be taken very seriously. I will refer you to what the President said. For those who might always want to go with the President, it is easier in the Hansard. On Page 3678 of the Hansard, he was asked this question, and I want to quote him and then end my submission. 

The President said, “We must make a distinction between terrorism and political demands. If you want, we can have another dialogue. If you think the CA was not enough and that this Constitutional Review Commission is not good enough, we can have another dialogue. No problem.” 

I submit that the Constitutional Review Commission, which we talked about yesterday, has been derailed. It does not provide information, which is required for us to make the correct analysis and judgement. I therefore commend the President for this position, and I will request him to contact all political persons and leaders in this country that this should be the way forward. I thank you very much.

MR SEBALU MIKE (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have thanked the President for having found time to come and address Parliament about an issue of national concern regarding the security in the northern region. I would like to thank your office for having facilitated that interaction.  

Mr Speaker, like all other members have rightly put it, security in the northern region in particular, and in any other part of the country in general, is a critical issue to this country if anything that we seek to do is to be realised. For that matter, that subject demands that all stakeholders should play their part in ensuring that the war is put to a logical conclusion. And Parliament, as an institution, was brought on board, as it had been clamouring to play a part.  

I would like to thank members for the initiative that was earlier on put forward to assist the people of the northern region. This country needs a minimum consensus and common understanding of the notion of common good for the general well being of our country. 

Security is one such notion that we must have a common understanding about, regardless of where insecurity takes place. As long as one part of our country is affected, the whole country is equally affected. You can look at the economic depreciation that we may be going through. It can partly be explained by what is going on in the northern region. The productive forces have been put at a halt. The production process has been disturbed. And yet a lot of investment needs to be put there, in form of running the war machinery in the north, without equally realising anything in terms of returns. 

So, as national leaders, we need to look at this as a national problem. It was clearly brought out in the President’s speech, when it was given a national character by addressing all leaders in this land, including Members of Parliament. As national leaders, we have that moral responsibility to bring in our ideas and input. 

When we had the budget increased, so many ideas came up in terms of rationalising the budget. But the Defence budget being increased at this point in time may turn out to be a saving in the long run, if it is properly utilised and this war is put to its logical conclusion. 

I had time to talk with my people in my constituency, Busiro East. They supported the idea of handling this problem once and for all. Their concern is that the budget is increased but it should not be something that we should do every other time. Let it be increased and the issue of the northern region be brought to a logical conclusion, so that it becomes a saving in the long run.  

This brings up a very serious issue about the UPDF and the way the war is being managed in terms of rationalising resources, and the logistical and operational capabilities of the UPDF. Increasing the budget alone without putting the house in order, in order to rationally use the resources that have been provided to put this problem to an end, may not help this country in the long run. 

So, as citizens of this land, they demand accountability in form of results, not only sending money, and at the end of the day the war keeps going on and on. So, we demand that this increment is reflected in the performance of the UPDF.  

This war can end. It does not need to be handled on one front. Let’s put to use all available options to make sure that the war ends. Let all stakeholders be brought on board. It can be done. Let each stakeholder play his or her part. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Lira): Thank you Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion as amended by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s proposal yesterday.  

This particular speech of the President I can say was rather unique. It would have even been better if he had spared us the first half of his history and analysis of the Ugandan situation. 

I think I will spare his speech the burden of any detailed analysis, because the first part really is highly subjective, debatable and in many ways falsifies our history, particularly, those who know this very history and know it perhaps even better, and do not to use it for a very specific purpose.  

However, the President analysed the cause of war and probably the cause of the prolongation of the present war in the northern part of Uganda. I want to agree with him to some extent. But my own view is that, like the present President and other presidents before, arrogance and selfishness are some of the basic ills for our situation. To the extent that even Kony, by reaction, has now adopted a style of arrogance and will not heed to anybody. I do not believe that Kony was originally arrogant, but as a reaction towards perpetual arrogance and bad attitudes towards him, he has now also developed his own method of arrogance. Therefore, we now have two like poles, which you know repel one another – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I come from Kaberamaido.  Hon. Okulo Epak has mentioned very touchy matters in the delivery of his speech. He said that like presidents before, our current President is dishonest, selfish and arrogant. 

I would like to be clarified in the following terms: In our history we had the Nairobi peace talks between the government of the day, which was headed by Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa, and the NRA, who were then in the bush, headed by Kaguta Museveni. The Nairobi peace talks, some say, did not succeed in bringing peace to this country and are responsible for the war in Northern Uganda. May I be clarified whether the failure of the Nairobi peace talks is what hon. Okulo Epak is referring to as dishonesty and selfishness?

DR OKULO EPAK: I wish you could give me the chance to state my argument about arrogance. That may be one of them, according to you, sir. 

When Museveni threatened, during the 1980 elections, that he would go to the bush if something went wrong with the elections, the President of the day dismissed it by simply saying, “Let him go to the bush, we shall follow him there and we shall leave him there”. Indeed, we followed him there but we did not leave him there. As a result, this country suffered serious social and infrastructural devastation in Luwero Triangle, which is not yet repaired – arrogance!  

Amin dared attack Nyerere and said he would marry him except for his beards and grey hair. That is the level of arrogance we have in this country.  Even some people who you would not think should be arrogant, when they have an inkling of power, they soon assume to be a know-it-all, and behave in the most arrogant way you can think of. That is why I say even Kony has now been induced to be arrogant before he has even acquired a bit of power – (Interruption)

MR NORBERT MAO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In a BBC interview conducted by the then African correspondent, Robin White, with Dr Milton Obote, then President, he asked Dr Obote, “Can you talk to Mr Museveni?” Dr Obote said, “Your name is Robin. Do you know Robinhood? Can you talk to Robinhood?  Museveni is Robinhood. You cannot talk to Robinhood. He is a gangster!” 

I wanted to give this information as a further example of arrogant language and disregard of national interest as opposed to strong and rigid positions by a national leader. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you.  Actually that was one of the things I was going to say. It was actually Obote’s worst interview with Robin White. He asked him “Could you talk to Museveni?” He said, “You are Mr Robin. Do you think I am going to talk to the Robinhoods of this world? And do not talk to me again about that issue”. He was ordering Robin White of BBC.

The other argument, which the President raised, was the question of money for fighting the war. In the 1997/1998 Budget, the President asked for an increase in the Defence budget – (Interruption)

MR ETONU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give about this arrogance of Ugandan leaders is that it did not start after independence. 

In 1961, the late Kiwanuka was the Chief Minister. I was then working in that office as an administrative officer. We were responsible for organising a rally at Entebbe. A certain young man asked the Chief Minister, “We have heard Obote has gone to Lubiri to meet the Kabaka, why can’t you, as a Muganda, go first?” The late Kiwanuka answered, “I see you are a Muslim. If I ask you now to go and slaughter a pig, would you do it?” That was arrogance! And the late Kiwanuka would have remained in power if he had gone to Lubiri before Obote.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you. I think we have now established the fact that we have arrogant leaders who do not care about the citizenry, who do not care about the view of the people to whom they actually owe allegiance and their positions in power.  

But I was talking about the Budget. In the 1997/1998 Budget, the President pleaded with Parliament for an increase in the Defence budget. Hon. Aggrey Awori was very strong in supporting this proposal. Parliament granted an increase after a while. When the budget was approved and apparently the Army was now purportedly equipped to finish off Kony, what did we see? We saw an invasion of Congo. It was a request for finishing Kony, purportedly, but actually, the intention was to go to Zaire. 

Let us be watchful; let us keep our ears and eyes open. The recent 23 per cent, and even more now, being mopped off from other budgets to support Defence may actually be intended for a totally different intention from what we are being told.  Let us watch out. If you see this happening, you say, “Okulo told us”.  

Mr Speaker, I said the President’s speech this time was about the best. I would like to admit and make an observation, including when I heard hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere’s statement here the other day that we do not gain much from war. Sixteen years of civil war, not just civil war but stupid civil war, has taken its toll on us. For the first time, there was a little bit of humility from the President when he made this last speech. For the first time! There was a bit of humility; there was a bit of statesmanship.  

Before that address, we saw it in Lira. The President went to Lira, addressed the people of Lira and for the first time apologised for failing to protect the lives and property of the people of Lira. When he invited Lango and Acholi Parliamentary Group, and religious leaders and elders in Gulu, the President’s appearance was completely different from the past. It was reported today that he also apologised to the people of Kitgum. 

Hon. Mao said this morning that there is a change. With the prayers we are having, and with realisation that Kony may be nothing - he may be a ghost or a dream, and you may be a Sandhurst expert, a Field Marshal, an expert on guerrilla warfare, an expert on toppling governments; he can engage you for 16 years, and it may even be more, and surpass all your deadlines. I believe we have learnt a lesson and we must develop alternative-based approaches.

I would like to thank the President of the Sudan for allowing Operation Iron Fist to go to Sudan. I think that was the best gesture of co-operation and magnanimity. I wish his effort was engaged on a third-party intervention to bring about intermediation between Kony and the Government of Uganda in peace talks, in a similar manner President Museveni is playing the role in the talks between the Government of the Sudan and Garang.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to remind you that the motion was amended. It is now a motion moved by the Minister as amended by the motion moved by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I want to read a paragraph, which I have not heard anybody commenting on, but it is part of our motion. It reads: “In the strongest terms the members condemn, with all deserving contempt, the unlawful…” 

The message is, whereas we appeal to Government to do whatever it can in its favour, we have also to talk on the other side. But I have not heard anybody dealing with this part of the motion. I think our debate should be balanced so that we deal with this motion as it is.  

DR RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Definitely, a lot has been said but still there is a lot more. I will start by saying I support the motion as amended, to condemn Kony. But I have a few things to say. 

I will take the route less travelled on. Whereas there is no reason; and war is called senseless, but I do not think it is as senseless as not having an ambition. Kony and group must have an ambition. It couldn’t have been supported by Sudan. Kony and group have an ambition. 

Although all of us are not students of communities, the communities in Acholi, having up-to-date been able to hide and support them, they must have an ambition – (Mr Onek rose_) Mr Speaker, save me from the one who wants to make me sit down, because mine is an analysis. I am saying these people in Acholi have given Kony strength to fight. Involuntary strength – (Interruption)

MR ONEK: I am perturbed about what the hon. Bulamu is saying about the people of Acholi, who are hostages of Kony’s war against the Government of Uganda and hostages of Sudan’s support to Kony to fight Uganda because of our border location. I would like to know whether it is in order for the honourable member to be so senseless, to tell this House that the Acholi population is supporting Kony? Is it in order, Mr Speaker?   

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I do not know whether you followed the debate yesterday.  You must have heard the contribution of the Member for Busongora South. He was giving reasons as to why that war is going on. He alluded to that idea that it must be local support. He was not asked why. Now what I can do is to ask the member to substantiate and then we proceed to decide on the issue.

DR BULAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish we could be patient. You are flogging the person who has come to fight with you.

I was saying that the disease with the communities, the disease of fear, suspicion, superstition and inestimable poverty, makes these communities think Kony is an entity. And when they think of him as an entity, with fear and disbelief, they apparently make him strong. 

It is because of this that I think that whereas so much ammunition should be bought, we should take on the community advocacy, counselling and sensitisation, so that they stop living in fear of Kony but develop a spirit of defence in themselves. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the people have not done enough? Are you saying that they have not faced Kony and that is why he is fighting and prolonging the war?

DR BULAMU: I am saying that the NGOs that are there should be helped by Government to help the communities to survive, and they should also sensitise the Government to resist Kony. 

For instance, there was a time when these people were taken to camps and then allowed to go to their homes, they remained unsensitised enough to report the existence of Kony to the Government so that Kony could be expelled. Just as I do not think that there is no cause for Kony to fight, I also do not think that a guerrilla war can take 16 years if there is a way of blocking Kony from all ways, including the people staying in Acholi land. 

Whereas they increased the Army, they should also increase advocacy and the confidence of the people, so that they know that Kony is not the one to help them, but they should report his every step so that he can be defeated. 

According to what we heard from the symposium that we had in the gardens, the communities that have remained in the camps have remained with fear, superstition and suspicion of Kony. This is what I request should be fought. But it should be fought on the basis of alleviating poverty, because a hungry person does not understand, his beliefs are hazy. It is a pity that I have not been understood, but definitely, even by looks, I am not the kind to support Kony. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At long last I have caught your eye, and I am glad to get the opportunity to contribute to this motion on the speech of the President. I do support the motion that we should appreciate the speech by the President. 

I would like to thank all peace loving Ugandans who have been touched to participate in trying to solve the war in the north of this nation. Actually, the war that is going on is not just a northern Uganda war; it is a Ugandan war. People in all parts of Uganda have died and suffered because of this war. Like we always say, if one part of the body suffers then the whole body suffers. That is why I would like to thank this Parliament for having identified itself with the suffering of the people of the north. 

And I thank you for not only contributing the money that we contributed in this Parliament after a resolution of Parliament, but also some who have individually contributed materials and items, which have gone to northern Uganda. 

We would like to thank the office of the Deputy Speaker who mobilized a few things from the women Members of Parliament meant for the suffering people in northern Uganda. And I would like also to thank other people like the NGOs, the churches and the diplomatic missions, which have supported all this. 

I am most grateful to the President and the Movement Government, and I would like to especially thank the President for being a little bit different. Although we have said that most leaders and presidents are arrogant, we have noted, and it has been admitted in this Parliament, that the President has apologized to the people of the North. And he looks very different now, even when he is talking to the people and when he addressed us. That makes him very different, and we appreciate that.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the people who organised the joint prayer meeting this morning, which you graced with your presence. What we admitted and agreed on in that prayer meeting was that creating peace, fighting for peace, wanting peace in this nation is the role and duty of everybody. 

We all have a stake in getting peace and supporting all possible means that would bring peace to this nation. Therefore, we definitely feel sorry, we really feel sad about the people who have died because of this conflict, and we pray that this conflict will end soon, with all our participation.

Mr Speaker, as a way forward, I note, like the President mentioned the chauvinism that was created right from the imperial times, that there are lots of other chauvinisms which have not been addressed. For example, there are few programmes, if any, which are really focused on the general unity and peace of this nation, the values that put us together as Ugandans. 

We remain as individuals; I become a Munyankole, someone becomes an Acholi, but we are one nation. We have even failed to get one unifying language that would bring us together as Ugandans. I even wonder how people on the frontline do their intelligence work. If your intelligence work has to be interrupted, then it is a serious flaw in the whole system. Now we have UPE programmes and we belong to the East African Union, possibly we could take up a language like Swahili. It could be quickly taught in the schools and in the communities. We would say at least we have one language that makes us Ugandans. 

We really need to put down programmes that bring unity and peace in this nation. We need short- term, medium-term and long-term programmes that can bring peace and unity to this nation.  

I would like talk a little bit about the poverty that is ragging in the northern part of Uganda. In English they say, a hungry man is an angry man. If someone is hungry, then sometimes he can become angry. So, if there are no plans and programmes to alleviate the poverty equitably in this nation, and we keep seeing on TV the poverty-ridden children of northern Uganda, it really hurts us. Any peace loving Ugandan would not like to see one part of the nation so poor, so war-ridden and not really part of the general development.

I would like to talk a little on this peaceful solution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Madam, you only have one minute.

MRS MEHANGYE: Okay. I will wind up by saying I would like to thank this Government for the peaceful solutions that have been taken, right from the 1980s. I would like to thank those people who were talked to and they left the wars and bushes and joined in the development of this nation. 

I am proud to say that some members who left, who were convinced by the talks, are members of this august House today. Therefore, peace talks have been going on. Possibly the best we can say is that, they should continue with a more concerted effort, so that we bring peace and unity to this nation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand in appreciation of the address of the President, and I would like to start by quoting part of his statement. He said,  “Now we are entering the dry season, which will start in December. I do not think next year, 2003, we shall hear of Kony. If any Kony elements survive up to the end of this rainy season, they will not survive in the coming dry season.”  

The Government of Uganda in the last days has started talking in a different tone, starting from the President himself. Everybody is going prayer-like and divine. The President has taken a prophetic mission of telling us about the future. That means he is very near to God and he is very sure of what he is talking about. God does not make mistakes, and this time I am sure God is not making a mistake.

In the same vein, Parliament has also gone prayer-like. We started with a care mission and today we finished with the priestly mission. I think this is the right direction. But it is also an indication of a failure in the direction which we have been taking until now. That is why we have all turned to God. We have failed, and I would wish that this country appreciates and this Government accepts that we have failed until now, in tackling the security situation in this country. 

Concerning the Kony war, the President also made a statement. He said, “We have killed a lot of bandits”, and the bandits he is talking about are the bandits of Kony. He gave us figures and he said he could not remember some, but they were going into thousands. But he gave us a definition of who these bandits are, and I want to read that also. 

He said, “While the previous rebels leaders were really not terrorists, Kony brought in three new elements: First of all, forced recruitment…” And these are the people the President is calling bandits! They are people who have been abducted.  These are our countrymen who have been abducted by Kony to go to the bush. They are being kept there because they are afraid escape would mean their death. The Government is calling them bandits! If I am abducted tomorrow, I am going to be a bandit! Tomorrow you will be abducted and you will be called a bandit. 

Now, where is the direction this country is taking? Where are we going? We are praying for abducted children to come back, we are praying that they escape, and Government is calling them bandits. He is saying we are killing them in large numbers. Where is this country going?

Let us accept that we have failed to tackle the security problem of this country. The problem of Uganda is not fighting war. The problem of Uganda is that we are not allowed to talk. We are not allowed to talk, we are not allowed to dialogue. If you are a member of UPC, you can dialogue when you are in Kampala but you cannot dialogue when you are in Bushenyi. Is that freedom? I see some people opening their eyes when I mention the dire truth. Those who are saying we are free to talk in this country, you go and talk in Bushenyi as a member of UPC.  

The problem of Uganda is that we are not allowed to discuss, we are not allowed to dialogue. What is the Movement system? It is broad-based. We are supposed to participate maximumly but also we are elected on individual merit –(Prof Kabwegyere rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you accept clarification from Bushenyi?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member. It is not because I come from Bushenyi, but I would want to get to what the honourable member is saying. Am I to understand that the Kony phenomenon is about dialogue? If it is about dialogue, then we could see how we could dialogue. If we reduce the Kony phenomenon to dialogue, I would want to understand, because that one would be an easier task to handle.

DR ALEX OKOT: Thank you, my honourable colleague.  If we refuse to dialogue and somebody goes to the bush, then we say, “Okay, now I want to dialogue,” are you serious? If you are serious, you should have allowed dialogue as a principle, not as a consequence of going to the bush.  

So, the problem is, we are saying we are broad-based but what is broad-based? Broad-based means there are political forces in this country and because there are political forces, we include all these political forces in our system. When we talk of individual merit, we mean a person comes to an office, not because he belongs to a political force but because he is an individual and he is coming on that merit. How do we combine these two? A combination of these two is a confusion of the country.

Mr Speaker, I was very happy two days ago when Prof. Kabwegyere told us that with war, we cannot bring peace. I want to continue from his point. The people who have caused suffering to this country are all those groups who have waged war in this country. Any group which has waged war, whether they took power or not, are the source of the problem in this country, because their principle is, “if I cannot talk, I must wage war.” 

Some of them who have waged war and taken power are even refusing the very principle for which they said they had to go to the bush in order to fight and bring it. What does war bring? War brings hatred, anger and terror, and nobody should say, “I have fought for 16 years, I can still fight.” You have caused confusion, suffering, terror and hatred for 16 years and you want to continue causing the same. This is not how we are going to build Uganda; this is not how we love Uganda. If you love Uganda, let us create an atmosphere of dialogue where you are free to form an opinion.  

The basis of dialogue is forming an opinion.  It is not the different conditions which the Movement System has created or commissioned to inquire about that. I have not formed an opinion. I must have the ground to form an opinion where people come, we discuss and then you can come and ask me for an opinion. You do not want me to put it to anybody but you want me to be informed and to inform you.  How am I going to be informed?  

I would not know about these issues of cholera if Prof. Bukenya had not informed me. How could I have an opinion? So, let the Movement System open up so that people are able to sit and form opinions. Create an atmosphere where I can go to Lira, I can go anywhere for meetings and we discuss freely and openly, and then I will have an opinion, which I can use to build this country.  

The President talked of the lowest common multiple of development being security. It is not the lowest.  Security is a result of peace; security is a result of dialogue.  That is where we are going wrong; that is why we are fighting. We are fighting because the basic principles we have in mind are misconceived. If you want this country to have security, there must be peace first, and let us dialogue. 

Let us accept that we are all different and we have different opinions, and therefore, I can belong to a different group and somebody else can belong to another group. But let us discuss openly on even ground and then we can build this country, then we can form a political culture in this country which people in future will be proud of. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we really have to conclude this debate. Apparently, what I have heard is a repetition of the same measure - dialogue and a way forward. But I would really request that when you make your contributions, make concrete proposals as to how the problem in Northern Uganda can be solved because this is our main concern. Rather than being general, let us find measures that can end that war, because it is very painful.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from a constituency that in the last two months has suffered the worst form of atrocities in the hands of Kony. Therefore, the resolution which was given by hon. Lukyamuzi to condemn those atrocities, cannot pass without my voice being heard on this.  

I make this condemnation as a repetition of what we as members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group have done repeatedly. Unfortunately, many a time people still stand up and say, “but you people, you do not condemn these atrocities”. If time permits, I will come to a specific suggestion on that.  

I stand to support the motion and to repeat the same observation that hon. Okulo Epak made. I had written here that listening to the President that day, the positive attitude with which he conveyed his message, the ease with which he responded even to difficult questions, put him firmly in the position of a statesman.  

In that attitude, in that presentation, we saw hope that a new approach to the crisis in the north had come. In the same vein, I must thank all the members who have unanimously contributed, recognizing the problem as a national problem and seeking solutions.  

Before I propose two or three ways forward, allow me, Mr Speaker, to correct two impressions that have probably caused various peoples to have a wrong framework in seeing the conflict in Acholi.  

The first one is the issue that was raised about Acholis not contributing to the ending of this war.  We have said this before; we had in Kitgum, when the UPDA came out and the Kony rebellion was just beginning to emerge, people who volunteered to fight. There were even what they called “Arrow” groups. They said, “Government, give us the guns we finish these people off before they become a major problem.” 

There are those who have a wrong framework of Acholis, who said, “No, if you give these people guns, they will turn on Government”. The conception that Acholi who exist in Acholiland over these years only live to be in power is a terrible misconception.  The other misconception about the role of politicians arises from a lack of understanding of why this has continued while others in Teso and in Lango ended. 

Honourable members, you should know that the conflicts in Lango and in Teso were led by politicians. When they decided to go to the bush, the Langi political leaders mobilised to fight, and they used armed people as an instrument for asserting their issues. That applied to Teso. 

In fact, in Lango one of the leaders of that rebellion is a Member of Parliament now. In Teso, it is the same thing; several of them are Members of Parliament. Now, that is not the case in Acholi. 

First of all, when Tito Okello took over power, the Acholis who were supporters of UPC lost their government. The politicians were armed.  Eventually, when the crisis led to an armed rebellion, except for few politicians like Dr Obonyo who is now in London, all those leaders of that rebellion were soldiers. And I dare say, they were soldiers with very limited background on administration and even education. When they came out, they left the rebellion to Kony. 

So, when the rebellion persists, it is not because Latigo and younger people like hon. Mao, hon. Ocula, hon. Odonga have failed to involve ourselves in ending these things. This is something whose head and tail we do not even know. (Interruption)

MR MAO: In a tape that was sent and made public by the LRA in which Joseph Kony recorded his voice, and which the peace team now has access to, Kony spoke telling a story of a man who had got a lion by the tail. This man was trying to invite others to come and assist him hold the tail so that he could kill the lion. Now, when somebody came and relieved him of the lion’s tail, instead of fighting the lion, this other person just fled. 

Our interpretation is that Joseph Kony sees himself as somebody who saw other people wrestling with the lion and they were holding its tail. When he came to help them, following their call, they have left the lion’s tail in his hands. Some of them are in Government while others are in exile. 

I am giving this information to show you how Kony views himself, because we must also know that how we view him differs from how he views himself.  This tape is available, and I believe the hon. Bukenya is aware of it and has been briefed about it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Mao. The second misconception, which I think is important, emerged in the President’s speech. When the Sixth Parliament set up a committee to look at the war, I raised this issue and it is on record. This is the issue of chauvinism. I would like to quote the President on this. He says, on page 3658 of the Hansard: “There was also tribal chauvinism, which had been inculcated among our Acholi people by the colonialist, among others.” I will only take that part related to Acholi. He goes on to say, “They would then go to the Acholi and say, ‘you Acholi, you are very brave, you are like lions’.” 

The President gave examples of Baganda and Banyankole and stopped there, but he went to explain further the issue of chauvinism in Acholi in this last bit. He says, “so this was part of the problem – partly, the fear that had been inculcated into our Acholi people by the Bazilio’s, but also the chauvinism that had been planted among our people by the colonialists, without anybody to destroy the chauvinism”. 

The implication of that worries me, Mr Speaker, because if you say “without anybody destroying chauvinism”, I could easily ask the question; is this Kony war part of the process of destroying the Acholi chauvinism of being brave?  (Interruption)

MR ETONU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is, since the honourable member has said that the war was started by politicians, I would like to know what the politicians were fighting for? And when they pulled out, didn’t the politicians realize that it would be their duty to ensure that the war ended, other than just pulling out and leaving the war, as it is claimed, to Kony? I would like to be clarified.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Well, I will simply clarify by saying that, what you said I did not say it. I did not say that politicians started the war in our place. On the contrary, I pointed out that politicians were not part of this war –(Interjection)- this is what I said, I thought that you were so close to me that –(Laughter). 

Anyway, this issue is very unfortunate because every time people forget the fact that this Kony conflict, although we Ugandans claim it as our problem, the real victims are the Acholi. There is no way that our chauvinism would encourage us to destroy ourselves. If that was our attribute, I do not think any Acholi would exist now.  

Now, coming to the way forward, Mr Speaker, first, it is good that hon. Bukenya is here. In addressing the problem of this war, let us separate the war from the Acholi’s support for the Movement. If we do not do this, we are going to create confusion that does not help the process.  

Hon. Bukenya knows that when he went to Gulu, accusations were made. Even when we volunteered to move together with the hon. Minister, we were actually left when the hon. Minister went to Kitgum. When the President’s wife went to Gulu, invitations were selectively made. Some of us only heard in the news that the President’s wife went to Gulu. And when she went to Gulu, she was informed that we deliberately refused to go. Unfortunately, she stood up and said, “You see, those who are here are the people who think about you.”  

Yesterday the President was in Pader. On Tuesday, the President was in Kitgum and I happened to be in Kitgum on another mission. Certain individuals who are Members of Parliament from Acholi got information about the President’s visit. We were not informed. They think we are not Movementists, and it is very unfortunate. (Interruption)

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, you know that when a wound is healing, we never like to scratch it because it may get infected again.  When I went to Gulu, all Members of Parliament from the Acholi region were informed. Indeed, when we went to Anaka and Polongo camps, all of them were with me in the helicopter.  

On flying to Kitgum, some members did not go with me, for mainly two technical reasons. One was excess luggage that we had to take to Kitgum.  But even then, we dared to take all members who come from Kitgum. 

The information I wanted to give my good Prof. Latigo is, let us heal the wound. Do not scratch it. When you scratch it, you will infect it and it will become worse, and our way forward might be difficult.

PROF. LATIGO: I agree with the honourable minister as a medical man. I would like to assure him I was not scratching a wound that was healing. If I did not acknowledge the fact that you went with my colleagues, I must acknowledge it.  

But the point is clear that up to now, the good examples that you set by involving us were undermined by the two examples that I talked about. You may not be aware. So, it is not me who is scratching. I am the one who is now feeling the itch because the hope that we would work together was undermined.

The other area of a way forward is really for this country to truly commit itself to the war.  We support the budget cuts from other ministries to be transferred to defence. But please, let this money truly go to address the problem of the war. I say this because right now, soldiers are thin on the ground. When you go there and see the kind of uniforms they wear, you will say, “provide for them uniforms”. We have soldiers that sometimes we don’t have enough food for. 

But more importantly, we are now once again involving LDUs in our efforts to end this war. It was very unfortunate that yesterday, in the newspapers, it was reported that the LDUs in Gulu were rebelling because they had not been paid for three months. It was even very unfortunate, and I checked this in The Monitor and New Vision newspapers.  

When the President was in Kitgum on Tuesday, he talked about ending the war. We thank him for the apologies he made, but what he said was perturbing. He said that we are now going to recruit LDUs, but the LDUs will be paid from the next financial year. My understanding of the next financial year is July 2003. (Interruption)  

MR ONEK: Point of information to correct the mistake. I was in Kitgum and all the Members of Parliament from Kitgum were with the President. There was nothing confidential about going to Kitgum. I would like us to erase that kind of suspicion of an individualistic nature.  

Secondly, the President said they were still going to continue paying 40,000/= during this financial year to LDUs. But next financial year, their salary would be raised and it would be equal to that of the Army. So, that was the honest position. I do not want any misconception.

PROF. LATIGO: I thank you for your information.  The two papers quoted a press release from the President. I am not creating it, honourable members. It was there, and I am saying that since we have 23 per cent of the monies schemed from other ministries available to Ministry of Defence, why don’t we use it. It is not a lot of money. 

Why don’t we use some of this money to make sure that the people actually can do the work? Because the jet fighters will not kill these guys when they move four or five. You need people who can track them on foot. But they should be well fed, well remunerated and motivated.  This is what I am saying.

On the visit to Kitgum, I did not complain about it, I talked about Pader. I am an MP of Pader, and I am here talking, and it is you who told me that the President went to Pader.

Finally, Mr Speaker, when I appeared before the Parliamentary Committee on the North, they asked me whether killing Kony or dialoguing with him would end the wars in Uganda. I said, “Yes, it will end the Kony war if you have killed him or dialogued with him. But as long as conditions that lead to violence and war remain, somebody else, not Kony, will emerge.” 

I would like to urge fellow countrymen that we have actually tried to run, maybe in all honesty, but we cannot run forever. We cannot hide from the fact that man is a free animal.  Let us learn from what is happening in Kenya. Let us open up politics when the person whom we believe can manage the affairs of this country effectively is still in reign. If we wait too long, the vacuum will lead to terrible chaos. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there anything that has not been said? I think everything has been said. Let me give an opportunity to the Prime Minister and then we get one person from this side because everything has been said.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish also to support the motion moved by the Minister in charge of the Presidency, and I find the amendments by hon. Lukyamuzi innocuous.  In other words, they are not harmful.

Government is totally committed to end insurgency and insecurity urgently, using political, diplomatic, religious, military and other methods. You cannot use only one method.  This is so because the problem is very difficult to define. In fact, the problem we are having is that it is difficult to describe the problem.

I am a researcher, and when you are asking someone to do a Masters or a Doctoral thesis, they must first define the problem. If they do not define the problem correctly, they cannot proceed, and the same applies in medicine. Unless you have defined the problem correctly, you may not prescribe correctly. 

Our problem is that Kony may not know what he wants and he may well be used or misused by political opportunists. When you get such a scenario, it becomes very difficult to prescribe. Be that as it may, we are using a multi-faceted approach. We are using the political, diplomatic, religious, military, and other measures.
  
Let me deal with the political, because some people have been saying that development has not been balanced. As a political scientist, I want to inform you that I have never known a country where resources are equitably distributed. If anybody knows of such a country, that country is in heaven. However, the task of any country is to reduce the imbalances. That is the major task. There is no country where resources are equitably distributed, but we try to reduce the imbalances in order to create unity.

I want to put it to all members here present, beginning with the Speaker, that we are addressing the question of equitable distribution, especially of scarce resources. If you look at Article 193 alone, we are using the Equalisation Grant to give to the least developed districts. Just take that measure alone. So, that matter is at hand and there is no way you can run a country with consensus when you do not address reduction of imbalances. So, that matter is both economic and political. 

However, when you are addressing it, do not just give handouts to people who are less developed. Give them skills; the moment you give them skills, then they will also be able to harness their resources. But if you give them fish and they do not learn how to fish, they will endlessly be wanting handouts.
  
Let me also deal with the amnesty law. Over 6,000 people have given up rebellion and taken advantage of it. So, you cannot underestimate the amnesty law. That is a political approach and it has been used. An office has been set up for it. Only today, I was talking with the first deputy chairperson of the committee handling this matter, and I was given all this information.  The office is there, and I think there is one person now manning it. 

The issue is to work out a budget quickly and we go full blast. You must use a multi-faceted method, you cannot use only one, because even defining of the problem is problematic. Let me use other examples. The Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF); it is in my office and has US $1 million. There is even an element for peace building in it. 

We also have the Acholi Land Programme where Government –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Prime Minister. 

One, he has talked about NUSAF, which we passed last financial year. Up to now it is only being talked about when the issue of poverty in Northern Uganda is raised. We think it is used as a cover-up to prevent other funds to get into the programmes in northern and eastern Uganda.

Two, the Prime Minister has said that the Government is totally committed, but I have fears about the members of the Front Bench. Last financial year, we put a lot of pressure on Government to disarm Karamoja. One of the things that we agreed on was to open the road infrastructure in Karamoja, and I am told some funds were got for that. 

In the President’s speech, he said one of the problems in Northern Uganda is the poor road infrastructure. Disarmament has stopped and up to this moment, no road has been worked on. I am sure that by the time the issue of disarmament in Karamoja comes up, the Prime Minister’s office and other offices will come back here and say there is no money for disarmament. 

So, may I get clarified on what measures the Prime Minister is putting in place to ensure that the members of the Front Bench are using the funds that are being lobbied in the name of northern and eastern Uganda for development in that area?

MR MWANDHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the Prime Minister whether among the political solutions, they have included reconciliation with parties that are opposed to Government so that these can also be taken on board to fight insurgency.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have to deal with those who are opposed to the Government and not only those people who are on your side. That will be political in-feeding, which is not particularly useful. 

Regarding NUSAF, as you know, when you negotiate a project, it takes time. I was in charge of Makerere Institute of Social Research, where I had a lot of projects, I learnt that they take time and they have stages. I have invited Members of Parliament from the north and we have discussed this in detail. If I started discussing it here, I would need three more hours. 

Be that as it may, I want to inform you that it is at hand, and even the presidential committee in charge of our ministry has had a statement regarding it, in writing. I directed that they have everything in place, and recently, there was an argument as to whether the headquarters should be in Gulu. Some people wanted to take it to Teso but it was agreed that it stays in Gulu. 

Already, we have seen the advertisements for posts; they are there. We do not advertise in darkness. Even you, honourable members, if you have relatives or friends, ask them to apply. Should any frontbencher misuse these resources, of course we do have –(Interruption) (Mr Nsubuga Nsambu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude this.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Lastly, there is the issue of the military. Unless you also use military pressure; Kony is multi-faceted, he will not just give in; you need a mixture.  

Let me now inform all Members of Parliament that we have even set up what was the marshal plan after the Second World War. How do you reconstruct the north after the war? Government has set up a committee to deal with how to reconstruct the north after the war, and we are working out the budget and issues, and we shall involve everybody.

Let me finally say that I was delighted this morning when we prayed for peace. May the Almighty irrigate us with peace! I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you heard yesterday, the NPC made a suggestion that we should study what we have contributed so that we see how to effect it. However, I am appealing to the Executive to get the copy of the Hansard since we started this debate, and set up a committee to find out the salient features of our debate, to see how best to utilise them. 

Otherwise, I thank you for the concerns you have expressed and the wisdom you used in your contributions. I think this is going to help us solve this problem that has been on for so long and has caused such suffering.

Honourable members, today we come to the end of the 2nd Meeting of the 2nd Session, and we are going for the Christmas recess. As you know when you go on recess, it is also necessary to prepare work so that when we come back for the 3rd Meeting of the 2nd Session, there will be work for us. Therefore, we are making arrangements to have some committees do some work and prepare reports from which we shall proceed when we come back. 

I want to request the committees to come back to prepare for work during recess. That way, a lot of time will not be wasted. So I appeal to whichever committee is back to do exactly this. I think the clerk will give you the details. 

The committees will not work for the same amount of time because the kind of load before them is not the same. Some committees may require three weeks before we come back; some may require two and others one. We have to consider all this in light of the funds that we have to support our activities.

I have been asked to inform you that Members of Parliament on the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities and other members are reminded of their workshop scheduled for tomorrow, Friday, at the Nile Conference Centre, starting at 8.30 a.m. Please, keep time. 

I also remind members of the Appointments Committee that we have some work to do tomorrow, at 9.00 a.m. in the usual place.

Honourable members, this brings us to the end of the 3rd Meeting. I thank you very much for whatever you have done; for your understanding and acceptance of various views. This is very good. You were exercising your right to speak on whatever issue, candidly, and for the good of our country. I thank you very much and I wish you an enjoyable Christmas and Happy New Year - a year better than the present. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned sine dine)


 

