Thursday 14th December, 2000

Parliament met at 10.33 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at Committee Stage is when we take decisions, and by look of things, we have not been able to realise the quorum. So, I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes and then we will come in and start the process of roll call.

(The proceedings were suspended due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption at 10.59 p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us start with the roll call. When you are called, you stand up to indicate your presence and say so.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether there are other Members who are still outside. The roll-call has indicated that there are 84 Members who are in the Chamber.

MR.NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to have my name recorded. 

MR. EKANYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to propose that as you draw the budget for the coming financial year, the Parliament should import machines where every Member presses with his finger. Maybe that will help. Thank you.

MR. ALI GABE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to register my presence.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek guidance based on the constitutional provision, which we all know. The provision under Article 83 (1)(d) has never been operationalised. It reads as follows: “83. (1) A member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament – 
(d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliamentary Committee for his or her absence.”  

We have always transacted business here with less than 150 Members, and this is House is composed of 280 Members. The question is, what is happening to the other Members? Will there be a way of formal reprimand? This is the guidance I am seeking. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but in order to do that, we have to go through a process of ascertaining who is present, who is absent, and who is more frequent or absent than the other. This is exactly what we are doing.

MS. NAMUMBYA: I would just like to inform this House, basing on the clarification by hon. Okumu Ringa, that there is something that is happening in the countryside, and that concerns the eight newly created districts. They are putting in place the interim chairmen, and Members of Parliament must also know what is happening in their constituencies. So, the Members of the eight districts are fully participating in the matters of their constituencies, Sir.  

THE SPEAKER: Right; that is their representative role.  What happens to their legislative role? You have to make the laws in order to conduct elections. If you were not here, you would have not made any laws for the elections.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker, whereas I wish to agree with the hon. Member who has just sat, the procedures are very clear, even when they should be in their constituencies, they must seek for permission from the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you satisfied with that clarification?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, you and I, and probably other Members, are aware that there are permanent Members of Parliament who are never here. I want to say that you know them as much as we do. I would like to know, have you given them permanent authority to be absent from this House?  

Two, is it fair for Members of Parliament who come here regularly, but once in a while they are absent for a number of reasons, which you know, because you are also a Member of Parliament, to be indicated as undisciplined because you have roll-called and they are not here? All this as if I do not know my parliamentary legislative work, when there are over 100 Members of Parliament who are never here for the last four years and you know them! Is it really fair for Members of Parliament, who come here regularly, and you do know them, to be called such? 

The other time Aggrey Awori was in America for six months! Was it with your permission? Was it with your authority? Is it fair on Members of Parliament, who come here more regularly, and one day you roll call and signals are sent to the countryside that Captain Guma has been absent for two days? Is it fair for you to roll call knowing that there are 100 MPs elsewhere? Given opportunity, I can even give you 30 names.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the fairness of roll-calling is really based on finding the factual situation on the ground. There is no other way we can do that except by roll calling, and this is the method.

MR. TIM LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I have been consistently counting on my own, although you did not give me permission to so, and we are now 93. One has just left but another one came in.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, we are doing the same.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to be clarified as to whether it is not possible to revisit the issue of official quorum. Other Parliaments are operating on quorums as low as three! And this problem is likely to be endemic. Now, if we lose three hours each day, I think this will be very costly to the state.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have now realised the necessary quorum. We shall proceed with business.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

Clause 30

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Katwiremu): Mr. Chairman, in Clause 30(1), we would like to insert the words “registered by the Registrar General” between the word “bylaws” and the word “to”. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Chairman, when I insert that phrase, I do not see any difference, therefore, we have no objection.  

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My concern is with the word ‘bylaw’, because ‘bylaw’ normally means that the entity is either a local authority or it is a public body. I think private bodies and bodies which are in the domain of the commercial world normally have regulations.  So, I am bothered by the word ‘bylaw’. ‘bylaw’ in a way gives the corporation some sort of quasi-political or quasi-public function. Normally for commercial entities, it is regulations. I do not see how you can say that a corporation should have bylaws, because a corporation is really a corporate legal entity.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe they were trying to distinguish it from the regulations to be made by the Minister. The Minister has powers to make regulations under this law, and then the corporation has the manager, the regulator of discipline within the condominium arrangement. He has to use certain instruments to keep order. I do not know whether those can be distinguished.

DR. OKULO-EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am a member of the Committee, but I think hon. Mutyaba is also right in that sense. If it is a matter of contrast, maybe we can use rules or standing orders.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you call them standing orders in order to distinguish them from regulations made by the Minister? This is what is being floated around.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, it is a standard thing in all condominium laws all over the world, and we picked a leaf from other people.  

Secondly, the corporation is given effect of that power by this particular Act, and they can pass certain bylaws. The reasons there are bylaws is because when they pass them, they do not become effective until they have been crosschecked by the authorities. Therefore, they are passed by anything that is not Parliament. Anything that is not Parliament passes particular regulations. Those become bylaws after they have been approved by a higher entity, so we use the word ‘bylaw’. 

I do not agree with the notion that a corporation or any other entity cannot pass a bylaw, because even directors of a body like Uganda Airlines, of which one hon. Member was a Managing Director, can pass a bylaw as long as it does not conflict with other laws.

MR. MUTYABA: No, Mr. Chairman, I beg to differ from the Minister. I was speaking as a lawyer who knows very well what a bylaw means. I think the Minister was referring to some countries where actually the corporations, which are in charge of condominiums, are public bodies. For example, where the condominiums are owned by municipal authorities, they can pass bylaws because these are public bodies. But in an area where you can have a group of people forming a corporation as a legal entity, I do not see how the word ‘bylaw’ comes in. I think the right word is either ‘rules’ or you can call them standing orders or regulations, but not bylaws.

THE CHAIRMAN: What are those laws passed by district councils called?

MR. MUTYABA: Public health authorities, for example, can pass bylaws governing public sanitation. District authorities can pass bylaws. Local authorities can actually pass bylaws up to LCII. Those are bylaws, and it is their nature as public bodies that qualifies them to pass these bylaws. But in this case, we are talking about a corporation, which can actually be a corporation formed by private people. I want you to distinguish this from corporations running condominiums in other countries, which the Minister has talked about.  In these countries, some of these corporations also double as municipal authorities, and definitely the rules they pass then can be bylaws.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us get some clarification from the hon. Mutyaba. The bylaws that you are talking about are defined on page 7 as the bylaws made by a corporation.  

MR. MUTYABA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, and I am saying that the inclusion of the word ‘bylaw’ is not right. We can call them standing orders, we can call them rules, but we cannot call them bylaws because this corporation is not a public body. It could be a public body, but essentially it is not a public body. Any body of people can come together and form a corporation for the running of the units, which they own. So, it can be a private initiative, and this distinguishes it from many other countries where actually these condominiums are owned by municipal authorities.  

MR. LWANGA: I would like to seek clarification before we move on, Mr. Chairman.  The word ‘corporation’ has really been bothering me, because it gives the feeling of a public body somewhere, where Government is also involved.  From the way we have used it here, it is like a group of people coming together and forming an arrangement. 

Why don’t we use the word ‘company’, so that people like me, who have simple minds, have it clear that we are dealing with a company formed by individuals as opposed to an organisation, which has got a public connotation?  I am not sure about this word, and I think this is why the lawyers are now telling us about bylaws and some of us think that they are regulations or laws.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the issue is whether we should use the expression ‘bylaws’ or something else, which is also enforceable. If you read the so called bylaws, they are supposed to be enforceable.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, laws are enforceable and regulations are enforceable.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I want you to take that into account.

MR. MUTYABA:  So, I would like to move that we amend clause 30 and delete the word “bylaws” wherever it appears, and substitute it with the words “standing orders and regulations”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am just taking it from where you have stopped. Supposing you use the word ‘rules’, then you will be able to distinguish this from the regulations, which are supposed to be made by the Minister. 

MR. MUTYABA:  So, I move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are adopting the word ‘rules’?

MR. MUTYABA: Yes.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, that is the first amendment we still have the amendment by the Committee. The Committee wanted us to insert “registered by the Registrar General.”  But once you have made rules, why should you register them, they will be there. They derive authority from the statute. I think it is not necessary to register.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we had put that amendment because we had the word ‘bylaws’. We thought that for them to be registered under the Registrar General, they would have more authenticity. That was the intention of that amendment. But now that we are using rules, it may not be entirely necessary. So, I withdraw the amendment.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, as a consequence of the amendment, which we have passed, and as consequence of what you have said, I move that we delete clause 30(3).  The justification is that in sub-clause (5), it is very clear that once the corporation passes the bylaws, it binds both the corporation and the owners, and that is enough. The registration does not add any authenticity to the rules. So, I move.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I would like clarification on the amendment being proposed. If I followed the chairman, he wants to have the rules registered in sub clause (1). Now, sub-clause (3) implies that in order for the amendment of revocation of these rules to take effect, the amendment must be registered, which implies that actually the registrar already has the original rules. Otherwise, why do you want to register the amendment and not the original rules? So, I have a feeling, and that is why I need clarification, that actually when the corporation makes the laws, they are registered with the registrar on the basis of which they will also subsequently register the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, hon. Minister, you are arguing that (3) should not be removed. But that would still mean that the amendment in (1), requiring registration, will have to be there, so that (3) can then make sense.  

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, the Minister may be right but I just want to ask, isn’t the corporation formed under this Bill also subject to the laws governing companies because it will be a company limited?  Will it have its own existence? I find a problem of having a corporation with a legal personality, which is not created by an Act of Parliament, for example. It either has to be created by an Act of Parliament or under the Companies Act.

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, the question asked by hon. Mutyaba should be obvious with this very Act. If we pass it, we are authorising the entities to make corporations. In otherwords, we are moreless creating them by this Act.  

Secondly, as a Committee, we prefer the laws to be registered merely to make them authentic, so that nobody can just come and say we made these rules here without authenticity. So, I really do not see any harm in the Registrar General registering the rules made by the corporation. We just want to make it authentic.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we are now back to taking a decision on the amendment by the chairman, namely that the rules made by the corporation be registered. 

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, that is what I am supporting.  I have just stood up to support that. I said the Committee decided on that because they wanted the rules to be authentic.  

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I think we should support the amendment by the chairman of the Committee, because unless the rules or bylaws are registered, they cannot even be amended. So, in order for them to become authentic and be amended or revoked, they must be registered. So, I would like us to support the amendment by the chairperson.

MR.BAGEINE: The amendment by the chairman of the Committee is talking about the Registrar General, but under clause 20, where we talk about the formation of the corporation, sub-section (7) says, “The Companies Act shall not apply to a corporation established under sub-section (1).”  

If we begin registering with Registrar General, which means Registrar of Companies instead of Registrar of Titles, I think there is going to be a problem. It is a technical problem here. Should we not be talking about Registrar who is defined as Registrar of Titles and not Registrar General?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this registration has nothing to do with interest in land or in the property. It is really to record it somewhere in an authentic office so that anybody who wishes to find out about this can go to the Registrar General's office and find out. That is the purpose. It has nothing to do with registration of interest.    

CAPT. BABU: I was about to say that the concept is to give these rules the effect they require, and to be protected in order to see that there is no conflict with the laws of the country. The Registrar has to get these rules, look at them, and then register them and make sure that they are in operation. That is the reason as to why we take them to the Registrar. Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from both the Minister and the chairperson.  The rules we are talking about will refer only to a corporation under the Act. What about a situation where there is no corporation, maybe it is just a company?  What rules will apply? 

CAPT. BABU: The Companies Act. Mr. Chairman, I really do appreciate that the concept is new, and therefore some people would like to relate it to something they already know. In clause 20(7), we made it very clear that the company rules do not apply to this kind of corporation. 

This is a new concept, I agree entirely and I admit, but we should not split hairs because we are talking about owners of a block of flats getting together and forming an entity. When they corporate with each other, we call that a corporation. It is when they get together, and this law we are making now gives an effect to that entity, that it is now called a corporation. I am sorry it is a new idea. It is not the same as the corporation under the Companies Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us be focused. We are dealing with the amendment by the Committee as to whether these rules, which are made by this corporation, should be registered.   That is all.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, the reason I am raising this issue is because what the Minister is referring to is the process of people getting together and baptising it a corporation –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, let us talk about whether these rules, which we have already agreed should be referred to as rules and not bylaws, should be registered. That is all.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to have a logical understanding of this corporation. Is the corporation the process of people getting together? Or is the corporation what we know in legal language as something established by an Act of Parliament. If it is a process, then the word ‘corporation’ is being wrongly applied in this context.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Chairman, the corporation, which we are talking about here, is clearly defined in this Bill on page 7. So, we should be able to register these rules, because if we do not register them, we are running a risk of somebody rearing pigs without agreeing with the neighbour, who is rearing dogs. So, I think we have to register them.

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I have been seeking very important clarification and I am trying to understand. We are talking about a corporation, but I want to know whether you are forming a legal entity. And if you are forming a legal entity, much as we are not lawyers but the lawyers should tell us, how does that relate with the normal company law of this country? Is it going to be there or it is not going to be there? What is it?  Is it a company or -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tim Lwanga, have you read Clause 20(7)? It says that the type of law or company law you are talking about will not apply to this corporation!

MR. LWANGA: So, why don’t we remove “r” and put “o” so that this is a co-operation other than a corporation.  Why don’t we do that if it is just people coming together? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us first of all deal with the amendment. I want us to deal with the amendment, because you are bringing in ideas, which you should have brought up during the debate.

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Chairman, whether there would be -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: These rules should be registered by the Registrar General.

There would be no problem, but if you go back to the definition, the Registrar in this case means the Registrar of Titles.  That is all it says under the definition, Registrar of Titles under the Registration of Titles Act.  Now, I do not mind registration of the rules, but why is it that in this case it is registered with the Registrar of Titles?  Because this is new, it have never happened here for a corporation, whether it is a corporation of voluntary people coming together, to go to Registrar of Titles, normally we go to Registrar of Documents who is in Registrar's office.  If you want to register the rules to give them that extra efficacy, it should be with the Registrar of Documents. What sort of clout does a Registrar of Titles have in this case that actually these regulations should be registered under him?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the Registrar General is also registrar of documents. 

MR MUTYABA: It means a registrar appointed under the Registration of Titles Act, which is dealing with land.  Whereas I believe that in this case, the registration that should take place should be under the Registrar General.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is correct. That is what the chairman is amending. I will now put the question. 
                          
(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tim Lwanga, your problem was to do the baptism given to this entity called a corporation. Is it the same like an entity operating under the Companies Act? The answer is no, by virtue of clause 27.

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Chairman, in that case, it is operating like a co-operative. Am I right to understand it that way?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is going to make rules as to how it is going to operate.

MR. LWANGA: So, probably it is not right to use the word ‘corporation’. We should call it a cooperative, an arrangement, or anything like that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Move an amendment if you do not like the word ‘corporation’ so that we are focused.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, I have a problem with this corporation, because if you are going to register these rules, rules must belong to somebody. If people in Bugolobi register rules, those of Buganda Road register rules, those of Bukoto register rules and these rules do not relate to somebody specifically, whose rules are they? Why don’t these rules go with some entity, and that is the entity we want to call something, which is not a corporation.  It must be something. The rules must not be left hanging there. 

MR. KATWIREMU:  Mr. Chairman, if we went back to clause 20, where this corporation is formed, maybe Members would not raise some of the issues they are raising now.  Clause 20 reads as follows: “There shall, upon the registration of a condominium plan, be constituted in respect of any building or structure to which the plan relates, a corporation which shall operate under the name- “The Owners, Condominium plan No… 

(2) The number to be specified under subsection (1) shall be the number given to the plan upon registration. 

(3) A corporation shall consist of persons who own units in the parcel to which the condominium plan relates. 

(4) The corporation shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued in its corporate name. 

(5) The Secretary of the corporation shall keep custody of the corporation seal. 

(6) The common seal of the corporation shall be authenticated by the signature of the chairperson or of any other member authorised in writing by the board and the Secretary 

(7) The Companies Act shall not apply to a corporation established under subsection (1).”   

So, in terms of operation, because the whole corporation with so many people cannot really effect decisions, they will have a board, which will act on behalf of the corporation. It can enter into management agreements with the management agencies for example. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am opposed to the way the corporation is used, because if you have a block of flats of eight floors, that is a corporation.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us be focused. If you want to change it to an entity by which the flat will operate, move an amendment so that we make a proposal and proceed. 

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I would like to propose that we amend this now because we have to bear with consequential amendments, even to the interpretation clause. I propose that the word ‘corporation’ be replaced with ‘co-operative society’.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you use co-operative society then you will have to deal with the Co-operative Act. Hon. Members, in the general debate you were informed that this is a new concept, at least in Uganda, and it is for the purposes of people owning units in the ‘air’ and getting titles for that. That is the purpose of this law. It has nothing to do with ordinary corporative law.

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Chairman, your decision is right. In fact, we should not really labour so much on the word corporation, because as long as it is defined, we should take that definition given in the Act. Although you may understand a corporation as a different thing, do not go beyond the Act. So, I do not think we have a problem.  

I would also like to raise a different matter, because in this same section, under (7), we are saying that the Companies Act shall not apply to corporations established under sub-section (1). As you know, this Act is not exhaustive. I know that even in the cases where we create corporations by Statute, for example Uganda Airlines, which the hon. Minister was talking about, we have a provision that the Companies Act shall apply. In this case you have got a board of directors. When it comes to matters of infidelity, how will you, when you go to the court, prosecute the directors?   

This one does not provide generally about how you are going to deal with matter, for example, of behaviour within a company or conduct of meetings. How are you going to deal with those matters? You are at the same time saying that the Companies Act does not apply, and yet you cannot fully provide for those matters here. Which law are you going to apply?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mutyaba, we passed that section. You are taking us back to clause 20 (7). Let us proceed to the end and then we can consider those matters later. 

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, having expressed my feelings about this word ‘corporation’ and having received advice to move a substantive motion, I wish to move a motion under Rule 44 (h) of our Rules. I move that the word ‘corporation’ be replaced with the word ‘body corporate’, so that at least those of us with simple minds can understand.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the lawyers must really be firm.  You must make a distinction between these things. The lawyers should be able to help in this matter.

MR. MUTYABA: But I have explained it very well, I have said the Corporation, which we have under this Act, is defined under the Act. We should not go beyond it. You take the meaning as provided for in the Act. Do not start importing your own ideas of what a corporation is.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have another amendment?  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I would like us to look at sub-clause (4) on page 28. What we have basically done is to spilt that sub-clause into two parts, just for purposes of clarity. So, we would like to replace sub-clause (4) with the following: “a rule shall not – 
    (a) prohibit or restrict the devolution of a unit, or the transfer, lease or any other dealing in the unit; or 
    (b) destroy and modify an easement implied or created by this Act.”  

What we have just done here is to separate those two ideas so that -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not see any difference except for the fact that you have broken it up. Is it necessary to break up a small paragraph such as this one? Does the clause, as it is make matters difficult to understand?

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, this is for clarity’s sake, because the clause deals with two aspects. One, it deals directly with the unit itself and then secondly, it deals with matters outside the unit, such as easement. So, I think if we spilt them into two, it would be easier and clearer to read and understand.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The substance is really the same. You have only made it easier for someone to read and breathe and then start again. That is all.

MR. MUTYABA: Since we have professional draftsmen, and we are not changing the meaning, we are not adding anything, why don’t we leave it to these people, who have been trained in doing these things? 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we are getting involved in drafting rather than actually approving the ideas, which are going to be the law.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, of course these were laymen who wanted it to be a little bit clearer, but we have no big problem with that. So, I wish to withdraw the amendment and the draftsmen should make it as clear as we thought it should be.

Clause 30 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 31(3) reads as follows: “An authorised agent of the corporation may determine a fine payable under section 30(7)”. 

We would like to delete the word “determine” and insert the words “advise the corporation on the amount of.”  The justification is that the management agent, if given the final decision, may arbitrarily determine the fine. The board may rather consider his or her advice but take the decision itself. So, we wanted to remove the power to take the decision on a fine from the management agent to the board. That is the import of that amendment.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would not have had any problem, but if there is a delay, there could be a problem. I want you to take a block of flats and you have given them to somebody who is managing the place. The corporate members might not even be residents. They might be renting those flats. Now, by the time you have to go to the corporation, which will sit three months after, to come up with a fine for this gentleman who has done something, there will be a delay. I have no problem with it, but it will delay the charges against those who might be violating the rules that are set. As far as I am concerned, I have no problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, your worry is that you do not want the decision to be taken by the agent, but there is a remedy if somebody is aggrieved. If somebody is aggrieved, he can appeal. 

MR.KATWIREMU: I think the Minister is worried about the length of time that the corporation will take to respond to the advice. But you have got a board, which is acting on behalf of the corporation. We thought it should be the board to take the decision on how much you should fine someone, rather than the management agent. The management agent can give advice, but the board should take the final decision.  

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, the expert in the management of these flats is the agent. He is an expert, who is trained to manage, and can formulate the fines that are required. The only thing probably one could say, is that they must be approved fines. As you rightly said, there is a right of appeal. So, I really think that this is going to delay the whole process. Thank you.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 30(7) in the Bill provides as follows: “The bylaws shall provide for fines which may be imposed for breach of the bylaws.”  So, I would like to propose that in clause 31(3), instead of “determine”, we use the word “enforce.”  And the sentence should read as follows: “An authorised agent of the corporation may enforce a fine payable under section 30(7).”  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, are you saying that under 30(7) the fines are already determined?  Clause 30(7) says, “the bylaws shall provide for fines which may be imposed for breach of the bylaws.” 
So, it is mandatory, and when it comes to imposition, it becomes a discretion. The bylaws can provide up to a point by way of a fine.  But whoever is imposing may impose a lesser figure than what is provided for in the bylaws. In other words, the fines are already provided for under 30(7). Now, what is up there is really enforcement. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, there is 31 (1), and this makes the bylaws prescribe the fines, it determines it. So, when you come to 31(3), the word “determine” is used there. Hon. Kadaga is saying we should not use ‘determine’ but ‘enforce’. In other words, the agent simply enforces what is already prescribed by the laws. So, instead of determine, she is saying we should use ‘enforce’, which I think is proper.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, the amendment by the Committee is perfectly in order. The experience in management of properties is that the agent will advise the owners first before anything is put into place. Now they are suggesting that he advises the board and then they discuss and agree, so that the element of appeal does not come in. What this really means is that you have determined, and if you determine the fine, you have already told the board, and when this is passed on to the person being fined, he appeals to the same people who have again made the same decision, because the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation.  

So, I think the amendment by the Committee is quite in order. He advises the board or the corporation on the fine and then when this is imposed, it is final. There is no question of appealing again to the same people. So, I support the amendment by the Committee.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Chairman, I think it should be advise, because you cannot determine the extent of the fine just like that. It is the agent who will find out how much damage it is and what kind of damage. It will vary from case to case.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I will put the question to the Committee’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think sub-clause (4) and sub-clause (5) have to be consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, proceed if you have more amendments. 

MR. KATWIREMU: In sub-clause (6), we would like to delete the phrase “may appeal to a Tribunal established under the Land Act 1998” and insert “may appeal to the court.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Didn’t we change the definition? So, It should be consequential.

MR. KATWIREMU: Okay. Sub-clause (7) and (8) are the same. Sub-clause (9) should also be consequential, because we are deleting “at the Land Registry” and inserting “with the Registrar General” as we have just agreed. That is all I have under Clause 31.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think most of these, if not all, are consequential.

Clause 31 as amended, agreed to

Clause 32 

MR. KATWIREMU: In clause 32(2), the Committee proposes to delete “three or more times within a period of one month” and replace it with “three times within six months or six times within 12 months.”  

The rationale was that we were allowing somebody to be a nuisance too many times before we actually got him. The Committee felt that instead of allowing three or more times within a period of one month, thus allowing somebody to be a nuisance, we make it three times within six months.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are being generous!

MR. KATWIREMU: No, we are being more stringent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you are being more lenient.

MR KATWIREMU: In the Bill here it says, you are habitual if you have breached the bylaws three times within a period of one month. We are saying that if you do that three times in six months –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You are being generous!

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, I agree.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you not tolerating too much nuisance around for all that time?

MR. KATWIREMU: That is what the Committee felt.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I want to oppose this amendment. When you live in apartment blocks or in flats, like some of us do, you will find that you have to be a little bit stringent in order to keep law and order. I would like to request the chairperson to heed to this. We, we will not accept this amendment as a Ministry.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee took a liberal view because we thought, if within one month somebody violates something three times, it should not be called habitual, it did not sound correct. So, that is why we said that it can be really habitual if it is done three times in six months or six times in one year. That can be habitual, but how can you now designate somebody as being a habitual offender within one month! It does not really sound correct.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ongom, if somebody, in one short space of time, does the same thing, that is in fact the right definition of habitual.

MR.BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the Minister’s view. In fact, as it is in the Bill itself, it is even generous, because it depends on what the man is in breach of. To wait for six months before you determine whether somebody is habitually breaking the rules of the corporation! I think if he does it once, twice, three times, at most within one month, definitely something ought to be done immediately. Otherwise, as I said, depending on what he has done, you will just be prolonging things for nothing. You will make life difficult for the other people who are owning the property with him. So, I think the provision in the original Bill should stay.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If we retain the current sub-clause (2), is there any provision somewhere where such a person is being warned or that will be spelt out in the rules?  Thank you.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the rules that we have just talked about will precisely lay down what you are expected to do and what you are not expected to do. And if you breach those rules in that frequency, then this will take effect. For example, somebody could bring in discos, or somebody on the 3rd floor could be pouring water on people on the 1st floor three times in a month and he is warned but he does not take heed. Those are the kinds of things that this is supposed to take care of.

THE CHAIRMAN: And you want this person to continue pouring water for six months!  

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, our problem sometimes, when we are making laws, is that we are very lenient. Just imagine that somebody has a party one Saturday, and the next Saturday, and the third Saturday, and you have to wait until he has done that for six months before you warn him or you take action. It is being insensitive to other people. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 32, agreed to

Clause 33

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the amendment I had here is really consequential. It is to replace “District Council” with “local authority” in sub-clause (1).

Clause 33, agreed to

Clause 34, agreed to

Clause 35, agreed to

Clause 36

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, immediately after sub-clause (3), the Committee wishes to create a new (4) to read as follows: “in a case where the board is the managing agent and a request is made under subsection (1) and the board fails to comply with that sub-section, the aggrieved person may refer the matter to court for appropriate action”.  

Sub-section (3) reads as follows: “where a request is made under subsection (1) and the management agent fails to comply with that subsection, the aggrieved person may refer the matter to the board for appropriate action”.  

So, we want to take that appeal process a step further, beyond the board, and that is what we intend to do in the new sub-clause (4).

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU: Mr. Chairman, this has already been provided for, and the method for the aggrieved is first to go to the board, which is part of the corporation. If that fails there, then he appeals to the court.  So, I really wonder why this is here, because we have already said that the person who is aggrieved can go to court after going to the corporation, if he so wishes.  Thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, the amendment by the Committee is introducing a new idea altogether. It is saying that the board is going to manage the corporation’s property, but there can be a busy situation where some people are involved in managing their own property through the board and there will be a lot of confusion. We have seen instances where you have a chairman of the board and he is employed somewhere else, but he is supposed to handle monies being paid by the members of those units and so on. So, there will be endless confusion. I think we should not allow any situation where the board is going to act as its own agent.  

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we should understand this concept. I know it is a new idea and I understand. The agent is the normal person who manages the estate. Let us take an estate of flats, if this agent does something that does not agree with one of the tenants, that tenant can appeal to the board. If he is not happy with what the board has decided, then he can go to court. This is all we are saying. We are not saying you should not go to court, but we are just repeating ourselves because we have already said so somewhere in the law.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister has just missed one little point. Supposing the management agent is actually the board itself?  

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think the management agent is an agent of the corporation. A board is one of the institutions of the corporation. The board is part of the corporation, but the managing agent is an agent of the corporation.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, there is really no need to introduce these new amendments. The process is very clear. The board will delegate to the managing agent, and final authority will go back to the board, and when it fails, it will go to court. So, the amendment is irrelevant. 

THE CHAIRMAN: We can vote on it if you have a strong point.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have another amendment? There is a small amendment there.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, it is a small amendment really. In sub-clause (4), we propose to delete “twenty days” and instead insert “twenty one days”.  This is because in sub-clause (2) above, the management agents have to provide the information referred to in sub-section (1) within 21 days after the receipt of the request. We thought those should be uniform.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think all these amendments are consequential. 

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in sub-clause 1(b) and (d), we are proposing to insert the phrase “if any” at the end. The justification is that the proposed rules and recreational agreements may not be in existence at this stage. We started when we were passing the Bill, and we are providing for any laws if they are there.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is either there or not! And at the end of (b), we agreed that it is now rules not bylaws. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to beg that we do not really put this. This is redundant, because the rules have to be there. To operate this Act, one will require the rules, and therefore, it cannot be ‘if any’. As for the recreation agreement, it is part of this Act. Where they are, there shall be an agreement, where you do not have them you will not have an agreement. 

There is an agreement that will be there when you have a recreation centre. Some flats will have swimming pools, recreation centres, and others will have Jacuzzis and all these good things. So, when you do have these things, then this agreement will have to exist, but if they are not there, then you do not need that agreement.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, if we are looking at the person who is in the process of developing and consequently selling the condominium, this will not have been put in place by that time, and therefore, I do not envisage any existing rules or existing management agreements. This comes into play when the condominium is formed. Therefore, the word “existing” in (b) and (c) should be deleted. Nothing like a condominium is in place until the developer has developed and sold, and then the condominium is formed. They are all proposed –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the significance of “propose” together with “if any”? I thought that “propose” takes care of a situation where something does not exist. It is still being proposed and then you are saying “if any”.  The draughtsman will find it very difficult to sort that out. 

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, my clarification is clear. We are dealing with something that is yet to come into being, and therefore, there can only be proposed rules, proposed management agreements, but not existing ones. I am only saying that under (b) and (c), the word “existing” should not be there. It should simply be “proposed rules” and “proposed management agreement”, because after developing and you are going to sell units, the condominium will be formed when various people have put themselves together in a corporation and are forming that condominium. That is when rules come into place.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, move your amendment and then we discuss it when we are focused. The Committee’s amendment is “if any” and he is coming up with another amendment. So, we have got to deal with those amendments. Let him move his amendment formally, so that we can discuss it, unless the hon. Minister would like at this stage to persuade him not to proceed.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I was actually going to persuade him not to proceed, because clause 42, which is about the developer, is very clear. The developer develops and then he hands over. Remember that whilst there is a transition before this law comes in existence, immediately we finish this law, the rules have to be made. So, for anybody who reads this law afterwards, there will be existing rules then. But if this is finished, that is when they will come into effect.  

Right now, we have proposed rules and until the law is out, they will not be in existence. Immediately the gentleman hands over, there will be standard rules, which will be attached on every condominium, and they will be part of this law. So, when the developer has handed over and each parcel is taken up by an individual, the corporation is formed within a certain period and from that moment on, they will go by the proposed or the existing rules at the time. This is the difference, and I thought I should make it clear.

MR. MUTYABA: I think there is a problem. I understand hon. Bageine’s point. I may be a developer and I want to sell these units under a condominium law to different people who are interested in them. As I am selling, I may, at the same time, propose the kind of rules or attach the management agreement, which should govern this kind of corporation, which they will make. 

I imagine that it must not be permissible for the developer, for example, to enforce his own management agreement on the owners. So, that is why they are proposed. They can refuse or they can take them up. Now, the bylaws, which the Minister is talking about, are going to be made by each corporation. It is not that we have standard bylaws governing all matters of condominiums, because every corporation, from the way we have made this law, is entitled to come up with its own rules. We are not going to have standard rules, but every corporation should come up with a - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately, we are talking about generalities as if we are having a general debate.  Anybody who disagrees will take a decision. Move your amendment and we shall deal with it.

MR. BAGEINE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to move that under clause 41 1(b) and (c), the word “existing” be deleted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: What about (d)?  

MR. BAGEINE: I propose that it be deleted wherever it appears in this section. 
I already said earlier that when you have developer putting up a block of flats, he may be doing it so that he retains them, but later on decides that he wants to sell units. At that stage, the condominium comes into play. It is at that stage that rules and management agreements will come into play. 

We have already said that each corporation will make its own rules. If a corporation is not in existence, and it is supposed to make it own rules, whose rules is the developer giving to whoever is purchasing? So, the proper way should be proposed laws, which may or may not be accepted by the purchasers. Therefore, there is no reason to refuse him from proposing rules or management agreements, but they cannot be deemed to be in existence.  

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I hear hon. Members talking about management agreements and rules, but this Bill does not talk about management agreements, it talks about sales agreements. So, I think you better read it properly. 

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a management agreement. 

MR. ONGOM: Yes, but at the same time we also have to realise that the developer may not sell all the units at once. He may sell some and some may still remain. For instance, if he has sold some and some are still remaining, then the sales agreement will be made for those that he has already sold. But now he is saying is that when he proposes to sell the remainder, he should also make those agreements which are already existing or proposed available to the purchasers. This is what he is talking about.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I think hon. Ongom has misunderstood me. I am not talking about the sales agreement. I have no problem with it. I am talking about rules and management agreements. Even if the developer sells part of the property and he retains part, he will still be one of the members of the corporation to be formed. Therefore, he should not be seen to be imposing rules that has been formed with him as a party on the new corporation. 

It would really not make sense to use the word “existing”, because by doing so, you are now enabling the developer impose his own rules and management terms on the new corporation that is being formed and that includes him. So, my motion is to delete the word “existing”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question that clause 41(1) be amended by deleting the word “existing” wherever it occurs in that sub clause.  

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 42 (3) reads as follows: "Subject to section 42, a purchaser of a unit from a developer may, without incurring any liability for doing so, rescind the sale agreement within ten days from the date of its execution" 

And sub clause (4) says, "if a sale agreement is receded under subsection (3)…" 
So, we think that sub clause (3) should read, “subject to sub-clause (4)…” instead of “subject to section 42…” 

We also find that (4) is not sufficient, and we are introducing a new - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with the first one. You are saying the expression “42” should be deleted and substituted with “sub section (4)”.

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, because this subject definitely refers to sub-clause (4) and not section 42.

MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, what the chairman is saying is that there is a problem with sub-clause (3). Sub clause (3) is in reference to sub clause (4). So, it should be “subject to sub clause (4)”. 

If you agree with him, then he intends to amend sub-clause (4). Maybe let him talk about sub-clause (4) so that we can comprehend both issues. Proceed and talk about what you are going to do with (4) if we accept your amendment in sub-clause (3).

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, sub-clause (4) says, “If a sale agreement is rescinded under subsection (3), the developer shall, within ten days from receipt of written notice of the recision, return to the purchaser all the money paid in respect of the purchase of the unit.”  

We want to take care of some unserious potential purchasers, people who want to buy and they unjustifiably and arbitrarily rescind sales agreements without incurring costs. We want to put a time limit within which you can do that without incurring a cost. 

So, we would like a new (4) to read as follows: “A purchaser may not rescind a purchase agreement under sub-clause (3) if all the documents required to be delivered to the purchaser under sub-clause (1) have been delivered to the purchaser not less than ten days before the execution of the purchase agreement by the parties to it.”  

So, if they have delivered papers to you within ten days, then you do not just withdraw from the agreement without incurring a cost. If you let ten days pass and you have not withdrawn your intention to purchase, then there should be some cost for doing that.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I have got a problem. Sub-clause (3) protects the buyer, sub-clause (4) requires the seller to return the money to the buyer, and clause 42 is on the sale agreement. Therefore, sub-clause (3) is actually saying, subject to the sales agreement, a purchase of unit from a developer may, without incurring any liability for doing so, receive the sale agreement within ten days from he date of execution.  

Now, he is saying “subject to that sales agreement”, because you might bring the sale agreement and I am not happy with it and within ten days I say no, I will not buy, and therefore I would not incur any costs. 

In (2) he says, if I have given any deposit towards this sale, then the seller will have to return my money if I have done it within ten days. Now, this is international in property dealing. You must protect everybody so that the seller does not give dubious sales to these people. The person should be quite sure before buying the property, and this is what this is doing. So, I really fail to see the argument of the unserious buyer and the serious buyer. Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do agree with the Minister that there is need to retain sub-clause (3) and (4), but my concern is with regard to the time frame. Ten days is too long, it should be seven days, so as to ensure that there is seriousness. One can miss a transaction within these 10 days and somebody comes back and says, ‘sorry I am rescinding’! So, I would like to first seek clarification from the Minister on the 10 days. Otherwise, I support the retention of the existing sub-clauses.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, we gave 10 days because usually on two days in the week, Saturday and Sunday, people do not work. There is a tendency to take care of that, and the person who proposed the 10 days insisted on that because of the weekend in between. Normally they take care of that by giving only three extra days so that you have working days. So, this is why the 10 days were given. Actually, I did ask why 10 days, why not 20 or three, and I was given the reason that it is one week normally, but they are giving you 10 days to make sure that you cater for the weekends.

MR. BAGEINE: Before we agree on these two sub-clauses, I would like to seek clarification. Clause 42 is introducing the sale agreement. Now, under 41, we are attempting to introduce a sale agreement, which is repeated in clause 42. I think that 41 (3) and (4) would properly come under clause 42, because it is already in fact stated under 42(a) and the rest. Otherwise, in my opinion, we are mixing up issues. I would like the Minister to read that and see whether there is really need to have this and then repeat the same thing under clause 42.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I thought that 41 deals with the sale of units, there is marginal noted there, and then 42 deals with the contents of the sale agreement. They address specific issues.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman when you talk of rescinding of sales for the purchaser to come out, is it just because after I paid 10 days ago, then I say ‘no, I have got a different business proposal, I want my money, I want to rescind’? Are we not protecting the seller, and should we not give reasons as to why the purchaser wants to rescind the sale agreement.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Who gives the reasons? He is saying you are allowing the seller to rescind, but who is rescinding?  It says he should rescind under a condition.

CAPT. BABU: Well, not really, Sir. Buying is sometimes an intention, which is decided by many things. Maybe when somebody went to buy something, there were certain intentions, but then after he has consulted his wife or his girl friend, and even after he has looked at the property again, at the end of it he comes back and says no, he does not want it, he prefers something else. This has happened, especially in property markets where there is very high competition. 

I could give you the example of Naalya. There are four different types of houses. You might have wanted a particular type, but after consultation you might want to change to another one. This gives you the chance to be able to change your mind before you actually go into the main transaction. It is really to give you a buffer zone to help you make up your minds. In fact, this is good for the buyer, because after you have passed the 10 days, it is a point of no return.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I want us to be focused. The Committee is saying that the way sub-clause (3) is drafted is wrong. It is saying that the reference there is not to section 42, but it is actually to sub-clause (4). If that is the case, then the expression “section 42” should read sub-section (4). The Minister has now given an explanation. The Minister is in fact saying that sub-clause (3) and (4) as they are should remain. That is where we are.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, that is one of the reasons why I am standing up. In my view, it would be unfair for the House to decide whether (3) should be subjected to sub-section (4) and not to 42 or the other way round. I think they should agree first, because the two mean different things.

I also want clarification as to whether in normal drafting you can say that two is subject to three, and when you reach three, you say it is subject to two. I am just asking for that clarification as a layman. I do not want to debate this as a Cabinet Minister, so that I may appear to be at variance with my Colleague. 

We negotiate sales, we finalise, we sign the agreement, and I make the payment. Unless you are legislating for problems, where immediately you pay me, I pay someone. When you come ten days later to say, ‘no I have changed my mind’, if it is on a fraudulent basis, you will find that I have sold to you, but I also sold it earlier to somebody else. This case can be covered under the law. But if you come and say that you have changed your mind because your wife has advised you or because you have found a cheaper one and you want your money in ten days, that is different. I may tell you that I will give you back the money, but you will have to give me one year to pay you back, because I have already used this money. 

In other words, you are going to legislate for a situation where you will have people using people’s money because you cannot take someone to court to say that they have not paid you after your change of mind. You cannot do this when they can prove that when you paid them, it was their money and they subsequently settled their debt or whatever the case may be. Now they are not in a position to pay you. This is a problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, hon. Minister, what is your proposal?  I take it that at an appropriate time you will move an amendment if you want, but we have an amendment here. 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to speak in terms of an amendment until I get an explanation. If I am not satisfied, then I will liase with hon. Dick Nyai for an amendment.

MR. BABU: Mr. Chairman, property transaction is not like normal sale. Later on, when you reach clause 43, it will become even clearer. It is very clear that in property transactions, when the money is initially paid, it is put in a trust of some form, and when the transaction is over, that is when the seller gets the money. In the ten days you have not sold completely, and in some countries it is even longer than this. So, the transaction is slightly different from buying and selling. 

I thought maybe you should read clause 43 and talk to a few people, who have been in the property business for some time. We are trying to introduce that kind of approach in buying and selling properties. But if you do sell your property, this might not apply. We are talking about a different problem here. Thank you.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: May I then understand that the ten days are part of the transaction?

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I want us to cut the whole story short by including the concerns of the chairman of the Committee in (3), so that beyond ten days, there is a liability to rescinding the agreement. I think the Minister agrees with me. 

I also want us to agree with the chairman of the Committee that sub-clause (3) should be subjected to sub-clause (4), because it is in (4) where we talk about rescinding of the agreement and being paid back your money within the ten days. So, I would like to agree with the chairman that sub-clause (3) should be subjected to sub-clause (4). But his concern is that if within ten days you have not come back, then what happens. I think we impose the liability on you if you come after the ten days.

THE CHAIRMAN: But that is what he says!

MS KIRASO: No, he wanted to put it in (4). I want it to be in (3).  It will be neater.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying that they should rescind the sale agreement within ten days from the date without incurring liability? 

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the Committee wants us to precisely include what will happen if it is after ten days.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is a drafting technique really.  If it goes beyond the ten days, automatically you incur liability. That is what he is saying.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I agreed with the Minister’s explanation about the ten days being part of the transaction. Now, if it is beyond ten days, then the agreement is finished. The deal is sealed.  We should not now come and say ‘if it is beyond ten days’, because we have given you ten days. Within the law, I have not received the money, but you have given in the money. After ten days, if you have not changed your mind, deal sealed!

THE CHAIRMAN: But what is this business of “without incurring liability”?  What is that for?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: It is automatic in the sense –(Interruption)

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Chairman, my problem is simple. If you talk about the purchaser, in common terms it means he is somebody who has bought something. If we are now talking about ten days, then I would wish to plead with the Minister to accept to instead use the words ‘the intending purchaser’. Once you say ‘purchaser’, the deal is already complete. So, what are the ten days for? A contract has to be signed.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have spent a bit too long on this. Let us have the Minister, the chairman, the Minister of Local Government and hon. Bageine sit and come out with something, so that we sort out this problem.  
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Condominium Property Bill, 2000” up to clause 41.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: We shall suspend the proceedings until three O’clock. I hope that will give you enough time to have your lunch, travel to Parliament, and get into the Chambers by three O’clock or five minutes to three.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 1.26 p.m)

(On resumption at 3.38 p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, before we broke off, we had gone as far as clause 41, specifically sub-clause (3) and (4). We had appointed a group of wise hon. Members to get us out of that problem. Can we have a report on that?

MR. KATWIREMU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have looked at clause 41 as a whole and discovered that in sub-section (3), we were actually referring to clause 42. Clause 42 is basically on the contents of a sale agreement and yet in clause 41(1)(a), we have already referred to a sale agreement. So, we have agreed that where a sale agreement is mentioned is where we should find the contents of a sale agreement, so that a sale agreement is completely defined at that stage.  

We also thought that putting the whole of section 42 under 41(a) would be a bit clumsy. So, we propose to amend as follows: 

Clause 41(1)(a) should read, “A developer shall not sell or agree to sell a unit or proposed unit unless he or she has delivered to the purchaser a copy of – 
    (a) the sale agreement, whose contents are contained in the second Schedule of this Act,” 

We would also like to move the whole of 42 into Schedule two of this Act, so that when you refer to a sale agreement, it is completely defined. We prose the above instead of referring to it in sub-section (3) and (4) and then referring to its contents afterwards. 

So, I am simply putting the contents of the sale agreement in 41(1)(a).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we would move all the contents in section 42 into the second Schedule of this Act. In other words, we would create another Schedule, because we have one already, then we would have a second one, which would be the contents of the sale agreement. 

MR. KATWIREMU: The second Schedule would contain the contents of the sale agreement as in section 42 now. So, in other words, we would delete 42 and take it to a Schedule.  

And then we would keep sub-section (3) and have our amendment as we had proposed, and then maybe a new file.  So, (3), (4), and the new one we had proposed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, the first amendment is in paragraph (a). The other is to delete the whole of clause 42 and transfer it to Schedule two, and then amend sub-clause (3) of clause 41 to read “subject to Schedule two” instead of “subject to section 42.”

MR. KATWIREMU: This would read, “subject to sub-section (4)” because 42 is no longer there. It is just part of the sale agreement.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we are getting a bit confused.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, sub-section (3) and (4) are part of a substantive law here. Section 42 is only on contents of a sale agreement, which we have transferred to 41(1)(a).  That is all. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us work on 41(1)(a), the sale agreement, whose contents are in the second Schedule to this Act. Can we pronounce ourselves on that?  This is an amendment by the Committee now.  I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now let us go to sub-clause (3). What is the amendment in sub-clause (3)?  

MR. KATWIREMU: In sub-clause (3), the words “section 42” should now be deleted and replaced with “sub-section (4)”. This is because Schedule two is already part of 41(1)(a), so we cannot subject this sub-clause to the contents of a sale agreement. And we would like to introduce (4).

THE CHAIRMAN: There is an existing (4), are you introducing a new one?

MR.KATWIREMU: We are introducing a new (4) and the current (4) will become (5). So, we would like to introduce a new sub-clause (4) immediately after sub-clause (3), to read as follows: “A purchaser may not rescind the purchase agreement under sub-clause (3) if all the documents required to be delivered to the purchaser under sub-clause (1) have been delivered to the purchaser not less than ten days before the execution of the purchase agreement by the parties to it.”  

The justification is that we want to deter the unserious potential buyers from unjustifiably rescinding purchase agreements without incurring costs. In otherwords, we do not want people to just make it a game to disturb people because after ten days you must incur a cost for rescinding an agreement.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I hope you are listening. We have two amendments to deal with.

CAPT. BABU: I have no problem with the first one.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, let us pronounce ourselves on that. The amendment is delete “section 42” and insert “sub-section (4)”.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us go to the second one, which is to introduce a new sub-clause (4).

CAPT. BABU: That is the one I am worried about, Mr. Chairman. In the original Bill, we wanted the buyers to have some time to think over this transaction, and we gave them ten days. In the amendment we are saying if they gave you these documents ten days ago, within those ten days you can no longer refuse or rescind. Now, on this one I am a little bit worried. 

The idea in the first instance was to give a buyer enough time to make up his mind to buy this property.  I, therefore, have a little bit of doubt, unless I am convinced that this new (4) will not put a conditionality or create a loophole. These ten days, which are given to the buyer, could be used as a loophole. They could say you no longer have ten days anyway. This is my worry.  Otherwise, I am not worried about the first one, but I am a bit worried about the second one. It seems to be removing (3).  Thank you.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I do not see any contradiction. I do not see why the Minister is not comfortable with the amendment as read out by the chairman. The amendment only seeks to emphasise that, if within ten days somebody has not made a decision, then you have to pay inconvenience costs for not making any decision within the ten days given to you. I do not think there is any contradiction.

MR. BABU: Mr. Chairman, that is the exactly why I am saying that I do not agree with this particular amendment. We want to give a buyer enough time to really make up his mind. And this is an international way of buying property. This is not about buying and selling like you do in a shop. When you are buying property, a lot of money is involved, and sometimes you even have to borrow this money, therefore, you need ten days to really make up your mind. After ten days, it is a point of no return, you can incur the costs, but before that, you need the ten days.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, this morning when I asked for clarification, I was told that the ten days are part of the negotiation. So nobody is reliable if within those ten days an agreement was breached. Now, if this amendment brings in the element of a cost when I have changed my mind on the ninth day, then it runs counter to this morning’s clarification. 

I will also raise an issue on (4) because it talks about the developer returning the money, but this morning I was told that within the ten days the money has not even been passed on to the seller. So, we need a clear position, instead of passing a law that is going to be an inconvenience to the public.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Chairman, to me the original clause 42 and what has come from the chairman of the Committee is saying exactly the same thing. It is in line with what my Colleague wants. The chairman has written it in indirect speech and there is no difference.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is why I am saying we should be a bit careful. We should not turn ourselves into a drafting Committee or into draftsmen. Let us get the idea, and the draftsman can arrange this and put it in proper language. Even in (4), when you talk about execution of the purchase agreement by the parties to it, I do not think that is how we do it in legal drafting. Anyway, let us agree on the idea and then the draftsman will polish it for us.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When you look at that way sub-clause (3) is drafted, and you take the proposed amendment by the Chairperson of the Committee, the amendment negates sub-clause (3). This being the case, it would be better to leave the current 42, which is now a schedule, so that the rest of the issues could now be contained within a schedule rather than in part of sub-clause (4).

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, we have discussed the amendment by the Committee this afternoon, and it is being brought in because under 41(3), the purchaser is being protected, but the seller is not being protected. He was being protected under 42, where that amendment has been lifted and brought into the new clause being proposed now. So, on one side you have the purchaser being protected and being given the right to rescind the agreement. The other one is saying, if however all the documents have been delivered and ten days have elapsed, the purchaser should not be allowed to rescind the agreement. That is why that amendment is coming in. And the present (4) will become sub-clause (5).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is that clear, hon. Okumu Ringa?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  No, Mr. Chairman. It is not clear because the proposed amendment says, “a purchaser may not rescind the purchase agreement under sub-clause (3) if all the documents required to be delivered to the purchaser under sub-clause (1) have been delivered to the purchaser not less than ten days before the execution of the purchase agreement by the parties to it” 
The issue in sub-clause (3) has been very clear, but here we are all operating within the period of ten days, and if ten days have elapsed, the purchaser could be penalised.

THE CHAIRMAN: The effect of the amendment is to insert a new sub-clause (4) as proposed by the Committee. I am going to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU:  So, the existing (4) becomes (5). Just push it down.
 	
Clause 41 as amended, agreed to

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, as I explained before, Clause 42 becomes part of Schedule 2. So, I propose that we delete clause 42. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 43, agreed to

Clause 44

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the Committee proposes to amend the marginal note. We propose to delete “management agreements” and insert “developers management agreements”. Clause 44 reads, “(1) A corporation may terminate a developer’s management agreement at any time after the majority of the units are owned by persons other than a developer  

(2) Either party may, for good cause, terminate a developer’s management agreement.  

(3) A developer’s management agreement shall not be terminated except by giving sixty days’ notice in writing to the other party.”

We want the marginal note to be consistent with what is in the clause.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 44 as amended, agreed to

Clause 45

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we would like to delete clause 45(1) and (2). These are routine matters and they should be catered for in the rules of the corporation. I beg to move.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, after thorough consideration, we have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 45 as amended, agreed to

Clause 46

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we propose to delete clause 46 because it can be catered for in the rules of the corporation.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 47

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we propose to delete clause 47 because it should be covered in the rules. It is covered under the normal course of effecting tenancy agreements.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to the deletion, but when this is to be taken care of in rules, how will it come in? How do we take care of this in rules when the corporation is not the owner of the property from the way it is drafted?

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one? It is supposed to be deleted but you are complaining about the way it is drafted.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: My complaint is that they say it would be taken care of in rules, but even in the rules it does not apply.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you happy with the deletion?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 48, agreed to

Clause 49

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in clause 49(1), we propose to insert the words “comprising the condominium property” after the word “premises” in the second line.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 49 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I propose to amend Clause 51(2) by inserting the word “developer” between “the” and “corporation” on the second line. So, it should read, “An application to terminate the condominium status of a property may be made to a Tribunal by the developer, corporation, an owner of a unit, a registered chargee of a unit, or a purchaser under an agreement for sale of a unit.”   The Committee felt that even a developer could apply for termination of a condominium status.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have a little bit of a problem with this amendment. A corporation is formed by people who own parcels and units of that property, and if a developer owns part of that property, he is part of the corporation. Therefore, putting it in here is redundant.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support the Minister, because the word ‘corporation’ here includes everyone owning parcels of the property. So, the developer is part of the corporation. So, the amendment is redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am inclined to put it to vote, if you should wish, hon. chairman.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, if it is clear to members that the developer is part of that, I with draw the amendment.

Clause 51, agreed to

Clause 52

MR.KATWIREMU: Clause 52 (3) reads as follows: “upon termination of the condominium status of a property by a unanimous resolution, the corporation shall dispose of the property or part of it by sale or transfer.”  

We propose to replace the word “shall” with the word “may”. This is because we want to provide a scenario where the developer is still the sole member of the corporation and therefore, the property reverts to him automatically without necessarily having to sell or transfer them, so that the transfer is optional.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have a little bit of a problem. The word ‘shall’ is mandatory and ‘may’ is optional. But when you are no longer part of the corporation, it is imperative that you get out of that corporation. Therefore, in my opinion, the word ‘may’ is not strong enough in this particular case, because you are talking about dismantling somebody from the main corporation. Thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, the Committee seems to have gone back to the developer, when we have actually gone very far away from the developer. We are dealing with the owners of a condominium. Now, the argument that is being put forward here against ‘shall’ is that it is not optional. We are dealing with a condominium property already owned by a number of individuals, including the developer if he retained one or two of the units.  Therefore, when you are dismantling the existence of the developer, he is no longer in play. So, I support the Minister that this should remain as “shall”, so that it is mandatory.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we do not have very strong views on this one. I withdraw the amendment.

Clause 52, agreed to

Clause 53

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, for those who may not have the Bill, clause 53(1) reads as follows: “A Tribunal, upon an application by the corporation, owner of a unit or a management agent, may by order, provide for the winding up of the corporation” 

We propose to delete that sub-clause and replace it with the following: “Upon termination of the condominium status of a property under section 52, court may, on the application of the corporation or the owner of a unit, provide for the winding up of the corporation.”  
Should there be claims on the corporation, then such claims should be entertained by court before the corporation is wound up.  I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think there is a word missing before the word “court”. Do you agree? Don’t you think the word “a” is missing?   

MR.KATWIREMU: I take your amendment, Mr. Chairman. We can say, “a court may…”

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman I have a lot of difficulty. If you look at the original 53(1), I think it is a much better sub-clause because “tribunal” has been replaced by the word “court”.  “A court, upon an application by the corporation, owners of the unit, or management agent, may, by order, provide for winding up of a corporation.”  Now, unless there is a problem with that sub-clause, I think we should leave it as it is.  Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, if you use the idea of a consequential amendment, the current formulation will read, “a court, upon an application by the corporation, owner of a unit, or a management agent, may, by order, provide for the winding up of the corporation.” 

This is more relevant and more exact in as far as the Bill is concerned. Because when you look at the proposed amendment by the Committee, they are talking about a condominium status, and yet whether there is a corporation or not, the cluster of premises or flats would remain a condominium. So, this is really providing for the existence of people, who have formed themselves into a corporation and one or two may wish to opt out, and that corporation would be dissolved and another one formed. So, the existing corporation is better, and I propose that we retain it and we re-draft the amendment.  Thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, whilst I agree with wording as it is now, I have a problem, and maybe the hon. Minister could throw light on this. The provision gives authority to a management agent to wind up the corporation, but I have a slight problem with that. It says “a court upon an application by the corporation, owner of a unit, or a management agent….” I have a problem with that management agent applying to wind up the corporation. I think we need some bit of explanation on that.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, a management agent is an employee of the corporation, therefore, under instruction from the corporation or a board, he can lodge in the papers for this. This is the same as any other normal operation. So, I really do not see why we should split hairs on this one.

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: In the Committee we looked at a situation whereby most of the Members of the corporation might have defected to Canada or to UK and the situation would be stale. So, the management agent would take care of such an empty situation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I will put the Committee’s amendment to vote. 53(1) is being replaced by the Committee’s amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 53, agreed to

Clause 54

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we have an amendment to Clause 54(3). Immediately after the words “rating authority” in second line, we propose to insert “or for ground rent in respect of the lease.”  

So the sub-clause would read, “The corporation is liable for any rate, charge or tax levied by a rating authority or for ground rent in respect of the lease in relation to the common property.”  

The reason for this is that, in case the property is under lease on private land, then one would be entitled to ground rent. I beg to move.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I am a little bit uneasy with this one. If I lease my land from hon. Bidandi and I put up a flat there, he is not the rating authority.  Therefore, I would like to separate the two. I would accept the rates to go to the local councils, because they collect rates, but there is also a bit of separation with leasing. Private people own land and they can lease that land, so you cannot put them together. If you feel that you would like to include this, I would rather it ends up in another law, where lease agreements are reached upon between the owner of the land and the person leasing the land. And there are such documents. So, I do not accept this amendment.

MR. BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I agree with the hon. Minister with regard to separation on taxes vis-à-vis ground rent. There is a law, which governs leases. And there is ground rent charged for holding that land, and you are given a lease document. So, when we are talking about the taxes and other charges, we should know that they are levied annually by the controlling authority. Therefore, the relationship between the controlling authority and the owner of the property has nothing to do with the actual lease on the ground. We should not be confused. Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the amendment by the Committee, because we are looking at a corporation as an entity, which is taking charge of the condominium. Since that is the case, they may be liable to pay the ground rent other than the other utilities.  So, it is good if it is tied up in this law, because the corporation is more-or-less another entity. That being the case, the amendment surely should subsist. So, I support the amendment of the Committee.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Chairman, the side note to this provision is “rating”. And rating is a tax to a town council or a local government as defined in the Local Government’s Act and in the Rating Decree, 1975. So, when you bring in the lease aspect, you are now putting unlike objects together under rating. This is rating, and therefore, the lease and the rent are the foreigners in this clause. I oppose the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55

MR. KATWIREMU: We propose that clause 55 (2) be consequentially deleted because we deleted clauses 46 and 47.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 55 as amended, agreed to

Clause 56, agreed to

Clause 57

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 57 (1) reads as follows: “A person who fails to comply with section 37, 41(4) or 43(1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred currency points.”  

This clause is on offences and penalties. Instead of one hundred currency points, we propose fifty currency points. The Committee felt that the one hundred currency points were a bit excessive. We did not want to come to the situation of the high fines in the Traffic Act. I beg to move.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Chairman, I want to oppose that amendment.  The apartments in this country go for very high prices, and the people who live in them are sometimes extremely stubborn, even the owners do not want to do certain things. The penalties have to be stiff in order to make them aware that these offences are not acceptable. 

So, by reducing the fines, we are not helping anybody. All you are doing is making it a luxury. For a man who is renting his flat for 2000 dollars or 1000 dollars, 200,000 shillings is nothing. So, he will pay it and do it again, and pay it and do it again. I would rather that it were a little bit stiffer, so that this person does not do it over again because they fear to pay the amount. Thank you very much.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to agree with the Minister. Actually, if I had my way, I would increase it to 150 currency points because of the nature of the business.

MR.BAMWANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would also like to agree with the Minister. These are properties located in very highly valued sites, and as you know, the value of property depends on three factors, location, location and location. When you look at these people who stay in Nakasero, if they were to be fined very little money, somebody would come and keep a goat on the balcony, somebody would bring any nuisance within the common parts. So, in order to avoid inconveniencing situations, we must make these fine really punitive so that somebody does not even convert his unit into a nightclub or a drinking place in order to inconvenience others.  I thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether the Committee in proposing this amendment read 43(1), which provides for putting the money that is collected in a financial institution. When purchasers are paying money for these condominiums, that money must be kept as stakeholders’ money until the transaction is over. It can involve a lot of money. In fact, there should have been another clause to say that an insurance against this money be obtained by the developer. You can imagine a situation where he gets this money and he uses it for other things and then he has problems. So, this penalty is actually very lenient, it should be even more.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, hon. Bageine, do I understand that you are opposed to the amendment by the Committee?

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I am opposed the amendment by the Committee.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I need some clarification because many of my constituents fall in this category. I wonder whether it would be reasonable if one said that a person who fails to comply with a given section, without reasonable cause, commits an offence. 

I understand these legal people say that ‘reasonable cause’ can be established by the court.  That is one. 

Two, the law we are passing is going to cover properties in a number of areas where you may not have an occupation permit or where one needs to work backwards to obtain that occupation permit. In other cases, there is still some wrangle about the ownership of the land, but the fact is that the property is in place. So, I think there should be a legal window where a genuine person should not be punished. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Go back to clause 37, for example, it really goes to illustrate what the Minister is getting at. Clause 37 is on documents required for doing something and it reads as follows:“A developer shall, within six months after the date on which the condominium plan is registered, provide the corporation, free of charge with the following documents…” And the documents are listed.

The hon. Minister is saying, supposing you had a good reason for not providing them those documents within the specified period, what happens? One document could be misplaced in some other office and you are still chasing it, and so forth, should you be outrightly penalized because of that without really giving you an opportunity to explain? That is what it means! Therefore, he may want to say, “a person who fails to comply with section 37, 41 (4) or 43 (1), without reasonable cause, commits an offence”.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to encourage the Minister for Local Government to look at a situation where buildings collapse because there were no structural plans. Buildings are constructed with no sanitation facilities in this country and people die. So, it is extremely serious if you are a developer and you are unable or unwilling to provide structural plans, electrical plans, and all these things.  So, it is a very important clause, and I would like the Minister for Local Government to accept this reasonable penalty.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are persuading the Minister of Local Government not to proceed with his proposed motion?

MS. ALITWALA KADAGA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. BABU FRANCIS: Mr. Chairman, if you look at the requirement in clause 37, it is so important to the modernisation of human settlement and housing in this country. We must get away from the old method where draftsmen make our plans. A structure, which is going to be a condominium, is a high-rise building. It is a structure, which requires thorough calculations in terms of engineering know-how, and it must be well planned.  The architects must work it out. The structural engineers must be on hand so that when we get earthquakes, it should remain standing. That is why we are demanding for this. We are actually protecting the developer.  

I would like to give an example of Istanbul where they had an earthquake and the developer, the Architect, and everybody, including the financier, went to jail because they never followed these rules. All we are saying is one hundred currency points. We have not even added 99 years in jail for killing people –(Mr. Wambuzi rose_)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wambuzi, I will come to you. The hon. Minister is bursting with some important information.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, it is wrong to misunderstand a member who is making a point – (Laughter)- and the Minister himself will bear with me as we try and solve these problems. His answer is in respect to 37 (f), meaning all certificates, approvals and permits issued by the City Council. But I am talking about (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e), all agreements to which the corporation is a party, and the plans showing the location of the underground utility services and sewer pipes.  Also included are structural, electrical, mechanical and architectural workings, drawings and specifications. We also have as-built drawings of the common property of the corporation, if they are applicable, and all warrants and guarantees on the property of the corporation. 

A delay in all the cases above cannot only be caused by a question of illegality. We are only saying, and we have put it in other laws, insert “without reasonable cause”.  You cannot tell a court of law that you have the building but you do not have approved plans, and the court says that is a reasonable cause! The court knows that in order to have that property, you must have approved plans. But there could be other instances where you are not encouraging illegality, but you are legislating for day-to-day circumstances, which we come across.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WAMBUZI: Mr. Chairman, in addition to what the Minister of Local Government is saying we have got a lot of property, which is suitable to be converted to condominium leasing. There are no plans in City Council for a lot of the property, which was inherited by the Custodian Board. If you put in this type of punishment, you are actually asking Local Government to start demolishing those building because there are no plans for them. And there is no where you can go and dig out a foundation of a three storied building to find out what was sunk in that building.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it is either one hundred currency points or fifty currency points. Let us dispose of hon. Bidandi Ssali’s amendment first.  It is very simple, the Minister is reading strict criminal liability into this section. So, he would rather we introduce the element of a reasonable cause. If you have a reasonable cause for not complying with it, then you should not be penalised. That is what he is saying. Did you move the amendment?  

MR. BIDANDI:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 57(1) reads as follows: “A person who fails to comply with section 37, 41(4) or 43(1) without reasonable cause, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred currency points.”  

I have already given the reasons. The cases on some of these properties are still in court to establish the ownership in some cases. Supposing the case is not decided by the court within that period, should I pay the fine simply because I have breached provision 37? I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, if we transferred “without reasonable cause” and put it immediately after the word “fails”, would that be better? 

MR. BIDANDI: I have no objection, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, that is the amendment.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, who determines what a reasonable cause is? We are providing an avenue, an escape route, and a loophole for people to escape through if we leave it for somebody to decide that this is reasonable and this is not reasonable!

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, the moment one introduces fines and penalties, that smirks of criminology. So, normally, under our rules of criminology, someone must establish an intention to do something. So, without a guilty intention, you do not normally punish people.  This is where the Minister is right. I think we should really put in that amendment.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to speak to that amendment. Any property with high rises and with encumbrances on it cannot be registered as a condominium property. Therefore, the argument being put forward by the Minister does not apply to this Bill. It applies to buildings, which have been accepted, which do not have encumbrances, and which are going to be condominiums with parcels of land and units. I want to make that very clear. For the other high rising buildings, which have not applied to be condominiums, that law does not apply. So, the argument the Minister has put forward is not a problem on the properties which have not applied as condominiums. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: On the currency points, should it be one hundred currency points or fifty currency points as being proposed by the Committee?

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to give Members information that one hundred currency points is two million and fifty currency points is one million as of now.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we vote on that. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we would like to amend clause 57(2), which currently reads as follows:“If a corporation commits an offence under subsection (1), it is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty currency points” 

We would like to replace that sub-clause with the following:
“Where a corporation fails to comply with this Act, each member of the board who is knowingly a party to that failure commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty five currency points.”  This is to protect the individual unit owners from the board members. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: It differs with the present (2), because you are now involving the individual members of the board.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, what we are doing here is to make individual members of the board liable.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I am sorry, but I am going to refuse this one, because we have already formed an entity in the law just for justice. The whole group should pay the money, not an individual. And this is common everywhere. When you have a group of people, it is the group that pays, not an individual. If you go on to individual level, we might even create more problems.  I think if it is the board, if it is the agent, if it is the corporation itself, then they should pay this money.  Thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, 57(1) is in reference to Clause 37, 41(4) and 43(1), which all talk about the developer. Now, I want to get some clarification on how the corporation has now turned into the developer in order to commit the offence. I think there is need for clarification on that. If you read the provisions under 37, 41(4) and 43(1), they are specifically in reference to a developer. So, how does the corporation now commit an offence under the developer’s provisions?

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Chairman, this provision is loaded.  The Committee is making it criminal. It is saying if the corporation fails to do any of the things mentioned in the Act it is liable to paying a fine. This is very dangerous! It is only in respect of 37, 41 and 43 that there is committing an offence. But the Committee’s provision is widening the net to capture the corporation on every action in the Act. I do not agree with this, and I think it is not the intention here to make every action not complied with criminal.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, if you look at the marginal note, it is on offences and penalties, and clause 51 is dealing with offences with regard to developer. What we could do, since this is the aspect of only offences, is to create another clause where we introduce offences committed by a corporation or any other individuals. Maybe when we separate it, it would flow more logically.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you opposing the amendment?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I am opposing the amendment. The way it is, it can come under offences, but not necessarily under clause 57.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I am still waiting for clarification on the application of subsection (2), relating to the corporation committing offences. The sub clause says, “If a corporation commits an offence under subsection (1)…” and sub-section (1) relates to clause 37, 41(4) and 43(1), which relates to a developer. How has the corporation now turned into a developer to commit the offences and become liable? If there is no explanation, then I want to move an amendment to delete.

THE CHAIRMAN: But we have already pronounced ourselves on sub-clause (2), so we are going back to the original one.  

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, if hon. Bageine could look at section 37 carefully and then get to (e), he will find that there are agreements between the corporation and the developer. The main reason is very simple. This is between two parties, the developer and the corporation when it is set up. If the corporation in any way does connive with the developer to break the rules that have been laid out in this law, then the corporation is also liable, and it is that point that we are trying to bring out. The corporation should not try to do that at all, and in most of these countries, some owners have connived with the developers. Thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I am still worried about this provision, because the hon. Minister is now trying to shift the responsibility of providing all these documents, structural plans and certificates from the developer to the corporation. I think we must zero down on one responsible person as the developer, and it is up to him. If he colludes with the corporation, he is still responsible and they can join him in a suit against him, but it must be his responsibility to provide all these documents. Therefore, I would like to move that this provision be deleted, because it is irrelevant, and it does not apply to what is defined in 57 (1)

THE CHIARMAN: He has moved an amendment to delete sub clause 2 of clause 57. 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that since the marginal note is about penalties, we could delete this and re-introduce it as part of the penalties. There is need for us to have areas where we create offences, which would act as a deterrent either to the corporation or to those concerned with the condominium law generally. So, I would like to propose that it only be introduced - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu-Ringa, hon. Bageine has introduced an amendment, you talk about that amendment and whether you support it or not.

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support the deletion on condition that when we delete, we introduce it in a different way.

THE CHAIRMAN: That will be up to you. We are looking at this amendment.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I support the deletion.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I hope hon. Bageine will agree with me. Instead of deleting it under offences and penalties, could we improve on it to read as follows: "If a corporation fails in its obligations under section 37, 41(4) and 43(1), it is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty currency points.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought we had dealt with 57(1)?

MR. BAGEINE: Yes, Mr. Chairman, we finished with that. The proposal by hon. Kiraso can only work if we go back to section 37, 41(4), 43(1) and include the corporation as having the responsibility to produce these things.  But as it is now, it is absolutely specific that the developer must produce those documents, and therefore it is his responsibility and the co-operation does not come in.  So, that amendment would not apply unless we shift the responsibility and include the corporation under those clauses that we are quoting under (1). Otherwise, this is not applicable.

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Chairman, I need a clarification. What is really stated under clause 57(2) is supposed to be the offences committed by the corporation immediately they have taken ownership of the rights of the developer.  Meanwhile, clauses 37, 41 and 43 are talking about the offences committed by the developer. So, we must have a section that deals with the corporation and individual board members of the corporation as the chairman has introduced here. We must have a section where people who commit crimes, other than the developer, must be penalised.  

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I think we are all agreed that as it stands now, sub section (2) is referring to sub section (1), and sub section (1) is referring to section 37, 41(4) and 43(1), and those refer to a developer. Now, if you want to introduce a different section, you can do so, but as it is now, this provision is irrelevant because there is no basis for it here. The members can bring in something different to deal with the corporation.  

MS. KIRASO: I have tried to make it better by saying, “if a corporation fails in any of its obligations under this law, it is liable, on conviction…” 

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, can I move my amendment to delete and then move an amendment to provide for that? I insist that this should be deleted. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I was just waiting for an amendment, and then we would deal with yours, but let us just vote on yours.  The amendment is that we delete clause 57 (2).

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Bageine, are you stopping there?

MR. BAGEINE:  Mr. Chairman, the few members, hon. Okumu-Ringa, hon. Bamwanga and hon. Kiraso are free to move their amendment now, which has nothing to do with this particular provision. They can make it general for offences committed by the corporation. So, they can move their amendment now.

MS. KIRASO: I beg to move that it reads as follows: “If a corporation fails in any of its obligations under this law, it is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty currency points.” This one covers all the obligations under this law, which have been given as a responsibility to the corporation. So, it is general, and I do not think it jeopardises sub-clause (1).

THE CHAIRMAN: Are all the obligations punishable? Is the failure to comply or to perform the obligation always punishable? Should we be specific?  

MR. RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I sympathise with hon. Kiraso, I want to tell her that her motion would criminalize all failures of the corporation, irrespective of the clauses. So, I would like to move another amendment to say, “if a corporation commits an offence under this Act, it is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty currency points”. 

I am using the words “commits an offence under this Act”. But if she just uses the word “fails”, then it would mean that all the failures of the corporation would be criminal, something which cannot be justified.

THE CHAIRMAN: Even your amendment pre-supposes that the offences have been listed or defined. When you say, “if a corporation commits an offence under this Act”, the offences must be there. But it would appear that what is there are requirements or certain things that the corporation is required to do, what you call obligations. They are all lined up. 

That is why I wondered whether we could not identify those sections, like you started with section 37, 43 and so on. But the honourable was again arguing that that was including the corporation when it should not. Why don’t you be specific? Get the sections which you would like to criminalize and create the penalty for them.

MR. RUKUTANA: Mr. Chairman, I fully agree with your advice. What we should do is to revisit the entire Act and look for the serious failures, which we should criminalize. After identifying those areas, we can make them criminal and we prescribe a penalty. I do not know whether we can do it at this moment in this House.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I think we should have a new part of the Bill dealing with offences by the corporation. And then, we actually need time to go through this Bill and identify the offences and prescribe penalties in a separate section, without mixing up the developer and the corporation. I do not know whether we can do it on the Floor of the House.

MR. RUKUTANA: Mr. Chairman, my amendment suggests that we go back to the Act, look for the most serious failures, then we make them criminal. And after enumerating them, we can prescribe a sentence for them. That is so important. Whereas we have protected the corporation against the developers and others, the stakeholders must also be protected from the corporation.

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Chairman, I just want to actually support hon. Kadaga, in the sense that this is a new law that we are introducing. Some of our people, who are living in some of these condominium properties, do not know what may be referred to as a crime. Somebody who will bring a goat or a chicken may not think that it is a crime. Somebody who is pounding his maize in the flat upstairs may not know that that is a crime. Somebody who is brewing malwa in a bathtub does not know that it is a crime. We need to sit down and identify those crimes that can be punishable in the law. So, I agree with hon. Kadaga on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we should not forget that somewhere we talked about rules, which are yet to be made. I think somewhere we talked about rules and regulations to be made by the Minister. Now, those rules or regulations will prescribe the ‘dos’ and ‘don'ts’, I believe. It is from there that you will be in a position to take a decision as to what you should criminalize and what you should not.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I really want to support you in that respect. I am beginning to wonder about this purchase of properties. These are really peculiarly civil matters, why do we punish anybody criminally? If someone is injured, normally you claim damages, but now we are saying that we should move from that way of dealing with the matter generally to punishing these corporations. 

Supposing somebody committed a fraud, it is covered under the penal code. When someone is bribed, it is covered under the penal code. So, I would rather we did not introduce penal clauses under this, which is really a civil matter. Buying goods, buying properties, buying whatever is a civil matter. If you have to do this, let us go to the rules and see what would be criminal; that is if we really have to do it. My only inclination would be, let us not criminalize this. If we want to claim damages because someone suffered damage when the corporation did something, then we can sue them, instead of making the whole thing criminal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mayanja Nkangi, are you saying that offences and penalties should be provided for under the regulations? Is that what you are suggesting?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I am saying, Sir, that is if we have to criminalize them. In any case, they are criminalized. I can envisage fraud, bribery, cheating and things like that, because these are already covered under the penal code. If we really want to bring them here again, I would rather have them in the regulations and rules.

THE CHAIRMAN: You should also remember that we have passed 57(1), which deals with offences by the developer.  
 
MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs is correct. Most of the offences likely to be committed by the corporation or its members are what they call torts or civil wrongs. 

The first one, in sub-section (1), dealing with the developer, is where criminal offences may be committed. We can leave that one here, but the rest, if we want to have any findings, should go to the regulations. Most of them are likely to be civil wrongs or torts and not criminal offences. So, I agree with the hon. Minister.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I am comfortable with that, because even in the draft rules we have, there is a section for the corporation and its members. If you do not agree with them, you go to court. So, I would rather we just continued and finished this.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I think there is one point you are missing. In my amendment I had said, “its obligations under this law”, because the law we are talking about is this one, which is intended to regulate and provide certainty in the legal relationship between the owners of the units. 

Wherever we have “the corporation shall” in this law, it means that is an obligation on the part of the corporation, and the minute that obligation is not fulfilled, to me, it is criminal, irrespective of the regulations that are going to be prescribed later. I still think that we should have something here on (2).

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the marginal note is about offences and penalties, I would like to move an amendment to read, “where a corporation fails to comply with rules under this Act, it commits an offence and it is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points.”

THE CHAIRMAN: All rules?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Rules under this Act, because those rules will be prescribed.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is very speculative.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, if hon. Okumu Ringa wants the corporation punished somehow, the Minister just told us what he proposes and this will be done in the laws. Once hon. Okumu Ringa says you pay 25 currency points, these to us are normally liquidated damages.  In other words, you agree in advance what the nature or the toll of the damage is. So, you would rather leave it at that.  Let the courts decide how much should be paid.  Leave it in the rules and let the courts decide according to the extent of the damage suffered.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I keep on repeating that the Minister and all of us should put this in actual day-to-day life. We become the advisors in our own areas. I just want some clarification. One of the functions of a corporation is to insure buildings and other improvements against fire. Supposing the corporation fails, is that what we are trying to put in law? Are we saying that he should pay premium in respect of any policies of insurance effected by it if the corporation fails? Is this the medicine we are providing?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I think we have moved away from that. Before I put the question, what is being argued against is criminalizing and block obligations by the corporation. This is exactly what we are talking about.  Because there are certain things, like the one you have mentioned, which the corporation is expected to do or is required to do. You are asking; should the corporation be penalised for that?  

The Minister responsible for this Bill has come up and said that they are looking at various aspects of the corporation’s obligations within the rules or regulations, as the case may be. They will later take care of the penal provisions if necessary. That is yet to come. Are you happy now, hon. Minister? I will now put the question that clause 57 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 58, agreed to

Clause 59

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we would like to propose an amendment to clause 59 (2)(e). It currently reads as follows: “prescribing the practice and procedure governing applications to a Tribunal under this Act”.  
Of course now we have a court instead of tribunal. Our amendment is to delete 59 (2) (e) because the Minister cannot prescribe how to apply to a court. Once we replaced the tribunal with the court under this Act, then it is consequential. The Minister cannot prescribe.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why not? You are saying that it is no longer necessary to say “prescribing the practice and procedure governing applications to a court under this Act”?

MR.KATWIREMU:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, previously we had substituted a tribunal for a court, which is a bigger institution with wider jurisdiction. He is now saying that we cannot retain the Minister’s power to prescribe the procedure for that court. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: In principle it can be done. In principle, the Minister can say to the court, for such and such a case coming before you, once it is there, then you may entertain it. The other question is, do we want to have him there?

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the question?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, it seems that the chairperson of the Committee is really constrained to delete the whole thing merely because we have already substituted “tribunal” for “court”. So, he says the Minister cannot therefore order the court on how to proceed. That is the only reason I am saying that, in principle a Minister can do so.

THE CHAIRMAN: Absolutely!

MS KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to appeal to the chairperson to retain this provision. In defining the word ‘court’, we actually said that a court includes a tribunal. We have administrative tribunals, we have land tribunals, we have all kinds of tribunals and we cannot anticipate that the ordinary courts and the ordinary civil procedure rules will apply here. I think it is important for certain procedures to be provided for within this law by the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, chairperson, you should not worry. It is okay for a Minister to prescribe the procedure to be followed by a court.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, if that is the case, then I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are not pressing for your amendment by way of deletion? 

Clause 59, agreed to

Clause 60, agreed to

Clause 3

THE CHAIRMAN: You remember we had a problem with clause 3. Those who were working on it can now report.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we stood over some definitions. One is the definition of a managing agent.

THE CHAIRMAN: A managing agent was not defined and we now want a definition.

MR. KATWIREMU: It was not defined, and yet it appears in the Bill. So, we propose to define “managing agent” as follows: “A managing agent is any person appointed by the management board to manage the day-to-day affairs of the corporation.” This refers to clause 29 on page 27.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we were involved in the formulation and we accept the definition.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment, but there is a problem. We need to add the words “of the corporation” between the words “board” and “to manage”, because the board cannot exist without an entity. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But the board is defined just below that.  Hon. Okumu-Ringa, do you have this paper?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I have it, Mr. Chairman. If it is going to be included in the definition, it is okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: Right, I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The next is a management board.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the board is actually already defined on page 6. It says, “ ‘board’ means a management board elected under section 26.”

THE CHAIRMAN: The word you have added is ‘management’ and I still have not appreciated the problem. You say ‘board’ means a management board elected under section 26. You also say, “a management board is a body of persons appointed by the corporation to carry out the functions of the corporation under section 21.” The functions are listed under 21, so why this definition?  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think this originated from the Minister, because as far as I am concerned, the board is already defined.  

CAPT. BABU: This suggests that some people were not happy. If you look at the marginal note on section 26, it reads, “Management board”. And if you look at the definitions, they define “board”. Some people wanted us to put ‘the management board’ clearly in the definitions. That is how it came about, and we have done exactly that. And we have expanded it to make it even simpler for some of us who are laymen.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, since a board is clearly defined under the interpretation clause on page 6, it is not necessary to define a management board. It becomes ambiguous, and we cannot define or interpret all expressions in the marginal notes. We do not have to so. I propose that we drop this one.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with that. It actually came from here. So, if the Members are very happy with the word ‘board’, I do not see any difference.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you have withdrawn it. We discussed  ‘owner’ and it causing a bit of a problem. We did not pronounce ourselves on the definition of ‘owner’. 

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think there are Members who wanted to introduce a fourth category of ownership of land in this country. They wanted to introduce the customary land tenure as number four or as (d). They said that (d) could be any other land tenure system under the Land Act.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I raised this on the Floor and the discussion which ensued suggested that we should be consistent with what is provided for in the Constitution and in the Land Act. It would simply mean a transplant of (d) in the Land Act to be the (d) under the interpretation clause.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: And what was (d)? 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: It would read, “owner means a person who is registered as the owner of – 
(d) land held under customary tenure.” 

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, when I left here, I consulted a lot of people on this one. Yes, the Constitution is correct, and it is also good in the Land Law, but here it was not included because on customary land you cannot put up a condominium without getting a lease. So, when you do get a lease, you will fall under the lease. So, this is why we did not include customary land tenure here. This is strictly for this Act, it is not for the Land Act, and that is the reason we left out customary land. You can go and ask the people who have registered customary land interests to give you a lease. So, in this case it is a lease. Thank you very much.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment by the Chairman of the Committee, but I think there is a small technical problem, and that is the use of the term ‘tenure’ and ‘estate.’ I think it should read, “owner means a person who is registered as the owner of freehold, mailo estate, leasehold, or any other estate system”. What you hold is an estate. You do not hold a tenure. A tenure is a system, and what you have as an interest is the estate. So, it should be re-worded to read, ‘any other estate held under any other tenure system’. That will cover the customary system.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I have not objection to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please read it out.

MR. BAGEINE:  “Owner means a person who is registered as the owner of- 
(d) an estate under any other tenure system under the Land Act, 1998.”

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, with due respect, however many words we use, it is simply the customary one. And the Minister is saying that under that one, you cannot proceed to erect these condominium type of flats unless and until you have got a leasehold. Once you have got a leasehold, then you fall under the other category.  So, however many words we use, we will still go back to the customary tenure or estate.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, your submission is that we do not need this because a lease is already covered above.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, when we talk about “any other system”, we know it is only and only the other, which has been left out and recognised by the Constitution, and that is the customary system. Now, the Minister is saying you cannot have a condominium law on customary land. Supposing I am part of a family or clan, and they say that we can put up a unit on our land, is there a law that stops me from putting it up as long as we agree with them? We may agree without necessarily having a lease for it!

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you will not qualify under the condominium law. That is what it means, turn your property into a lease first.

MR. BAGEINE: If that is the condition, then I concede.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, there are some two definitions, which we have not dealt with. We did agree that when I introduce the word ‘planning authority’, then we come back and define it. And I also want to introduce a definition immediately after “parcel” on page 9. 

“Planning authority means the planning authority responsible for physical planning in the area.”  We want to distinguish this from the famous National Planning Authority and others.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, there is a total misconception. When you say it is a planning authority, it does not preclude physical planning. You are planning physical things, economics and everything. These are planning authorities, and I said very clearly yesterday that the district authorities are the planning authorities. 

Now, under the planning authority, there will be different departments. I have got this problem where people think that physical planning is different from normal planning. It is not! There is the bigger picture but it is part of planning, whether it is an authority, whether it here, it is part of that planning.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I really do not have a contention here. I think we can say, “Planning authority means the planning authority responsible for planning in the area” if the word ‘physical’ is causing a problem.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Chairman, I remember yesterday when we were here, it was clearly put to us that the authority that we were referring to was the urban and the country planning authority and not any other. Now, if we leave it at just a planning authority, supposing we come up with a National Planning Authority, does it take this up?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: I do not know whether I can provide a way out, but I would like to provide some clarification.  The contest is whether the planning authority in this Act is actually an authority, which approves building plans. That is what I understand. And throughout the country, you submit your plans for approval to each local authority. 

In the case of urban authorities, you apply to that specific urban authority and you get the authority to go ahead. In the case of the rural authorities, you submit it to the district. So, the Minister is correct, and the chairman is also correct to say that planning authority means the authority that approves plans in that specific area.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether I captured it correctly, but I think he is saying that a planning authority means the planning authority responsible for planning in the area.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR.KATWIREMU: We have the issue of a management agreement, Mr. Chairman. Originally, we had said that the Committee’s definition of a management agreement was redundant because the word ‘management agreement’ had not been used anywhere in the Bill. But you pointed out that there was a marginal note, which read ‘management agreement’, but that should have been ‘developers management agreement’. 

From the discussion yesterday, even in that case, we still need to provide a definition for a management agreement, because after appointing a managing agent, you will have a management agreement signed between the board ant the agent. So, we have to recommit clause 29 to provide for a management agreement between the board of the corporation and the managing agent. In other words, we also have to justify the definition of a managing agreement in this clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we are waiting for you. We cannot do the recommittal now. But was it passed?

MR. KATWIREMU: If we passed the definition of a management agreement, then I can leave it until the time of recommital.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have been advised that we took a decision on that.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I was trying to explain why we need to retain that definition. After I had amended the management agreement to developers’ management agreement, there would be no justification to have the definition of a management agreement in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we did not delete it.

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, but after amending a management agreement to a developers management agreement, there would be no justification for it to be among the definitions, because it is nowhere else in the Bill. So, we will have to retain it, and then maybe after recommitting clause 29, we shall then justify why a management agreement should remain in the definitions.  Otherwise, before recommittal, we cannot justify why a management agreement should be in the definitions.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, yesterday we actually made a decision. If you look at clause 29, it does not mention the management agreement. The management agreement only comes in the definition. But if you read the definition together with clause 29, you can see where the management agreement comes in. I think it is a matter of drafting here. I do not want to split hairs, since we voted on it yesterday. I would like to ask the chairman if he could leave this and we continue.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem. I am only explaining why we should leave it in the definitions section. I will have to come back for a recommittal in order to justify it there, but I have no problem with the definitions.

THE CHAIRMAN: But then why do you want it for recommittal? It means you still have a problem, but anyway, we will deal with it then.

Clause 3 as amended, agreed to

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Chairman, before we go to the Schedule, there is something that is bothering me under Section 20(7). It says, “the Companies Act shall not apply to a corporation established under subsection (1)”.  I just do not understand it and -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished that, hon. Member.

The Schedules.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairman, remember that the original Bill talks about one Schedule and you are planning to introduce a second Schedule.  

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that the contents of the sale agreement in the original clause 42 become part of a Schedule to become the Second Schedule of the Bill

THE CHAIRMAN: And what does the existing Schedule become?

MR. KATWIREMU: The existing schedule becomes the First Schedule, and the contents of the sale agreement of the original clause 42 become the Second Schedule.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I accept with an addition “Section 41” on the side of that Schedule.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which Schedule now, we have two Schedules.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, if you look at the First Schedule, it refers you to a section. Now, the Second Schedule is part of clause 41, because you define the contents in 41, and the Schedule is attached to that.

MR. KATWIREMU: I have no objection to that, because we referred to the Second Schedule in 41 (1)(a).

(Question put and agreed to)

 MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from you and from the hon. Minister regarding the importance of the bylaws, which -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, why don’t we pronounce ourselves on the Schedule first?

MRS. ZZIWA: Because I would like to seek clarification as to whether these bylaws could not become part of the Schedule. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, those are rules, they are not bylaws anymore. We have amended that.

The Schedule, agreed to

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Condominium Property Bill, 2000” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think this is a convenient moment for us to adjourn. We shall dispose of the Bill tomorrow. So, we will adjourn until 10 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m and adjourned until Friday, 15th December at 10.00 a.m)







