Friday, 17 December 2004

Parliament met at 10.39 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.­

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MR OMARA ATUBO: On the timetable, Madam Speaker, I have seen notice of business to follow and other business to follow, but you will recall that I have persistently and consistently raised the issue of Security Report, which should come before we break off. 

I am happy also to inform the Speaker and the House that I have personally taken this matter with the Minister of State for Defence, who assured me that as far as she is concerned, this report is ready and it is up to you to put it on the Order Paper.  I am also aware that the Minister for Internal Affairs promised this House next week to bring just a small aspect of that report regarding the issue of PRA, people abducted here and there. But then I thought that the bigger thing should be consolidated in one report, because we are talking of the security report, and really for the Minister of Internal Affairs to come with that aspect only may not be very necessary; it should be consolidated in the main report of the security situation in the country.

So, aware that these two ministers are ready, I would therefore beseech the Speaker that this matter be considered urgent. We should get this report before we go for a very long recess. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will find space for it provided they are ready.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I do not know whether anyone has been mandated to ask on behalf of hon. Kagimu.

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Is it in order for hon. Omara Atubo to state that I am trying to assume authority when I am duly authorized, Madam Speaker?

10.45
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question for oral answer by hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka, Member of Parliament, Bukomansimbi County, was as follows:  

“Subsequent liberalization of the economy, the regulation of prices for agricultural produce has been left to market forces and currently the prices are in decline. In light of the above facts:

1. Is the Government aware of the above-mentioned developments?

2. If the response to the above is in the affirmative, what are the measures the Government has effected or intends to effect in order to address the underlying problems and assist the farmers who depend on proceeds from the sale of their produce?

3. Can the government establish a fund to provide subsidies to the farmers in light of the declining prices?”

Madam Speaker, I circulated the answer on the 9th of December, so I expect Members to have copies.  But, Madam Speaker, I could get you a copy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I think I am the only one who did not receive a copy.

MR NDUHUURA: So the answer, Madam Speaker, to the first question is: Yes, Government is aware of the above-mentioned developments and one of the major economic policy reforms that have been implemented by the Government is the liberalization of the economy. 

The thrust of economic liberalization was for the Government to move away from being a direct actor in running sectors of the economy, including setting of prices or controlling trade and businesses. The regulation of prices for agricultural produce was therefore left to market forces. Unfortunately, agricultural production in the country is done by small farmers, who are scattered throughout the country, producing a subsistence level with little or no market orientation. This means that they produce what is marketed both for export and domestic consumption in such a way that the prices they receive are largely dependent on the market forces, yet the population does not have sufficient disposable income that could spark competitiveness in the supply and demand for agricultural products.  Therefore, the low demand translates into low prices, and to complete the cycle, low prices discourage production.  

Subsequent to complete liberalization of the economy in the 1990s, the Produce Marketing Act of 1970 was repealed. There was also divesture of the Statutory Marketing Boards, namely, Lint Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board, the Coffee Marketing Board and Uganda Tea Authority. These institutions were divested in line with Government policy on privatisation. You may recall that these organizations used to fix and control prices of produce and the farmer was in the know all the time. It is now market forces determining prices of farmers’ produce with the following characteristics:

1. The biggest determinant is international market and prices as well as exchange rate, which is beyond the control of the Government of Uganda. This is very common with coffee and now recently with vanilla.  The Uganda shilling has made strong gains against the United States dollar, which is reflected in all prices for primary products.

2. Declining prices of major agricultural products is a global trend and it is not affecting Uganda alone, but other agricultural producers as well. In addition, the conditions for market access tend to discourage processing through tariff peaks and tariff escalation on our semi-processed and process products, that is, rendering our products to be less competitive.  

However, as of now, Uganda as an LDC country is protected against these tariff peaks and tariff escalation. In domestic and regional markets, prices are determined by bumper harvests or low harvests. Maize, beans, peas, sim sim, groundnuts are all affected by such season fluctuations. The other factor is inadequate market information, which too causes price fluctuations in internal marketing of produce.  

Measures to address the underlying problems: 
The prerequisite for increasing the efficiency of the domestic markets and the development of exports to the regional markets lie in addressing the current constraints in commodity markets. 

These are: 

(i) Shortening marketing chains between the farm gate and markets and the subsequent reduction of middlemen.

(ii) Increasing marketing transparency and competitiveness.

(iii) Providing improved access to appropriate and timely market information.

(iv) Producing and consolidating reliable and sustainable volumes of standardized/graded quality products.

(v) Developing appropriate market instruments/tools.

The Government has undertaken the following measures to transform the marketing of agricultural products: 

1. The Government has designed a marketing and agro-processing strategy that will ensure the following: 

(a) Increased market access, that is, both domestic and export markets.

(b) Provision of markets and price information.

(c) Capacity building for farmers’ groups and associations that will promote collective marketing and trading as well as collective bargaining so as to realize the remunerative prices.

(d) Export competitiveness through promotion of quality standards and supply sustainability for the products.  

A further strategic policy drive involves value addition to exports, especially food products, textiles and garments, leather products as well as enhancement and broadening of the cleaner production and productivity programmes, and strengthening of the adoption and multiplication of appropriate technologies. 

A departure of marketing of primary products to marketing processed and value-added products will ensure that the returns to the farmers in form of price are greatly improved. 

In addition, the Government has initiated value addition programmes to coffee where, for example, a factory is to be set up in Tororo specifically for coffee processing and value addition. Processed coffee is now in the supermarkets in China, South Africa, Egypt and Denmark.  

Further investments are to be made to cotton and textile through support to Southern Range, that is former Nytil, where modern machinery for making first class fabrics is to be installed and similar support extended to Phoenix Logistics, this is former UGIL.

(e) Infrastructure development that includes rural feeder roads and rural electrification that aim at lowering transaction costs.

Madam Speaker, through the Strategic Export Programme, a Private Sector-driven Uganda Commodity Exchange has been established. A trading flow has been established at the Uganda Cooperative Alliance Building on Nkrumah Road and the Uganda Commodity Exchange is linking producers and traders.  

In addition, the Government, in collaboration with a common fund for commodities, has undertaken initial activities that will enable the establishment of the Warehouse Receipt System (WRS). For our economy, the basic role of commodity exchange and warehouse receipts is to contribute towards the development of commodity markets and facilitation of trade by: 

(a) Reducing transaction costs and increasing market efficiency.

(b) Discovering market prices.

(c) Managing market risks

(d) Increasing liquidity in commodity markets.

(e) Improving product consolidation and quality.

(f) Serving as a clearinghouse for trade transactions.

Over time, the role of Uganda Commodity Exchange (UCE) will evolve toward hedging against price risks through feature’s contracts and options according to the dictates of market development.

A Bill to regulate the operations of the UCE and WRS will be presented to Parliament during this financial year to ensure that the operations of these market instruments are established.  

Government, through agricultural zoning, Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, intervention in strategic exports is addressing the problem of post-harvest handling and value addition.  This is besides improving on the infrastructure, that is, having good feeder roads, power, and cold storage facilities, particularly at the airport.  

Currently, efforts are being expended to fast track formulation and/or amendment of relevant laws and regulations, supportive of the strategic investments and promoting national capacity to take advantage of existing trade opportunities availed through generalized system of preferences with Japan, United States of America, European Union, and the multilateral trading system.

The establishment of National Food Reserve and operationalisation of the National Export Strategy will have the desired effect of storing surpluses of some agricultural produce, and then releasing such produce in times of shortage or when required in export markets. This will result in price stabilization and predictability in our export trade.

There was a second part of the question, which was supposed to be answered by the Ministry of Agriculture, but this question was redirected to he ministry, and this is on the subsidy fund. So, I have the following to say: 

Whereas the issue of market assesses, particularly for primary agricultural commodities remains a critical factor, the provision of a fund as a subsidy to farmers to address the problem of declining prices emerges with serious challenges.  It is well known that about 85 percent of households in Uganda are engaged in subsistence agriculture. A fund to cater for subsidies will wipe out the entire Government Budget and yet it will not be sufficient. There are numerous benefits in mobilization of farmers and traders to form cooperative groups under the new cooperative initiative that emphasizes member-driven savings and credit approach.

Madam Speaker, since the year 2000/2001, a total of 875 Savings and Credit Cooperatives have been registered. Madam Speaker, that is the end of my answer to the question by hon. Kagimu. I thank you.

MR WANDERA MARTIN (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his response, but I have not found his answer satisfactory because instead of answering the specific question regarding what Government is going to do about the continuously declining prices of commodity prices, he has instead created more questions. 

I would like to ask the Minister, in your response to Question 904 in part you said that Government is considering creation of a buffer stock to buy off excess commodities during periods of excess supply and then bring it back to the market when there are shortages and when it is required. When you were answering question 1004(b) you said that creation of a stabilization fund would wipe out the entire Government budget. But we also know that the creation of buffer stock also requires Government resources because a stabilization fund and a buffer stock are about one and the same thing because money is involved. The difference is that, with a stabilization fund you give direct subsidies to farmers. So, I want you to come out very clearly to tell me why you think you cannot raise money for a stabilization fund, but you can find money to create a buffer stock.  

Two, you said that support has been extended to Phoenix Logistics and Southern Range, can I know what kind of support and from what budget line, and how has that support helped in raising prices for consumers?  

Thirdly, you have said that a factory for value addition is going to be started up in Tororo. I would like to know who is starting up this factory; is it Government? If not is it with Government support and from which budget line? I am also aware that coffee is not grown in Tororo – okay, it may be grown but it is not one of those big coffee-growing areas. Why not put this factory in Mbale or Kapchorwa as hon. Kulany is suggesting? I thank you.

11.00
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister for his answer, but I think that answer was a Policy Statement. First of all, it was very long, there was lot of information in it and I think the Minister would do a lot of good if he circulated that statement. 

On the question of falling prices, I think we need a kind of mechanism to monitor the middlemen who handle these commodities because what happens is that these people form a kind of a cartel, they sit down and decide that they are to pay so much to the farmer. I think you saw it with the vanilla prices recently because prices cannot have fallen from Shs 150,000 to Shs 7000 per kilogram. What is actually happening is that these people sit down and agree that they are to pay a certain price to a farmer and that is what they come out with. So, how do we check such a practice? The only remedy is for Government to set up machinery for monitoring these people such that they do not cheat our farmers. It is also happening in the Cotton Industry, these people gang up and decide how they are to pay their farmers. Why am I saying that? I know -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, you see you are supposed to be asking a supplementary question.  Why don’t you just say, does the Minister know that the middlemen form cartels and cheat the farmers - something like that so that we move?

MR KALULE SSENGO: That is what I wanted to ask, but I wanted to make it clearer for him because the way he gave his statement gave me the impression that he was not aware of these tricks. Anyway I will oblige, Madam Speaker, and ask the Minister whether it is not possible for Government to set up machinery for monitoring these middlemen so that they do not cheat our farmers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.03
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Madam Speaker, since in the House we operate by procedures we set ourselves, when I look here at the dress code I find that we should dress in a particular way. I am wondering whether my colleague is in order to be in the House in the form he is, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the hon. Latif Sebaggala I think is dressed in a Kanzu, but it is a green Kanzu.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, according to Rule 62(a), the Kanzu should be accompanied by a jacket.

MR AGGREY AWORI: It is an established procedure in this august House, as a matter of decorum that once the Speaker has pronounced herself or himself on a matter, there shall be no further discussion or debate. Is my hon. colleague in charge of Parliamentary Affairs in order to defy and to display total ignorance of the Rules of Procedure?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have ruled that hon. Latif Sebaggala is dressed in a Kanzu, so let us proceed.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling, and I would like to remind honourable members that I am the Parliamentary Imam; today is a Friday and I am duly dressed for the occasion, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I am yet to be convinced with what the hon. Minister has given us. The question was very clear and I think the gist of the question, especially, question 1(i), “What are the measures the Government has effected or intends to effect to address the underlying problem and assist the farmers who depend on proceeds from the sale of their produce?” 

Madam Speaker, I have not heard the effective measures, which the Government has taken, because we all know that almost 80 percent of Ugandans entirely depend on agriculture for their living, and we know that these are the peasants we always talk about.

Madam Speaker, there is no way our peasants could improve on their household incomes when there are declining prices of their produce. My question to the Minister is; he has talked about selling processed coffee in Germany, China, etcetera. Of what effect is this kind of arrangement to the peasants, because as we talk now the prices, especially for coffee, are still very low. A full sack of coffee beans is between Shs 7,000 to Shs 10,000. Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to inform us: Have we realized positive effects as a result of selling processed coffee in the countries he has mentioned?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I think it is also one of the poor Government policies of encouraging farmers to grow certain commodities when actually they know that that commodity has no market. Our farmers have been advised to grow various commodities, at the end of the day the commodities are not sold.  As we talk now, they are advising them to grow cardamom; cardamom is a spice, it is a flavor, but I do not know whether the Government or the Ministry of Trade and Tourism is aware that the commodity they are now advising people to grow has very low market. I do not think it could be marketed.

Madam Speaker, finally –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Sebaggala, just ask whether the Minister of Trade first is aware that the processed coffee has no relation or benefit to the farmers, that is what you should be asking; or whether they first do market survey before they advise the farmers, then we would have finished that question already. Just ask the question.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, why I wanted to inform the Minister and also seek clarification is because he gave us that example that now processed coffee is sold in China and Germany. So, I was asking of what relevancy to the declining prices is it a solution; that since processed coffee is now being sold in those countries, therefore we are expecting our coffee farmers to benefit as a result of selling processed coffee in developed countries?  Madam Speaker, I will stop there.

11.06
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important question to this country. I have always been very disturbed really because the farmers of this country are just at the mercy of the gods. The Government has a responsibility to guide its citizens in all aspects of their lives, including what they produce. 

Madam Speaker, as you may have realized this year the whole of this region was hit by drought, except Mt. Elgon.  Mt. Elgon was endowed with a lot of rain and Kapchorwa grew a lot of maize, and even a few months ago the World Food Programme cited Kapchorwa as the only place where they were going to get maize. Last month the price went up to about Shs 300 per kilogramme in Kapchorwa, but as I speak now it has dropped to Shs 150. The farmers had a lot of hopes that there was high demand for maize, but because there is no guidance on the prices from Government, they are at the mercy of the middlemen.  

So, Madam Speaker, I am asking the Minister, what is his ministry doing about stabling the price of maize?  

I am equally disturbed that you are moving a coffee processing plant to Tororo where you do not see even one coffee tree. I do not know the criteria; if it is to do with borders, Kapchorwa or Mbale has a border with Kenya. So, why don’t you put this factory where the coffee is grown? 

Not only that, Madam Speaker, recently the Elgon coffee, especially from Kapchorwa, was second to Ethiopia in terms of quality in the whole world. So, how do you ignore such people who are producing you the best coffee in the world?  You ignore them, you do not want to add value and also improve on the employment of their citizens.  Madam Speaker, I am asking the Minister what criteria are you using to move or to establish a coffee factory where coffee is not grown? Thank you.

11.10
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, let me as a preamble to my contribution just let this House imagine the great agricultural potential we have, really to raise enough money for revenue as well as to eradicate poverty. My hon. sister has talked of maize; I want to talk of simsim, groundnuts, millet, sorghum, beans, vanilla.  Madam Speaker, all these and many more grow in all parts of this God-blessed fertile country. But we see the Government emphasizing and concentrating on coffee and cotton, and Government going abroad to keep on borrowing and borrowing. You have idle manpower in the form of peasants who can produce.

I am happy the National Political Commissar (NPC) is here.  For a long time he was the Minister for Cooperatives and Marketing and I want to commend him for what he did in terms of moving around the country and increasing production. He has a report on this, but the question is how has this been implemented? How has this been concretised or operationalised into reality for the benefit of the farmers? And it really pains me, Madam Speaker. 

Is the Minister aware that liberalization and privatisation does not mean total abandonment of peasant producers to market forces? The Government still has a role; even in America, which one could say is a total capitalist country of market forces, the American Government do intervene strategically in areas like even for production of cotton and protect their farmers. Now, there is a big crisis in the aeroplane industry, in computers. But for us in the third world, in a country in which we are so backward, the Government is saying ‘market forces’.  Surely, this is not the best.  

The second issue is on the Government role. In view of what I have said about the market forces, how does the Government intend to protect farmers from exploitation? People have called them middlemen, but the buyers, people who go and buy produce in the villages in Lango, Teso and so on and just offer anything; does the Government have a role there? How can the Government ensure that these farmers get fair prices for their products?  Furthermore, how is the Government using this great rich potential area of production to eradicate poverty? I am sure that a farmer who produces bags of maize, if he gets fair prices and the Government assists him to get that fair price, it is a great step towards eradication of poverty.

Finally, is the Government collecting fair taxes and injecting them into social services, particularly in the area of coffee, which the Imam, hon. Latif Sebaggala, has talked about?  I am aware that the Government has really intervened in this area of coffee, but my fear is that the Government has assisted certain families and certain individuals. 

After you have removed the monopoly of Government exporting coffee through Coffee Marketing Board, the Government went and privatised the exportation of coffee and what did it do? It promoted certain families, certain individuals in this country. They are exporting coffee to China, Germany, South Africa; we know it.  How much is the country earning from these individual cartels in coffee in terms of taxes, which are ploughed back?  

You see, when the monopoly was Coffee Marketing Board, efficient or inefficient depending on how you have looked at it, all the profits used to be ploughed back into the Consolidated Fund. That is why we could build in the UPC Government in Obote I in the 1960s 25 hospitals without borrowing money from anywhere. That is why we could expand schools; we could put a tarmac road from Kampala to Gulu and Lira without necessarily borrowing money from anywhere. But now what is happening in the privatisation is that we have given this very rich area of our economy like coffee in the hands of individuals; no fair taxation, these people pay farmers small money, rip huge profits, bank them abroad, nothing comes back or as little as possible to country –(Interruption)

MR JACK SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the funds my colleague is talking about, which were diverted to certain individuals were diverted from the Ministry of Agriculture in the Department that handles the building up of nurseries for seedlings. Now, all that money, which was intended to pay farmers in the rural areas, those who had put up nursery beds was removed from that particular institution and given to an individual to go and do what my hon. Minister is talking about. This was contrary to the laws of this country. It violated the way we manage public funds, and you can see here again the farmer that we are talking about was badly hit because of diverting these funds. 

MR ATUBO: Finally, is it not possible for Government to borrow money from abroad in order - I do not want to call it subsidy - in order to stabilize prices? You have banks abroad, you have governments abroad; rather than allow prices of maize, of sim sim to collapse, is there a way in which instead of us borrowing - we have a lot of money we have borrowed here for NGOs to drive in this country, if you move in this country you see NGOs and people – millions of shillings we have borrowed.  We have borrowed a lot of money to hold seminars in this country, you are aware of this.  

Is it not possible, Madam Speaker, for this Government to borrow money and use it as a sort of stabilization fund to ensure that instead of the farmer receiving Shs 500 per kilogramme of maize this year, next year the farmer receives Shs 100?  Is it not possible for Government to come out with some fund where the farmer receives Shs 600 per kilogramme of cotton today, tomorrow it is Uganda Shs 200? If we do not do this, Madam Speaker, we have no future as a stable country and with a possibility of eradicating poverty. I thank you.

11.22
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened to the hon. Minister’s speech very carefully, but he did not address himself clearly on two issues, which are very paramount to the peasant farmers of this country.  That is a clear address of liberalization and subsidy of agriculture. It is true that the Government liberalized cotton, coffee and others, but one thing that is missing is that the Government did not follow up with regulations to protect the peasants in the rural areas.

One major item that was removed from the cotton industry was the cooperatives. The cooperatives had been in this country for a long time. The cooperatives owned ginneries so that the cotton farmer was able to remove seeds from his cotton - ginning the cotton - the seeds went back to him to plant free of charge. In my area last year people had to pay for cottonseeds Shs 1000 per bag –(Interruption)

MRS RAINER KAFIRE: Thank you for giving way.  Madam Speaker, actually in his area they got the seeds at Shs 1000, in my area it was Uganda Shs 3000 per five-kilogramme bag.

DR MALLINGA: And yet CDO comes here and deceives people that these cotton buyers have been giving seeds free to the farmers and that is why they subtract a certain amount of money from the farmers! What is the Government plan to re-introduce, to re-institute the cooperatives, which would enable the farmer to gin his cotton, sell it into the world market and profits go back to the farmer? In my opinion, the middlemen who have come in are exploiting the farmer excessively. This is something we had overcome in the past, but this Government has re-introduced the exploitation of the peasant. I hope the Government will take it seriously and re-introduce the cooperatives in all the areas, coffee, cotton, so that marketing of produce by the rural farmers would be made easier.  

Secondly –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But please, just ask the question. You know, you could have asked the minister that in view of the exploitation, does the Government intend to revive the cooperatives, and that would have finished really. Please just ask. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was trying to make it clear so that the hon. Minister could understand. Subsidy of agricultural produce; there is no country in this world, which does not subsidize agriculture. My hon. friend mentioned United States; sugar is subsidized, milk is subsidized. You remember you saw on television people pouring their milk into the drains until the Government had to intervene and subsidize, and yet for milk in this country the farmers are being discouraged because they are underpaid.  Matooke is popular now –(Interruption) 

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, when His Excellency, the President of Republic of Uganda was in Pallisa, he availed his vision that, ‘Wealth for all by the year 2005’ and he said to achieve this we will have to provide market access and swore the country into specialization in agriculture and also provide subsidies including inputs and improved seeds so that people increase the productivity of crops in the country.

DR MALLINGA: I hope my friend did not believe that.  I have heard a lot and I have been careful choosing what I believe in. But I was talking about subsidy.  Cotton and coffee in this country play a very major role in earning foreign exchange so that farmers in these areas should be encouraged by being given good prices. In the colonial days and early days of independence of this country, cotton was subsidized annually and the prices of cotton kept on raising every year because of subsidizing, and people grew their cotton with a lot of enthusiasm. 

So, hon. Minister, is there a plan by the Government to encourage the growing of cotton in this country so that we can continue getting foreign exchange and buying luxurious cars and getting materials for building luxurious houses, and also buying materials for air-conditioning our offices? Do you have a plan for subsidizing agriculture because this is a worldwide practice? There is no country, which does not subsidize agriculture, and I hope in the plan of this country we have a plan to subsidize agriculture and stabilizing prices. We have silos in Jinja, which were planned to be a factor in the stabilization of agriculture. But I do not know whether this Government has been able to see these silos or they cannot see them. They are quite visible; you can see them even from 10 miles away. Thank you.

11.27
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope I will live to that expectation. Madam Speaker, at any one given time, we have different development jargons. These days the popular one is “public private partnerships.” Now, this means that there is an input in the development process from the private sector in the public sector.  I would like to know particularly in this area what is being done in as far as supporting out-growers’ schemes is concerned.  This is a very important arrangement, Madam speaker.  

I remember one time, I do not know whether it is still there, there was a pyrethrum project in Kabale and it was doing very well. I am sure if the hon. Member of Parliament from Butamira were here, he would have talked about the sugarcane growers in his area. How do we integrate the development process between the private sector and these poor peasants so that there are backward and forward linkages between the two sectors? 

Two; do we yet have a comprehensive export policy in this country? I don’t think we have it yet because when you talk about exports, they are sporadic, they are not coordinated. Today we are talking about the development of free zones, yes, that is one bit of the export policy. We need to have a comprehensive export policy and then guide our farmers in the areas where Uganda has got a niche in the global market. 

Finally, commercial agriculture: When we talk about commercial agriculture, before the 1995 Constitution no foreigner would come here and own land and produce, say, tomatoes or pineapples extensively at a commercial level and export them per se. But with the coming in force of the Constitution of 1995, the provision, which applied saying that if, for instance, you were having a factory producing tomato ketchup, you must justify that the peasants are not giving you enough raw tomatoes to feed your plant and then you would apply for land to grow your own tomatoes. 

That provision, as we speak now, is not applicable. I also want to know, what is Government policy in as far as promoting commercial agriculture with forward and backward linkages to our people?

11.30
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Is the minister aware that in this modern world when a question is asked a mere ‘yes’ is not enough to answer the question? For question number one, I would have expected the Minister to clearly demonstrate the trends of the pricing for agricultural products, but he has really meandered around, given us the Acts, which have been repealed; I do not know how they affect the pricing of the agricultural products.  

Two, Madam Speaker, is the minister aware that most of the answers he has given us to question 2 are speculative? There is no concrete strategy to address the underlying problem of declining prices of agricultural products. On page 3, when you talk of Government wanting to provide market and price information, are you aware that in Uganda when you give this market price information - the other day you were calling it indicative prices, they turn out to be the selling or buying prices, and therefore, in effect you are fixing the prices, especially in the cotton sector?

Madam Speaker, I also want to know, this one has been raised. The coffee shops you have set up, at least by now you should have been able to tell us how they have impacted on the prices of coffee at the farm gate - we export this in China, maybe some profit comes back to Uganda, and the farmers benefited in such a manner and in such amount.  That is the kind of analysis, Madam Speaker, which we want, especially from the Doctor, the Minister of State for Trade - I want to emphasize the “doctor” bit, that is, deep analysis so that you help us to understand these dynamics.

Madam Speaker, the trading flow at Uganda Cooperative Alliance: How many producers have you linked to the traders, and how has this increased the prices the producers get? I am not sure whether the people of Bujenje know this flow and whether they have benefited, yet they are predominately agriculturalists and all the major crops, by the way, are grown in Bujenje and Masindi District.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you have talked of improving feeder roads and rural electrification. Is there collaboration in Government? Yesterday on this Floor we were told, because of something the programme of rural electrification has been heavily affected, and actually in some places it was halted.  Does your Ministry have another programme to increase power supply to our rural areas so that the farmers can maybe process or keep their produce without getting bad?  

The very last - that is why I was saying this statement is really speculative and we are not allowed to speculate in this House. You are saying - I read the business we were supposed to do this year - I did not see these Bills you are talking about: Uganda Commodity Exchange and something to do with Warehouse Receipt System (WRS). At what stage are these Bills? You are saying they are coming this year and we are already beyond almost half of the financial year, and these are supposed also to help the farmers, I do not know in what way because it has not been collaborated properly. At what stage are these Bills, hon. Minister, because we needed them yesterday? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members question time is supposed to take one hour, and we have already gone more than an hour. I may be obliged to stop you from further supplementaries, especially because Members are just submitting. I do not want to hear submissions; please ask questions related to what he has written. 

11.36
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I will go straight to the questions. Thank you, Mr Minister. Does Government know the quantities being talked about?  

Two, we are aware that without industries we cannot benefit much from trading in these raw commodities, and during this year we had a proposal of Uganda Shs 50 billion for industrialization. When is Government coming up with this industrialization plan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, just a minute. I am sorry the people from Kagoma are leaving, but they came in when we had already started. We have some visitors in the gallery from Kagoma sub-county.  You are welcome. (Applause)

MR MUGAMBE: Most of the commodities being talked of are the non-traditional commodities, many of them perishables. Among the solutions we suggested, none involved transport. Does Government have any remedies in terms of transport, say, air transport, rail transport and the like? So, how is Government addressing the infrastructure and transportation bit? 

Four, the hon. Minister has talked of the quality of commodities. How can qualities be looked into when UNBS is not funded?

Five, Mr Minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mugambe, when you ask eight questions alone, what will other people ask really?

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, however I am the chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I wanted to note because most of my colleagues are alluding to subsidy and we are signatories to Treaties with World Trade Organization (WTO), Cotton Agreement, whereby subsidies are not allowed. At the moment we are negotiating with all those countries, asking them to remove subsidies, and now we are here in Parliament asking our Government to subsidize the farmers. I wish there was time to explain. However, given the limited time, I leave it at that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mugambe, really your committee has not asked me for time to come and talk about the Cotton Agreement. I would have created a whole afternoon for you to talk to us about the Cotton Agreement and the subsidies.

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, you allowed Parliament off three days. We had a Cotton Agreement workshop for three days. But the issues that were raised in that workshop are the same ones that are being raised here; they are being contradicted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I did not attend your workshop, I would have wanted to hear the outcome of that workshop. That is what I am saying; you should have asked me for time for your committee to give a report on where you had been and what you had been discussing, okay?

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, we shall, thank you very much. However, we would like to ask the Minister when the Competition Law is coming because most of the issues they are addressing of cartels and all that are supposed to be address by the Competition Law. Thank you.

1140
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions, but before I ask, permit me to express my dismay in the lack of coordination between various ministries.  One, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry seems to be operating in total disregard or unaware of the status of taxation in the Ministry of Finance. 

Two, a former Vice President has been going around preaching the recreation, bringing back Co-operatives and yet the Policy Statement here read as an answer to a concerned party in the House seems to be at total variance.  

My questions are as follows: one, are you aware of the former Vice President’s preaching of revival, that is, Her Excellency, Dr Specioza Naigaga Kazibwe? She has been talking about recreating, bringing back co-operatives. Are they in conformity with your policy of bringing back co-operatives to safeguard the interest of the farmers?

Two, again I am surprised to hear you talk about subsidies, and especially my hon. colleague condemning them that they are against World Trade Organization (WTO). Are you aware that a week ago the East African leaders, in Arusha, signed an agreement pertaining to the East African Treaty on the Union? Are you aware that they signed that agreement, and among other things, common external tariff for the purpose of protecting East African farmers in various crops? One, rice is now the number three food commodity in this country. Every function you go to, you will find rice, and yet the acreage is now decreasing because of imports of rice from Bangladesh, Vietnam, India, and yet those countries, which are now exporting rice to Uganda have got specific promotion for exports. 

I will give you an example. In Egypt, Mr Minister, any farmer who grows rice is subsidized in form of free water and free infrastructure for canals. In Nigeria, they were experiencing the same situation as here whereby the acreage of rice was declining.  They changed the policy overnight, they consulted the Ministry of Finance and increased the tariff to 110 percent, and within one year Nigeria had the capacity to feed all its nationals and even going into export. Are you considering possibilities of indirect subsidies by way of taxation? Do not put in any money from the Consolidated Fund, but just put up a tax, which will inhibit any importation; that is another way of subsidizing and protecting a farmer. Are you aware of that kind of mechanism?  

Three, we have the problem of transporters. Are you aware that your colleague sitting next to you on the right is in charge of the Police Force, which is harassing transporters, of agricultural products? Every so often a truck carrying tomatoes, matooke from Mbarara is stopped, and every stop, there is a little kitu kidogo for the Traffic Officer. As a result, by the time they get to Kampala, the price is so high and yet –(Interruption)

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. It appears to me that hon. Aggrey Awori has very vital information about transactions on the roads between the Police and matooke and tomato traders. I would appreciate if hon. Aggrey Awori provided this vital information to responsible officers of Government for appropriate legal and disciplinary measures.

MR AWORI AGGREY: Thank you, Mr Minister, for your expression of concern. But I do believe the same time in your portfolio you have what we call “Investigation Department – Special Branch”, you have got CIDs; all you have to do is to put one CID officer in a truck and he will know when he comes to a road block, he will find out. As a matter of fact, let me be very frank. I am a friend of the Police and they always tell me, they say, “Hon. Awori, you defend us and we can tell you the truth.  This is how we survive.” 

The other day whey cut off their water, we came here and expressed concern and within 24 hours, water had been restored. I do not know what you do for them.

However, co-operatives; again, Madam Speaker, my hon. colleague here is answering my hon. colleague concerned about the food security and the prices of food. When you talk about silos, are you aware that the silos, which cost this country US$28 million plus other grants from the Swedish Government, have been lying idle, becoming castles for rats and other rodents for the past 15 years you have been in power? What do you plan to do about restoration of these silos to a level where they can be used for storage of food? 

I will give you an example. I happen to be a resident of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think you said you had three questions.  

MR AWORI AGGREY: Section (b) of my last question.  (Laughter). Madam Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me one more minute. On the question of lack of coordination, which you seem to abundantly exhibit between you and other ministries, how come the Ministry of Finance is levying heavy taxation on agricultural inputs, which make the cost of production a lot higher? Take, for instance, the cotton we are talking about, what is the taxation now on the fertilizers, which make it very difficult? The taxation may be zero, but the person who transports these fertilizers indirectly takes advantage of lack of taxation, fills in the gap so that the cost of production remains constant and high for the farmers.

Last but not least, the matter of cotton.  I stand against cotton. Cotton has made the eastern region poor since colonial period. It is a seasonal crop, which is expensive in terms of input; it is not like coffee, which you do not have to plant every year. Therefore, give us an alternative. Do you have any plans in consultation with Agriculture to give us a more viable, less expensive crop, whether it is a food crop or not like rice; why don’t you encourage rice? Have you looked at the policy in Mali and Niger? The price of cotton in Mali and Niger is almost double of what you offered us here yesterday. Why, because they have a clear-cut policy and an arrangement with the French textile industries whereby they give them a certain price. Have you made such an arrangement with any country at all for that purpose? 

Please do not burden us with World Trade Organization (WTO). WTO is a way the so-called developed countries want to sit on us. Why should we continue to be members of WTO, conform to their regulations, when back home they are doing the exact opposite? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.50
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. One; is the Minister aware that the prices of accaricides or animal drugs are too high? If he is aware, what is he planning to do to reduce these prices so that the peasants can buy these drugs at reasonable prices?

Two, is there any information in the ministry to inform farmers about the prices prevailing in the country? 

Three, in the mid-west we grow bananas, and usually when the prices are low they are abandoned in the market. What plans does the ministry have of setting up banana processing factories, especially in Kabarole district?

11.52
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I sympathize with the Minister in charge of Industry that we are dealing with someone who markets what he does not produce. I want to know from him whether there is any linkage between the Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Agriculture.  In that sense, do the producers have market information to guide them on production; does your Ministry give producers market information of what they should produce for the market because we are seeing people running from red pepper to vanilla, Aloe Vera, and it is a circus.  Do these people have market information?  

Two, hon. Omara Atubo commended the National Political Commissar (NPC) when he was Minister for Cooperatives. I do not know whether he commended him for strengthening cooperatives or destroying cooperatives, but that being aside I wanted to get it from the NPC, what happened to point No.5 of the 10-Point Programme, “Building the Integrated Self-Sustaining …”  What happened?  Where are those backward and forward linkages that we were talking of - is it 10 or 15 or now it is 20, I do not know, but I think it is still No. 5 - what happened to those forward and backward linkages because this one will guide the Ministry to know that we can market this and get this, that even getting the integration between Ministries would be simple, but the Minister of Trade and Industry is there in charge of trade, but trading in what he does not produce.  The Minister of Agriculture is producing, producing what they are not sure of marketing and we are just in a vicious circle of confusion.  So, can he guide us with point No.5?

11.53
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request the Minister to assist me in this dilemma I have got with my people of Madi-Okolo. I have been telling my people to stop growing tobacco because of the poisonous nature of that product and instead take up the production of cotton. It is now established that the farmer spends Shs 500 to grow a kilogram of cotton. The proposed price to be paid to the farmer is Shs 300; this is at variance with elementary economics. Is the Minister now telling me to eat my words and go back to the people to tell them not to grow cotton also?  

Secondly, it is apparent that CDO is behaving like a middleman, living off the sweat of farmers. Is the Minister in agreement with this House to abolish CDO in the not too distant future? I thank you.

11.55
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  My question is on the quality of our products. Now that we are on the same market worldwide, the competition is really high. I happened to represent workers in the agricultural sector, but basically dealing with coffee, cotton, rice, maize and all that. What is happening, and this is real, is that these scrupulous traders, the private traders, go by the lakeside and get some stones, which are of the same colour, mix them up with the coffee beans and then export this coffee. It is a reality; workers say it.  

One time I said, here in this House, and I told Government that the quality of our produce, which is exported, is very seriously being altered and there is a need to put some strategy to see how we can monitor the quality of this produce because it is done. Now that there is liberalization, but the control of the quality - I know the Bureau of Standards exists, but I know it is not properly facilitated to look into all these. Now that people are privately dealing in this kind of produce, it is a serious matter and it is putting down our market of the produce that we get from here.  

Yesterday, I was listening to Super Radio. There happened to be two discussants and one of them was Mr Bakojja. Someone rang and talk about the quality of our produce in Uganda and the markets that are alongside the roads like Entebbe road, Masaka and all that. They were talking of a hygienic situation of the produce that are being put along the roads, that they are depicting a negative picture to those tourists; that when we take our produce down there they always think about the way they looked at these things because they were not properly kept in the market. So, one person called in and asked what the Government was doing about people who bring maize, beans, with some dust, which spoil the haulers when they take it for milling. But when you buy that kind of flour and eat it, it is full of dust. So, this is vivid but something must be done to make sure that the quality of our produce measures up to the standards of the world market.

Secondly, I want to add my voice to those who are saying that co-operatives should be revitalized because at least the quality was properly monitored and the Government had access to these people to see how the quality was being kept and we had no problem for our exports. Thank you.

11.59
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking both hon. Wandera and the hon. Minister for providing us the opportunity to discuss this key question, because hon. Wandera stood firm to indicate that he was representing hon. Kagimu, otherwise we could have lost the debate.

My first point, Madam Speaker, in a way will be answering what hon. Byaruhanga has raised about point No. 5. But the key point here, I think as we have been saying in this House and outside, is the question of high value crops and value addition.  We must recognize that we are part of the world economy and what happens elsewhere affects us, and it is up to us as Parliament, the Executive, and the people of Uganda to build survival strategies in order to be part of the whole world that benefit from the world economy.  

My honourable old boy, hon. Arumadri from Madi-Okollo, I think has made a key point indirectly.  He says that, “Should I go back and tell my people to stop growing cotton?” I liked the way he put it because some colleagues in the House are putting this issue as a one-sided issue; that it is up to the Government and the Executive to go and do these things out there in the countryside. 

Really it is a cooperate activity; we discuss here, we involve policies, we also have knowledge, and we have to use the knowledge we have to guide our people.  Therefore, this issue of high value crops is critical and it is not fixed; today vanilla will be high value, tomorrow it will be low value as you have seen. Tomorrow coffee will be high value, the next day it will be a different situation. So, I think we have to have a strategy of being vigilant watching these crops and ensuring that on a timely basis we are able to inform our people so that they can change also with the situation. The –(Mr Awori rose-)- if I could first develop my point Ndugu Awori, I will give way.  

MR AWORI: I might get lost.

DR KIYONGA: I will come back to you. The question of Tororo; I was in Tororo three weeks ago and the wanainchi there are actually waiting for this factory, and I would like to appeal that this house supports that initiative. Hon. Kulany says there is good high-grade coffee in Kapchorwa; I know that. There is also high-grade coffee in Kasese, and also in other areas of the country.  But I think the key thing is for us to have the factory that will absorb high quantities of our coffee and add value.  It is only at that stage that the farmers will benefit. The location is important, but it is not the most critical point.

In Tororo, if we compare Tororo with Kapchorwa, we have unused capacity there already in terms of factory infrastructure because the factories collapsed and they are just empty shells. So, if we can get machinery and fit in those factories, which are already ready, this would benefit everybody.

Honourable members, you are right to ask what has been the impact of these coffee shops on the farmer. Of course we have to build up to quantities; we have to start and build up. It is not that when we have one little shop in China, one little shop in another country, that immediately we are going to have a positive impact on the farmer.  I think the question that my colleague will answer is how we are going to build up in terms of quantities so that the farmer can also benefit from this initiative –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, as far as I know we have a Minister in charge of Tourism and Industry, and he is in the House. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for hon. Kiyonga to act on his behalf? Actually when hon. Kiyonga rose, I thought he was presenting petitions on behalf of the people he represents; I am getting confused as to whether he is usurping the powers of the Minister, who is present here, or the Minister is incompetent to respond? I really want guidance on this, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Kiyonga served in the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Co-operatives for a long time, and Members have asked specific questions of him as a Minister who was there before. So, he is not usurping the role of the other Minister. He is also equally knowledgeable; he will give his part and the other Minister will give his part. So, do not get confused, and do not worry.

DR KIYONGA: My colleague may also be informed that today I lead Government in the House, and therefore I should be ready to assist any of my colleagues on these questions.

The second point, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is that I think this House and the Front Bench have done very well to support an appropriate policy on the exchange rate. Before those “good old days” which hon. Omara Atubo was referring to when we had these bodies, we also had fixed exchange rate so that even when things changed positively outside because of the fixed exchange rate, the farmer did not get the benefit that accrued from a positive price rise outside. So, an appropriate exchange policy has actually interpreted into the benefits going straight to the farmer at a high value rather than fixing the exchange rate, and as long as we manage this policy very well, it has the benefit of encouraging exports and therefore benefiting our people.

Let me now address this issue of co-operatives; what happened in the past and what the Government intends to do in the future. I would like to inform honourable members that the ginneries and coffee factories that were built in the past and even rehabilitated were assisted by Government and Parliament. Many of these ginneries and coffee factories were built with Government loans passed on to the co-operatives; and because of a difficult economic environment and mismanagement, many of these loans became non-performing assets, and in fact now the country is having to pay from other funds in order to repay these loans. 

So, the co-operatives collapsed because of a structural problem of mismanagement, and if we are going to revive them the basis has to be different. These have to be active co-operatives, active members, equal members, rather than going back to a situation where we would have huge co-operatives with a well-educated Secretary/Manager but all the members are peasants and they cannot hold the Secretary/Manager to account. 

So, we do intend to return to co-operatives, to support them, but on a different basis so that at each level members who belong to a co-operative society or co-operative union are equal members and can control the management.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the National Political Commissar talked of co-operatives collapsing due to mismanagement, I wanted to know from him whether the Government paid for the lorries and money and the items they got from the co-operative society, or whether that was the mismanagement he is talking about.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going back to the issue of cotton, also referred to by the Minister without Portfolio. Internationally, it has been established that all those cotton-growing areas have never moved forward in terms of development. As, an example, what they call Cotton Belt States of the United States of America - I think you know them; Tennessee, Georgia and what not - have been a total failure. 

Egypt: The cotton growing areas of Egypt are the most backward. India: Cotton-growing areas of states of India are the most backward. 

Is this not enough evidence for us to see that we are in a wrong path unless we come up with a new formula especially, the United States of America, the most capitalistic country and most conscious country in terms of efficiency in agricultural production, they are the most miserable states in the United States of America. Why are we treading the same path of poverty and ignorance?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I want further clarification from the National Political Commissar in regard to revival of co-operatives in this country. Honourable members, you are aware that after the demise of co-operatives in Uganda, there was a rebirth of co-operatives in the name of micro finance institutions. Let me clarify on this. With these micro finance institutions, there was a rebirth. Most of these micro finance institutions are accredited as co-operative societies, and as a result in the law we are making on micro finance institutions on tier four, we gave the Ministry of Finance six months to come up with a legal framework that would harmonize the activities of these micro finance institutions in order not to die the way co-operatives died. It is now two years plus and the Minister of Finance has never reported to this House.

So, honourable Minister, how do you hope to revive these co-operatives when actually you have not come up with a legal framework that would enhance the efficiency of these cooperatives with new rebirth of micro finance institutions that are accredited to co-operatives?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable Minister holding the portfolio of Leader of Government Business should not misinform this House. My father, the late John Chrisostom Lukyamuzi in Kyabakuza, was one of the founders of Masaka Growers’ Co-operative Union. It is on record that at one time that union was very progressive and successful. I want to give information to the honourable Minister answering us now that it is on record that one of the reasons why Masaka Growers’ Co-operative fell was because the Movement, during its protracted war days, took coffee from Masaka Growers’ Co-operative Union and never paid back up to now. So, is the minister aware that one of the main reasons why co-operative unions fell was because of the protracted war, which up to now has failed most of these co-operative unions?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Co-operative societies by their nature are grassroots institutions. The minister said why the co-operative movement collapsed; because these people I think were uneducated, they could not hold the managers accountable. I do not know how the minister is going to make these members of these grassroots institutions, whose literacy rate has not changed very much from the time when the movement collapsed, to get the managers of the co-operative unions more accountable than they were before? So, this is confusing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not revive the debate because we had already finished debating and we were winding up.

MR ETONU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for accepting this information.  From what I know, co-operative unions were doing very well from the time of colonial rule until the wars started in Uganda. And it is during those wars that the co-operative unions, particularly Teso Co-operative Union, started going down because some of their vehicles, for instance, in 1979 Idi Amin’s soldiers also ran away with Teso Co-operative Union vehicles and frequent wars in Teso also destroyed the co-operative union. 

But before that, co-operative unions were set up in a such a way that nobody, even a secretary/manager you are talking about, could take any money from a co-operative union because every year there was always a general meeting and external auditors were recommended to the Ministry of Co-operatives who would appoint an external auditor to go and look at the accounts before the following year starts.  So, actually the co-operative unions were doing very well and local people in the primary societies were very keen to know what things are brought in like, for instance, agricultural implements and so on; they were properly accounted for.

To say the least, co-operative unions in Uganda were the backbone of the economy of this country.  If you will recall, I will give an algebraic equation, that is, 2Cs plus 3Ts equalled to not only development but also good economic background in this country. The 2Cs I am referring to are coffee and cotton and the 3Ts are tourism, tea and tobacco. If we could revive those, the economy of this country –(Interjection)- I am talking of that time, I do not know about the insects, which are destroying tobacco now. But I am saying, if you could revive the co-operative unions, I am sure our economy would grow very fast and Ugandans, as I know it, are very keen on development and they want to own their own development. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we must appreciate information from the senior citizen; it is very interesting.

DR KIYONGA: Yes, we take it seriously, Madam Speaker and we shall comment on it. So first, let me restate that the co-operative movement in the country collapsed for a number of reasons including mismanagement. It would be incorrect for me to say that it was only mismanagement. Two, it is not correct to say that any union has collapsed because the NRA took commodities from them; the information is there for us to debate. Now, in terms of payment, which hon. Byaruhanga was asking, as far as I know the commodities and their values that were taken from the unions societies were well documented and I also know that payments were made. So, if anyone really has evidence to show that there is a union, which since has either not been paid or has partially been paid they should present that and that can be dealt with.  

Now, hon. Mwandha James has raised a very principled question. If we think one of the reasons that the co-operative movement collapsed was because of inequality of knowledge and, therefore, mismanagement between the owners and the managers, how are we going to rectify this? That is a very important question, which we should address. But I would give hon. Mwandha James a few illustrations.  Actually out there in the villages, even amongst peasants, they have some way they co-operate, but only that when it goes to a larger scale it becomes more difficult. In my village, for example, every coffee season of harvest you get about 10 people giving a bag from each person to one person, then he is able to go and sell and buy his iron sheets. And because they know each other very well, they are able to know that this one has not paid or the other one has not paid.  

Today, some of the co-operative societies, which are doing very well, are those of schoolteachers using their salaries; they are getting common savings and they are using this money to help themselves quite a lot. So, I take the point of hon. Mwandha James that, yes, we must formulate a realistic and appropriate policy that will make the co-operative movement survive this time round rather than us just being traditional.  

The micro finance institutions, I think hon. Banyenzaki is also right, that we need to attend to this because it is going to help not only the co-operative movement out there, but also the rest of the economy.  

My honourable colleague from Teso saying that the co-operative movement did well and this equation of the 3Ts and 2Cs really there is information. This is not speculation, this is not being defensive, that the co-operative movement failed over time.  It did not just come suddenly; you just need to look at their books over time. Now, when the honourable Member says that every year there would be a general meeting, indeed there would be a general meeting attended by thousands of peasants, and is true by paper the peasants would appoint an external auditor. But really if you go back and ask yourself, were they actively appointing an external auditor? These papers, which were brought to them by the secretary/manager, on one day did the peasants fully appreciate the sophistication in these figures? I really want to assure you that the co-operative movement objectively failed, and if we want to revive it we have to go back to the drawing board and look step by step where the failure came from and how we can revive it.  

The 3Ts and 2Cs, yes, you are right but in the world economy, when a country is not fixed - among the 3Cs was copper from Kilembe mines in Kasese District. Copper today is not a very valuable metal; the price out there is not very interesting.  We even put up a cobalt plant in Kasese, after two/three years the story is different. So, even the three 3Ts and 3Cs have to be re-examined so that we promote only those aspects that can match with the present trend of the world economy.  

I want to finalize with the question of subsidy.  I think the minister was clear and let me restate that the principle of subsidy is agreed.  We should not be asking the question that, “United States of America subsidies, who are you Uganda who is a small country not to subsidize?” United States of America subsidizes because they have the money; to subsidize you must have the money because subsidy is a cost. So, that is not the debate, but how much we can afford is the issue and this Government itself is involved in subsidy in agriculture. 

For example, research. The research done in this country, although it is still weak, is fully paid for by the Government and it has brought dividends.  Take the case of cotton; cotton in my home area in Kasese, the average yield used to be 500 kilograms per acre. As I speak now, farmers are able to get between 800 and 1,200 kilograms per acre, and this is attributed to Namulonge Research Station, which has come up with more productive seeds.  

The other area where we should be giving subsidy is in extension, and we must admit on our side that extension is still very week and this is why we the honourable members of the House whenever we can we have to supplement. We have come up with initiatives like NAADS, like modernisation of agriculture, all in an attempt to ensure that extension can improve so that the farmers can get the best yield possible from their crops.  

Cotton, if I can go back to it. At the height of this crop we got half a million bales approximately in 1969/1970. In 1985, by the time the Movement came here, the yield had dropped to 30,000 bales. This has steadily today risen to 160,000 bales.  We are still very far from half a million; and I expected my good friends from Pallisa, hon. Kafire and hon. Dr Mallinga really to speak to this because that is one of the areas that has benefited. Last season Pallisa District alone contributed 50,000 bales to this yield of 160,000. This is partly because of extension, partly because of good marketing and partly because of better yielding seeds that are being given to the farmers.  So, I think there are still gaps on market information and the issue of commercialisation of agriculture, which hon. Awori and hon. Kabakumba have mentioned.  

Let me take the story of rice, which hon. Awori brought up. I agree with hon. Awori completely that there is an exploited gap here. All of us go to the supermarkets; you are buying rice at Shs 2,000 or 3,000 a kilo but imported rice. You go to Tororo, you go to Iganga, the places where we have this rice mills, the farmers are working very hard but the issue is value addition because they just put a rough hauler, the rice is broken - even you Members of Parliament, when you find it in the supermarket you will not buy that rice, you want the better rice. So, there is room here for –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: My immediate neighbours grow a lot of rice, Tilda, but definitely the quality of rice in Uganda is up almost by 100 per cent. If you go to any supermarket now, you find the best-packaged rice is grown in Bugiri. So, please, do not run down our locally produced rice.

DR KIYONGA: Well, I think Ndugu Awori is missing his point. I think the major point you have made, hon. Awori, is that we grow rice here and there are two handicaps, if I may inform you. First of all, how much rice is being produced. 

Secondly and more importantly, the quality of the rice. You may have a few, two or three farmers who are producing good rice. But how do you account, because the price here is a lower price, for the rice in the supermarkets, well packaged and being bought at a higher price? If our quality was better and also the quantities were sufficient, this rice from outside would definitely collapse because the price differential is so huge.  We are paying Shs 2000 or 3000 for exported rice, for our own rice here at best you are paying maybe Shs 1500. So, there is a quality issue here, commercialisation and value addition.   

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, in Busembatya we mill a lot of rice, which is grown in that area of Bugweri County and I thought that if Government invested in assisting farmers to mill their rice in a proper way, this would go a long way to improve the quality of rice.  But you know, because when they harvest it and dry it sometimes on the ground, you end up with stones in the rice –(Interjection)- oh yes, this happens and this ruins the quality of the rice. I hope that the effort the Vice President is taking to encourage farmers to grow rice will be accompanied by a similar effort to enable them to mill rice in a proper way so that we can improve on the quality of rice. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: I agree with you, hon. Mwandha James, very much, but I think again here we need to join hands. My own thinking is that rice is a viable crop, because as hon. Awori said, almost in all homes now you find rice. But you go to the market you still find a lot of rice from outside of better quality and it is preferred. To me, it means there is a market failure somewhere. Why is it that there is a crop out there in eastern Uganda, there is a market out here in Kampala and a good margin, why is the private sector not going in because if the private sector went in that would be much better.  So, there must be a failure, which we need to identify and solve. But I agree with you that ultimately Government has the responsibility and we working with the Members of Parliament we should be able to identify that failure and be able to deal with it.  

Finally, the question of commercialisation of agriculture, I think in Uganda, is still weak and all of us need to support the steps to move forward. For example, this cotton price you have heard about, it was just announced recently that cotton outside has fallen, immediately it hit us here. What is the failure in between because in the large commercialised economies, you have big traders who have forward contracts, I enter a contract now to sell a crop in 2006 and the prices are already agreed so then I can come back myself and be able to agree with the farmers on what price I will pay them. But because of the level of development, we have not developed that capacity to have traders who can go into forward contracts and they are able to supply and therefore can guarantee a certain price to our farmers. 

So, Madam Speaker, I think this is a good debate and we are moving in the right direction. What we should avoid is to appear - because when someone stands here and says, “In the good old days we built hospitals free because there were co-operatives” the people who are hearing do not have information, they may believe you and that is not the truth really. We should go for the facts so that we can help our people –(Interruption) 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, there are records to show that before this Government came to power, there had been development in this country. There are signs to show that there were schools, there were hospitals, there were roads and well maintained.  Is my honourable colleague in order to imply that before this Government came to power there was nothing achieved by the previous regimes? Are you in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is not what he meant. He said that we should avoid giving the impression that the co-operatives financed the entire development of this country without support from other sectors.

DR KIYONGA: May I conclude on that point, Madam Speaker and I thank you for your ruling. (Mr Ochieng rose_). Let me first address the issue raised by hon. Awori, it is important that it is anchored. By 1986, the GDP of the economy of Uganda had contracted by 25 per cent and the Movement Government has spent the first 10 years doing nothing but rehabilitation of broken down infrastructure, etcetera. So, although former governments did do something, we cannot deny the fact that we were in a downtrend, which fortunately has been reversed by this Parliament and the Movement administration.  

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the clarification I wanted to get from the minister is on the issue of saying that in other organized countries or parts of the world there are those people who get bigger contracts and for a period of time. Honourable Minister, that issue is right. My people stay at the border of Kenya and Uganda. It appears as if it is the same phenomenon that is happening. The Kenyans, irrespective of the price fall in the international market, are up to now still pestering my people to sell them the cotton and they are saying they are ready to pay Uganda Shs 500 or 600.  Madam Speaker, I would really seek clarification on what we can do. Here we are saying Shs 300, there they are saying they are ready to pay Uganda Shs 600 at the word ‘go’ and Christmas is near, my people are pestering me and saying, “What can we do?”

Secondly, Madam Speaker, last time when we were here, we were given a paper illustrating how the prices are really reached at. I would like to get clarification from the minister. We found a lot of money being taken away by the ginners and some of these things can also be done. The issue here is that there are a number of farmers, like in my constituency, who would like to get their cotton collected together, transported to one of these ginneries and then they only pay for the linting, then they sell their cotton after being lint.  

Will that be possible honourable Minister for the sake of value addition to my people, just as it is in the coffee sector? Because I know that in the coffee sector in this country today, somebody may own a coffee factory and that was the way how we got some of these Ugandans to get money to that extent of building their own coffee factories. There was this Coffee Marketing Board equipment at Bugolobi. Every Ugandan who had money, who had the capacity at that time, was allowed to buy his coffee from wherever, he takes it to the Coffee Marketing Board at Bugolobi, it is milled for him and then he exports even without having a factory. I would really like –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you know, you are going to pre-empt a matter, which we have assigned to our Committee on Agriculture. We sent them to continue dealing with the question of the pricing of cotton, the zoning all those are issues we asked them to deal with and they are due to report. So, let us not jump into it now, let them bring back the report and then we handle it extensively, please.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, you did indicate that we had already spent more than one hour on this matter, and if you look at our rule relating to questions, ministers are supposed to make specific responses to certain questions. I have great respect for my honourable senior colleague, Dr Kiyonga, but it appears he is making a statement of a general nature on matters of policy. I would like the Executive branch to make specific responses to the questions that were asked such that we move to other things. Opportunity can be availed under our rules for statements of a general nature to be made. So, I am requesting, Madam Speaker, that you guide the House and the ministers in particular to respond to these questions and we move to other things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I also appeal to the Members not to bring all their issues and frustrations, domestic matters into this? These questions were specific.

12.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRADE) (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all colleagues who asked for clarifications. I would also like to thank my senior colleague, hon. Kiyonga, for throwing light on a number of issues.  So, I will not touch those issues where he responded and allow me, Madam Speaker, not to answer questions about cotton because the issues of cotton were adequately debated here and resolutions were made. Government has looked at those resolutions and as I speak now, the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture is meeting His Excellency, the President, to chart out the way forward. I will be very brief, but when I was very brief in my answer especially number one, I was asked to be more elaborate. However, my yes in number one was followed by a statement; so it did not just end at yes. I wanted that clarified.  

Hon. Wandera wanted to know what kind of support we have extended to Southern Range and Phoenix Logistics. We have actually not yet extended any support, but we are just in process because we thought these two factories to begin with would help us if they got the state of art machinery they need, they would process cotton and produce world class fabrics. As you well know today, Tri-Star is importing fabric from China because the factories we have here cannot make the right quality. So, we want these factories to make the right quality, world-class quality of fabric and if they do this, it means value addition to our cotton, and therefore a better price. That is what we think.

The location of the Tororo factory: This was responded to by hon. Kiyonga. Hon. Kalule Ssengo, the middlemen and the cartels: These would be solved if the farmers were organized in co-operative societies so that they do the processing themselves because today what is happening, you have buyers, you have ginners and exporters. You can see all these categories end up cheating the farmer because the chain to the market is a long one. So, by having farmers organized as they used to be in the past in co-operatives and thus reducing the middlemen, would definitely solve this problem of cartels and monopolies. But as my senior colleague has pointed out, I think it is very clear how the co-operatives collapsed and what efforts Government has put in to revive the co-operative movement.  

Now, the establishment of coffee shops in China, Egypt, South Africa and other countries and the effect or vis-à-vis the benefit to the farmer.  What we are doing currently is trying to establish ourselves in the new markets as we prepare to process coffee from here in Uganda, so that by the time we go full blast we have already established our presence in those markets. The quantities definitely that are being handled in those markets are still very low, but the principle is that we establish our presence in the markets so that when we go full blast, we are already there –(Interjection)- no, I think I will not take any clarifications at this time. I was asked to summarize and take a very short time and I am time barred because in 15-minutes’ time –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I am not giving information, I am seeking clarification. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do not seem to be getting solutions, we are just being told a situational report and the situation is going to remain the same. The clarification I want from the minister is that, in this House we did recommend that actually the Government has the responsibility to organize farmers because the problem is that whereas we have the capacity to produce so much, we cannot pool quantities and standard for export. But the situation now is that we produce more to circulate in the local market and we cannot export any. Why can the minister not tell us the measures they are taking to rectify the situation other than telling us, “The co-operatives collapsed, we are trying to revamp Nyanza.” These are simple things. Identify a niche market, tell the farmers to produce so much in quantity and in the required standard for export. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We would like to get assurance from the minister as a clarification, first, that the co-operatives failing should not be a reason for not taking concrete measures to show that for us to be competitive as a country, given the structure of our economy with peasant farmers, there is no other way other than organizing the small farmers to achieve scale to be competitive and that can only be done through co-operatives.  But we are heaping on their failure as if they were the only ones who failed; the Army failed, the Police failed, Mulago failed, even this House. 

So, we should not single out co-operatives as a failure and justify it for not doing something very concrete because we cannot move. I can tell you, Madam Speaker, there is no way Uganda can compete unless we achieve scale, and that scale can only come if we organize on co-operative basis. I would want the minister to give me that assurance so that we can move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, maybe I could also add. I think what the Members are asking is, now that there are no co-operatives and the farmers are producing, for instance, the coffee, I think they would like to know that so far we have sold 20 tonnes of processed coffee in this shop and that one and that one, next year we shall sell so much, notwithstanding the absence of co-operatives.  They want to see how it is going to flow into these shops.

MR LUKYAMUZI: It seems to me, Madam Speaker, that the minister does not know that there is also a constitutional obligation for any Government we elect in power to endeavour to improve the livelihood of the people. Short of that, it should be out of government. For example, in the National Objectives of State Policy XII (ii) it is stated, “The state shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.”  

You have scrapped the co-operatives, which were undertaking the marketing of crop products of the people of Uganda. How do you want them to live?  What can you guarantee that they will survive amicably? If you are not able to deliver, why do you not get off and others come, and this is serious? And when the minister is talking, he does not provide any solution, he is simply saying they are replacing co-operatives, when?  

Madam Speaker, between 1962 and 1966, it is open knowledge that Uganda’s income per capita was the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. The economy was good and in working gear because there was guarantee for the people of Uganda to get their agricultural products in –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, now you are making a submission. Minister please, respond quickly and we finish this matter.

MR NDUHUURA: Hon. Rwamirama says we should give solutions and we are saying as Government, and I think we agree with Parliament, that we should stop this issue of marketing or exporting commodities in their primary form. We are talking of value addition, and I think this is the best way forward.  So, when I say we are trying to assist or we are identifying funds so that we can assist Southern Range, we assist Phoenix Logistics, that is what we are exactly talking about; value addition so that we stop exporting commodities in their primary form, which are exposed to all sorts of hazards, including the low prices that our primary commodities are now attracting.

MR SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted the minister to clarify how far true it is that Government is going to assist Phoenix Logistics, because recently when Mr Kashwada of Phoenix Logistics appeared in our Committee of Finance, he told us that Government had not assisted him at all and Government had no intention of assisting him to import the machinery you are talking about. Now, this statement you are making is a new development, which must be very recent? My chairman is around to bear witness.  

MR NDUHUURA: In answer to that, I will say that Phoenix Logistics has been assisted in the past in the same way that Tri-Star was assisted. So, if Mr Kashwada is saying he has not been assisted by Government, then I do not understand. He has already submitted his requirements to Government and I said we are looking for funds, we are looking for a way of assisting Phoenix Logistics. So, if he has not got the support he wanted, it is correct for him to say or to inform the committee that he has not got assistance yet because we have not yet extended it to him.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify to the House what hon. Kalule Ssengo said.  We had an interaction with these people and we had a report to this House and it is in the Hansard.  We did recommend that in order to benefit farmers, instead of pumping money into Tri-Star, they should give money to these existing indigenous companies, which buy cotton from farmers, to import equipment to make the fabric that is necessary for making shirts, which we are importing. Now the minister is trying to mislead the House to say that they have assisted them before, when we have interacted with all of them and they have not accessed funds for that equipment.  

In actual fact, the money that was injected in Tri-Star would have been enough to buy equipment for both Nyanza Southern Range and Phoenix Logistics. And for them they do not want free money, they want a soft loan to access so that they can process our cotton and make fabric.  

So, is it a new development because as far as we know, and as far as this House is concerned, we recommended we have not got a feedback? Are you telling us that actually you are going to do it, and if you are going to do it, how are you going to do it?

MR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I want to be on record that both Southern Range and Phoenix Logistics have ever been assisted by Government before and we are trying to assist them again. So, it is not true to say that it is only Tri-Star that we have assisted; we have assisted those two companies, they have now submitted their fresh requirements and we are going to assist them –(Interjections)- those are details I cannot disclose here as of now. They are not secrets, Madam Speaker, but I do not have the figures off hand. If I did, I would definitely tell you and I can promise to do it in future.  


A number of colleagues wanted to know how far we have gone with the Warehouse Receipt System Bill.  This Bill is out of Cabinet, we have okayed it, my ministry is only waiting for a Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance. Once that is out of the way, I will be here in Parliament to table it.

Hon. Mugambe, who happens to be the Chairman of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, should actually have assisted me to answer some of these questions, which he is putting before the House here. He says Uganda National Bureau of Standards is not well funded. Yes, and for the last three years we have been submitting the requirements of Uganda National Bureau of Standards but we have always been frustrated. I hope that in the coming Budge, an attempt will be made, with your support of course, to support Uganda National Bureau of Standards to perform its functions. 

Hon. Basaliza is saying farm inputs are expensive, but I think they are expensive when compared to the low prices we get for the farm products. If the prices were good, then I think the farm inputs would not be looked at as being very expensive.  

Banana processing: this is going to be piloted in Bushenyi and Mbarara early next year, and the success –(Interjection)- someone is saying ‘as usual’ but I think that is where the Bananas are.  

Now, market information, this was a question from hon. Byaruhanga, there is a programme called RATIN, this is Rural Agricultural Trade Information Network, which was doing very well until recently because it has lacked funding. Otherwise it was doing very well, and with the assistance of MTN, you would actually get these prices off your phone screens by just typing the product, send the message to 197 and in less than two seconds you would get the price on the screen and then you would compare the prices in the different towns of Uganda. And if you are a trader in produce, you would know where to buy and where to sell.  

My colleague from Madi-Okollo, I would advise that you hold on before you go back to the people to tell them not to grow cotton. I think we shall come out with a solution. Let us wait and see what comes out of the meeting of today between His Excellency, the President, and the Committee on Agriculture.  

MRS RAINER KAFIRE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The clarification I would like you to give me, you are telling us now, that whatever comes out of the discussion with the Committee is what you are going to follow. Do you mean you do not have any plan? Don’t you have a national plan ready with you; you have to depend on emergencies? If the cotton question never arose, does that mean you would not have given us any information? Is it true that you do not have a policy now until His Excellency, the President, answers the question?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have seen a trend that makes me very uncomfortable. In this country we have a Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. On a question of price determination on a commodity or a product like cotton, I thought it should have fallen under the mandate of his ministry to resolve that issue. I am surprised, Madam Speaker, that it has to take the whole President of this country to meet various stakeholders to resolve this issue. One wonders what the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is there for? If, in my opinion, it cannot consider and resolve a simple matter like a matter regarding the cost of a product -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it was this House, which made about six proposals.  One of them involved getting money from the Stabilization Fund; the second one was from the Strategic Intervention Funds; the third was to ask the ginners to drop the Shs 50, and I do not know which other group to drop another Shs 50. Surely, these were proposals we sent to the Government.  Why don’t you allow our committee to report back and then we discuss them? We are the ones who sent the proposals; we proposed five areas from which we could get money to support the farmers.

MR AMURIAT: All I am asking for is, Madam Speaker, is it beyond the capacity of the ministry to take that decision? Does it take the whole President of this country for such a decision to be taken?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR NDUHUURA: The issue of cotton pricing was discussed here and it took a whole Parliament of Uganda to even set the price at Shs 500 as an indicative price. So, when he says it is a small matter when Parliament has already made resolutions, which resolutions were looked at by Government headed by His Excellency, the President, I do not see how you call the involvement of the President uncalled for when it is not a small issue. If it were a small issue, Parliament would not sit here and discuss the price of cotton for the whole week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please conclude your answer, I want to move to the next item.  Please, you leave the cotton issue alone.

MR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I wanted to correct the impression that hon. Awori gave this House, that in Niger and Mali the cotton prices are double what the prices are here. What is happening now in those West African countries, which produce cotton, is actually a very big problem. They have already made a protest to World Trade Organization (WTO) about the price of cotton vis-à-vis the subsidies in the United States of America and European Union. So, if these countries were comfortable with the prices of cotton, they would not be doing this. So, I want that impression corrected. In a nutshell, Madam Speaker, that is all I had. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Honourable members, we still have work to do, so the House is suspended until 2.30 p.m. when we shall resume with the other items on the agenda.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.41 p.m._)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall we had concluded debate on this matter, what was remaining was the response from Government and from those institutions, which were adversely mentioned in the report. I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs is here to respond to that.

MR SABIITI: You recall indeed as you have said that we had debated and we had reached a point where a motion for a resolution of Parliament was supposed to be debated, and I am ready with my colleagues to start this debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is on record that the Members of the Cabinet, who were adversely mentioned, had requested for an opportunity to respond. The Attorney General was also to respond for the Electoral Commission and the Presidency.  So, before we debate that motion, let us hear from them and then we debate it totally. But if you are not ready, I think we should move the next item because I do not see the Attorney General and the Minister for Security.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE JINJA INCIDENT

2.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE JINJA INCIDENT (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, there are some copies at the reception, which they have just gone to pick to give to the Members, before I begin.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you would like them to read together with you?

MR RUHINDI: We would like to move together, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay you can hold on, let them bring them into the Chamber.

MR RUHINDI: This is quite a lengthy report. It has about 45 pages with annextures. The only problem I may have, Madam Speaker, is the way I should present it because this is more or less like a judgment where you find that every word, every comma is important, maybe calling upon me to read it as much as I can.  However, I am also aware of the problems involved in that kind of procedure. I think Members would certainly like to have their own time to read through carefully and internalise it.  

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, I will highlight the background, go through the different areas that we considered and read the observations and the recommendations of the committee.  

Madam Speaker, on the 10th of March 2004, the Speaker of Parliament appointed a 12-member committee to investigate the circumstances leading to the disruption of the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum (PAFO) workshop in Jinja on 5th March 2004. 

The committee’s terms of reference were to investigate all the circumstances that led to the disruption and make a report on its findings and recommendations.  

In conformity with rule 155 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee hereby presents the following report.

Background:

Members of PAFO on 5th March 2004 organized a sensitisation workshop at Crested Crane Hotel Annex in Jinja. The workshop was however disrupted for several hours by a chaotic mob, which was eventually dispersed by Police.

On 9th March 2004, hon. Kizige and hon. Migereko both made personal statements to the House on the incident. They informed the House that they had been subjects of discussion in connection with the fracas. They, however, denied the allegations and assured the House that they had not in any way participated in the events.  

In response to the above, hon. Ruzindana, chairperson PAFO made a statement to Parliament on 10th March implicating hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige. He alleged that “hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige were deeply involved in making arrangements for thugs to disrupt the workshop”. 

In a bid to resolve the conflicting statements and understand how the PAFO workshop was disrupted, the House with the guidance of the Speaker decided that a select committee be constituted to investigate the matter.

Methodology:

The committee applied the following procedure in handling its mission.

(a) Invited complainants before it.

(b) Summoned the accused persons.

(c) Summoned witnesses with relevant information on the incident.

(d) Visited and interviewed witnesses on the site of the incident in Jinja and other related places.

(e) Read relevant laws relating to the handling of assemblies or gatherings.

The above enabled the committee to make the following findings on the incident.

Happenings at the Scene:

Paragraph 4 relates to what actually took place on the scene. According to Mr Shaban Makata, who is the Manager of YMCA, Mr Kidega, a PAFO Assistant went to YMCA Annex Hotel on 28th February 2004 to make arrangements for a PAFO workshop. Mr Makata and Mr Kidega later met in Kampala and agreed that the workshop would be held on 5th March 2004.

On 5th March 2004 at about 9.00 a.m. a group of people ferried in coasters flooded the venue. They made groups in the compound and were later led to the entrance by the Mayor of Jinja, Mr David Fred Wakudumira, the LC III chairperson, Mafubira, Mr Gulume Balyaino, the LC5 chairperson of Iganga, Mr Kyafu Asumani, the LC III Mpumude, Mr Kasede, and the LC5 Chairperson, Bugiri, Mr Siragi Lyavala, 

On reaching the registration table all people without invitation letters were denied entry. The scuffle that lasted about four hours then begun.  There was violence that led to injuries and other losses as presented in this report. The Main Hall where the meeting was to be held was taken over by people who had purportedly come to attend the meeting. Some people remained drumming and dancing outside. 

Members of Parliament who were already at the scene were evacuated by the Police and taken to Crested Crane Hotel. Police finally repulsed the crowds under direction of the Inspector General of Police and the Minister of Internal Affairs. Some District Leaders, namely, Mr Gulume, Mr Kyafu and Mr Lyavala addressed the crowd before they finally left.  

The workshop then commenced at around 2.00 p.m. and ended at about 5.30 p.m. During the time of the meeting the Regional Police Commander (RPC), the District Police Commander (DPC) and Regional CID Commander were present to ensure peace at the venue.  

Aggrieved parties:

What follows, Madam Speaker, is a summary of what the committee considers to be persons who were aggrieved by this incident. We do not have to go through the quotations of what people said, but in brief you could see that the Leaders of PAFO felt aggrieved because they organized a function, which delayed to take place; there were losses in terms of property to some people; there is evidence that some people lost money and mobile phones. 

There was evidence that Mr Kidega was beaten, and according to his testimony he said that because of the beating he almost became unconscious and there was internal bleeding. 

Mr Majid Batambuze is a businessman in Jinja, he testified that he attempted to stop Mr Gulume from inciting the crowd and Mr Gulume in turn assaulted him, and that Mr Gulume has since apologized.  

Mr Mafabi said that he was attacked by what he called hooligans, and in the process he lost US$2000. But as we actually shall turn in our observations, he could not adequately prove this expenditure on the medical treatment he allegedly got in Nairobi; there was evidence that actually he was hit with a bottle.  

Hon. Mwandha, hon. Salaamu Musumba were also aggrieved and testified that their planned meeting was disrupted and had to start later than planned. They were insulted, exposed to danger and they had to be evacuated.

Precursor to the Jinja incident:

The committee was interested in the events that led to the Jinja incident. Some witnesses testified that there was a radio announcement inviting everybody to go for the meeting, while the PAFO workshop organizers blame the incident on the planned arrangements by some Members of Parliament from Busoga and the local leaders.  

Mr Moses Kanene, a teacher in Jinja, gave us interesting evidence. According to him they appeared in a Kimeza I think on 28th or 29th.  On that day, they were overwhelmed by the opposition, so their intention was to plan how to be effectively represented in the PAFO meeting of 5th March. So they went and organized this whole thing at hon. Migereko’s house.  Mr Kanene later wrote to the committee wanting to re-appear, but the committee thought that, that request was not worth following because he had already appeared before the committee in his normal senses - he was not drunk, he was not sick - the committee did not see any reason why they should have re-interviewed him.  

Hon. Tuma gave us evidence to the effect that, prior to the meeting there were open invitations to the people to go to the workshop and participate, and so did Mr Mugisha Muhwezi, who is the RDC of Jinja.  

The cause of the incident in Jinja:

The cause of the incident at Jinja has different connotations depending on the party involved. The accused blamed the incident on the nature of the invitation, the banners, radio invitations and invitations made at a Kimeza.  On the other hand, the organizers blamed the incident on schemes by some Members of Parliament from Busoga namely, hon. Kizige and hon, Migereko, plus some of the Local Leadership, who are alleged to have organized the disruption.
  
There were indications of financial gain, but we shall turn to it in our observations. There were testimonies that there were precedents where people had attended similar workshops, say, in places like Mbale and they had food, money in terms of refund for their transport, and could have orchestrated the whole scuffle.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, this is a very important report for this House and those who will be doing research on what happened; is it procedurally right for the hon. Member just to summarize this report.  I thought this report really should go on the Hansard as compiled because the way he has summarized, he is missing out very important areas.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, you see sometimes you make our lives a bit difficult. A number of times when the chairpersons are reading you say, “No, please summarize, we have got the document” and many of the chairpersons have been summarizing. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, in that incident therefore, is there no way, because it has happened before when some chairpersons summarize, but the Speaker orders the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do that at the end when they have finished.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Okay, thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I would not have really minded reading this whole report, but I also anticipated some problems with it. There was also a problem of the unclear invitation letter, and this is reflected in paragraph 6.1.2, in the sense that when the participants appeared and wanted to enter they were denied entry on the grounds that they did not come with the invitation letters, and the argument was that the invitation letter did not have anything to say, “Please come with your invitation letter”.  There was that problem and there was evidence to that effect.  

Then there was a problem of the open radio invitation in paragraph 6.1.3.  This too, those who testified for and against were saying there was a radio invitation, which was inviting everybody.  Then of course, in 6.1.4 another cause was attributed to the denial of entry. In 6.1.5 there was the problem of the banner. If you look at Annex 6 of your report, the banner reads, “Join the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum in the Debate`1 and Struggle ‘Safeguarding Uganda’s Democratisation process’ Crested Crane Hotel, Friday 5th March 2004.”   

There were testimonies saying this was broad and everyone looking at it would wish to come in and participate in the debate. 

Madam Speaker, 6.1.6, the use of bad language.  There was evidence, for instance, Mr Gulume testified that hon. Kasigwa told people at the gate to “take away their jiggers” and testified that that was provocative. 

Use of physical fights, in 6.1.7, hon. Nandala is alleged to have boasted of having boxed those who had come for the workshop and thus sparking off a fight.

In 6.1.8, there were testimonies that what orchestrated this scuffle was pre-planned. There was a lot of evidence to that effect. There was information that what could have caused all this is a move by some authorities to block the giving of information to the public, particularly on the issue of third term, and this evidence was particularly from hon. Kibanzanga and Majid Batambuze, a businessman in Jinja. 

In paragraph 7, Madam Speaker, the committee analyses the role of the disruptors, the different parties involved in this whole thing.  We look at the role of the disruptors; we look at the role of the Hotel Management in 7.2, and I must actually say that Management of YMCA gave us what we thought was very credible evidence, particularly in as far as they were third parties to this whole dispute.  They, for instance, highlighted the fact that those disruptors had take alcohol, seemed to be under the influence of drugs and many other aspects, as you will read and see for yourselves. 

The role of the organizers: We also see from the evidence given that they left a lot of loopholes in the arrangement, particularly in respect of the mode of invitation to the function; and we also note that some of them actually used bad language on the scene. 

The role of the local leaders, particularly those I have mentioned, Mr Lyavala, Mr Kyafu, Mr Gulume, Mr Kasede, indicated that they were very organized for whatever took place subsequently, and as a result the committee singled out two persons, who for all intents and purposes, it considered to be the ringleaders of this whole saga, that is, Mr Gulume LC3, Mafubira and chairman of Busoga Regional Lower Local Government Association and Mr Kyafu LC 3 Chairman, Iganga and accordingly, their evidence is very well summarized in 7.4.1 and 7.4.2. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Ruzindana produced a tape, which the committee looked at and you would not actually be left many doubt that Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu were the ringleaders of this whole scuffle.  There is also an Annex where you see Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu leading the whole team. They were easily identified by these disruptors immediately they appeared and converged around them. These are people, when in fact the saga was stopped, they had to address a crowd and Mr Gulume was saying that “I am the Commander and these others are my small commanders” and that whole thing looked very well planned – “Come and we sort out our things” - that kind of thing.

The role played by the authorities in the area and whether they carried out their responsibilities well, paragraph 8. Madam speaker, the committee particularly commends the role of the Regional Police Commander (RPC) because the moment he appeared things went back to normal. But the committee is of the view that there was complete dereliction of duty by the District Police Commander (DPC), and his approach to handling this matter was professionally wanting; and much of it, I will get back to it in my summary on the observations.  

The role of the Police, madam Speaker, is well contained in the Constitution in Article 212 in the Police Act, Chapter 303 of our laws of Uganda, and you will see that actually the DPC contravened many of these provisions of our Constitution, of the Police Act, to some extent even of our Penal Code.

In 8.2, the District Security Officer (DSO), Mr Tumwine - I must say that we did not get much from him. He was very elusive and he did not give us much by way of his testimony.

In 8.3, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), Mr Mugisha Muhwezi seemed also to have operated at a distance and there was hardly anything to link him to the offences at the scene of the riot.  

In paragraph 9, Members will read how we have tried to connect the facts with the law. This one being brief and towards the end, I can endeavour to read through much of it. The PAFO Members interviewed, including hon. Ruzindana, hon. Mafabi, hon. Salaamu Musumba, and all implicated hon. Kizige and hon. Migereko in making arrangements to disrupt the workshop. 

PAFO Chairperson, hon. Ruzindana, told the committee, “Our information is that hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige were deeply involved in making arrangements for the thugs to disrupt the workshop.” 

Mr Kanene Moses alluded to five meetings held before and even mentioned a budget to facilitate about 100 people mobilized for the PAFO workshop. These included meetings at hon. Migereko’s and Mr Kasede’s homes.  

Mr Kanene told the committee “The first meeting took place at hon. Migereko’s home on Sunday 29th February after the Ekimeeza. Mr Gulume, Chairman LC3 Mafubira, Mr Kasede LC3 Mpumude, hon. Migereko himself was there and hon. Kizige joined us later with two mobilisers from Kamuli… So we said we would need some funding for these people to be brought to drum support. So, we were given responsibility to find out the venue for the workshop, the number of people invited and how we can help our side… So we said if they have 500, we can add 100 perhaps it will benefit us… The people who came from upcountry were all good. It seems the problem was here in Jinja.” and you can look at Annex 10.

Controversy arose over his statement after making counter statements as stated in the New Vision of 16th June and writing to the committee. The committee did not find Mr Kanene’s letter, as I said before, worth following. According to Mr Kitanda Samuel, Jinja District Speaker, there was a plan to disrupt the meeting. 

In addition, hon. Salaamu Musumba told the committee that, “We had information from that camp how the plan was being coordinated and they all confirmed it was hon. Migereko.” According to Isaac Mufumba, who hosts a talk show at Kiira FM, hon. Migereko called him on the eve of the workshop and asked him not to allow hon. Salaamu Musumba to speak on his show because she was spreading rumours that he was involved in activities to disrupt the workshop.  

While Mr Kanene was the only witness who attended some preparatory meetings, the fact that there was general reference to the meetings before is not disputed. What remains in dispute is the actual participation or involvement of hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige and what took place at the meetings.  

According to Mr Kanene, hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige were only seen at the meeting in hon. Migereko’s house after the Ekimeeza and were not present in other meetings. Mr Twinomwe was hired to do the organization on the Thursday meeting; posters were brought by Mr Kasede, while Mr Gulume handled the money. Such fine details are corroborated by the appearance of campaign posters at the scene of the incident.  

The facts can be analysed as follows: There were masses of people who recognized Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu as their leaders by moving towards them on the appearance at the scene. Until that time, the people were at the scene but had not approached the entrance of the hall to try and enter and therefore had not been denied entry. Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu insisted on entering with them as “their” people and refused to enter without them. It cannot be established that these were necessarily people who were under the direct leadership as leaders, but in any case, this is not the normal occurrence at a workshop. They later addressed the crowd. Considering the large number of people and the fact that they are public officers, this is clear indication of prior preparations of some sort.  According to Mr Kanene, Mr Kasede and Mr Gulume coordinated the funds.

According to the testimony of Mr Majid Batambuze, a businessman, hooligans were paid to disrupt the PAFO meeting. According to Mr Isabirye Swaibu, a driver for the Council, he met people organizing themselves to disrupt the workshop, and these people include Mr Mohammed Bacurana of the Mayor’s office. According to Zziwa Philip, a cellular phone dealer, he said he knows people who were involved in the disruption; that these included Mr Kasede, Mr Gulume, Mr Haruna Ntugo, Mr Sekabira Mohammed, Mr Nyanzi and Mohammed attached to VCCU; that people were hired to cause disruption. In their defence, Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu made mere denials.  Mr Gulume said he had an obligation to enter the hall because he had been invited. This connotes he was ready to use force even though he was only an invitee; it explains the violence that took place. 

It was clearly not in dispute that a meeting took place at Bridgeway Guesthouse, and while there might not be clear evidence of the agenda of the meeting, it is quite certain it took place, at least from the evidence of the various witnesses. This was further confirmed by a visit to the scene, and the statements made by the management of the place, who said that a big group gathered there at the times the meetings were alleged to have taken place. 

Mr Gulume, hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige talked about the meeting at that place after the incident, to discuss what had happened about meeting at that place. Mr Gulume told the committee that, “I met hon. Kizige and hon. Migereko together … it was at – I have forgotten the name but all the same we met … it was in the evening, around five”.  

According to hon. Kizige, a meeting was held with hon. Migereko, Mr Gulume, Mr Batala and Mr Katawera to brief them about the events, when he heard of chaos in Jinja. This would be strange considering that according to hon. Katuntu and Mr Opit, hon. Migereko was not answering phone calls from members at the scene whom he would have got information from. Mr Opit told the committee that, “As we were sitting, the three of us: hon. Kizige, hon. Migereko and myself, his phone was on the table. So he would ask me, ‘can you answer that call’?”  

Furthermore, Mr Gulume is considered one of the major people in the organization of the events that took place. It appears rather strange that rather than go to the scene of the incident, there was a private meeting held to discuss the matter. It should also be recalled that there were telephone contacts between hon. Migereko, hon. Kizige and Mr Gulume. In addition, the Bridgeway Guesthouse management told the committee that hon. Kizige had told them that he was expecting business friends.  

Even the Parliamentary Sergeant-at-Arms was informed that the PAFO meeting was likely to be disrupted and he mentioned this to the O/C, Mr Charles Oumo. The normal procedure was followed and the local security in Jinja was alerted through the chain of command. The local police are expected to provide security to members once the procedure has been followed.  

It can be concluded that there were some preparatory meetings in respect of the matter, whatever their form. The main persons implicated are Mr Kyafu and Mr Gulume. As a result of these meetings, particularly Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu could be identified as leaders, both to follow and listen to.  

According to hon. Katuntu, around three Coasters ferried people to the scene of the incident. The people brought were riotous. They were young men who looked like thugs and they were visibly drunk. They were not part of the expected audience since the expected people were leaders. These crowds did not even recognize the Members of Parliament. According to hon. Katuntu, “Most of them had bottles and they were drinking, some were soda bottles, but alcohol was smelling. You would just pass through them and it was a wave of alcohol smelling.”  

According to Mr Kanene, there was a meeting to discuss how to mobilise masses for the PAFO workshop and a budget was produced to facilitate about 100 people. He said that these people were organised genuinely and not in bad faith.
 
According to Jackson Muziira, one of the witnesses interviewed, hon. Kizige’s driver and Mr Gulume had been mobilising people in Jinja the day before the workshop. They allegedly told people to come and see Museveni at Crested Crane Hotel. Mr Muziira, appearing before the committee, said, “The group of hon. Moses Kizige and his driver, hon. Kizige was not in the vehicle but the driver of hon. Kizige and Mr Gulume from Mafubira moved before the day of the workshop and they misinterpreted that the workshop is coming to Crested Crane Hotel and even the meeting, which is going to overthrow him, is at Crested Crane Hotel.  So you come and defend your lovely President.” 

A number of witnesses, for example Mr Majid Batambuze, and the regional police commander, Mr Simon Wagama, identified the people at the scene as hooligans. The regional police commander said that he heard hooligans at the site saying, “Let us go and attack them.” According to the regional police commander, the people at the workshop included drunkards. The hooligans were so noisy, some wanted to undress hon. Salaamu Musumba. However, their colleagues from Kamuli refused.

Mr Kyafu was implicated among those who addressed the people by the RPC.  According to hon. Mafabi, Mr Gulume, Mr Kyafu and Mr Lyavala were ringleaders of the unfortunate incident. Obviously the crowds had not come to attend the workshop, because both the DPC and hon. Mafabi say they had drums. This is not a normal occurrence at a workshop of that nature. The crowds even asked the hotel management for waragi, a local brew.  

According to the officer in charge of the police station, Mr Charles Oumo, the disruptors were a group of hooligans who had taken alcohol and drugs. He said that they were not appropriately dressed for the occasion. He considered Mr Kyafu and Mr Gulume to be ringleaders of the event. 

The people at the scene were riotous in that some had taken alcohol and insisted on entering the workshop hall. Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu were certainly responsible for their presence, particularly since they insisted on entering with the crowd of the people who had no invitation letters. The resultant injuries are also indications of the fact that the crowd was riotous.

Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu are linked to bringing these people. While there were statements that open invitations were made to people over the radio and the banners reading “Join the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum …” were interpreted to mean that anybody was free to attend, this interpretation can only stand in as far as justifying the appearance of the masses. However, it did not account for the drunkenness and the ability to identify particular people as their leaders, let alone the use of force to ensure entry. An invited person is a guest and should not under any circumstances transform the invitation into an obligation for attendance.  

What follows, starting on page 37, Madam Speaker, is an analysis of the law, which the committee considers to have been breached. 

Section 65 of the Penal Code Act, and sections 66 and 67, provide for penalties. Sections 72 and 73 of the Penal Code Act also provide for penalties in respect of offences of inciting the crowd, threatening violence and disrupting a meeting. We looked at provisions, we looked at Articles – that one is important and I should actually read Article 29 of the Constitution. It states that, “Every person shall have the right to freedom of association, which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organizations.” 

So, the right to assemble is a constitutional right. PAFO was defined by the organizers as a Parliamentary Caucus. It would fall squarely under section 2(2)(b) of the Political Parties and Organizations Act, as a pressure group. So, it is legally recognized and the right to assemble is granted. This was stated to have been the correct position by the RPC, who said that the Inspector General of Police stated that enclosed meetings are legal and can be provided with security. 

Had the meeting been unlawful, that would still not have been the correct procedure for dispersing the meeting. The procedure is clearly stated in section 32(2) of the Police Act, Cap. 303. Considering that none of these procedures was followed and that the Inspector General of Police actually considered the meeting legal, the manner taken by the leaders and the DPC to handle the matter was illegal. 

We also looked at provisions, which relate to causing grievous bodily harm. These are Article 24 of the Constitution and sections 235 and 236 of the Penal Code.

Madam Speaker, finally the committee made the following observations:

• There is sufficient evidence that the disruption of the PAFO workshop in Jinja was pre-planned. However, there is also sufficient evidence that there were loopholes in the organization of the workshop such as the open mode of invitation. The disruptors, however, took advantage of the loopholes in bad faith.

• There is adequate evidence, Madam Speaker, that Mr Gulume and Mr Kyafu were ringleaders of the disruptors.

• There is evidence that hon. Migereko and hon. Kizige participated in some meetings prior to and post the disruption. However, there is hardly any evidence linking them to the commission of offences in the riot.

• There is evidence that some of the workshop organizers used provocative and abusive language, which contributed to the riot.

• The evidence on record shows that the regional police commander did a commendable job in quelling the riot. The committee observes that there was dereliction of duty by the district police commander and his approach was professionally wanting.  

• Despite allegations that the Resident District Commissioner, Mr Mugisha Muhwezi, was involved in the disruption of the meeting, there is hardly any evidence linking him to the disruption.

• The evidence of the district security officer was incoherent and his character generally elusive, and was not therefore helpful to the committee.

• The forced entry by the disruptors on grounds that everybody was invited to attend and that they had spent their time and money on transport was baseless because as earlier on observed, an invited person is a guest and should not under any circumstances transform the invitation into an obligation for attendance.

• The committee observes that the conduct of the mayor, who left after a short time after being told that he could not enter without his invitation letter, was an example to be followed.

• The hiring of young democrats by hon. Salaamu Musumba to be in charge of security at the meeting was incompatible with measures ordinarily undertaken to ensure security at such functions.

• The committee finds the evidence of the management of YMCA Annex credible and convincing, particularly in as far as they are a third party to the dispute. The manager gave a clear picture of the character of the disruptors, highlighting alcoholism and hooliganism, and so did the regional police commander.

• Some testimonies lacked adequate evidence for proof. For instance, though hon. Nandala Mafabi informed the committee that he spent US $2,000 on treatment in Nairobi, he did not adequately prove this expenditure. Similarly, though there were testimonies that people were paid to disrupt the workshop, there was no evidence to prove it.

• The committee observed that there was evidence of people being assaulted, and highly condemns this act.

Recommendations:

• Madam Speaker, the committee emphasizes that leaders are public role models and accordingly should be leaders in espousing the rule of law and good governance. They should perform their functions with a particular grace and with a peculiar dignity beyond reproach. This will give stability to our political forms, social and economic structures and help to foster harmony in our society of divergent attributes.

• The committee recommends, therefore, that all those involved in the disruption of the meeting should be brought under the due process of the law.

• Public officials should be above the play of partisan politics in carrying out their duties. The relevant authorities should, therefore, undertake appropriate disciplinary action against officials implicated as having breached their duties and obligations under the law.

• All Ugandans owe each other a duty to be tolerant of one another regardless of one’s political inclination, to maintain and foster peace and tranquility, and for the common good of our country. This should be the secret of our nation’s survival and the source of its strength.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. So, the editor of the Hansard is directed to transcribe the full text and put it on record. (Full text of the  report  can be found in the  Appendices, page 12089.)

Honourable members, this is a lengthy report and since it was presented in summary, I would recommend that members go and read it in full, go through the annextures, and then we shall have time to discuss it. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seen the report but since PAFO has merged with FDC legally, why do they not take it up? It seems we are going to investigate things, which are not there. I do understand that PAFO has merged with FDC.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is not my business. I do not know who has merged with whom. Please, let us leave that. I have already ruled that we shall discuss that when we give you time.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $5.9 MILLION FROM OPEC FUND FOR THE DELIVERY OF HIPC RELIEF IN UGANDA

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENTANDIKWA (Mr Agard Didi): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a request to borrow US $5.9 million from the OPEC fund. The report of the committee is already here.

3.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request from OPEC Fund for the delivery of the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) relief to Uganda. This loan request from OPEC Fund for HIPC relief to Uganda was brought before this House in accordance with the provisions of Article 90 and Article 159 of our Constitution, and rule 99(5) of the rules of procedure of this Parliament. The request was committed to the Committee on National Economy, and the committee now wishes to report as follows: 

The Government of Uganda accessed loans from OPEC totaling to US $25 million at the interest rate of three percent as shown below:

The second line credit to Uganda Development Bank, the value was US $6 million and the interest rate three percent; the balance is US $2.02 million. 
For Kinyara Sugar Works rehabilitation, it was US $7 million at the interest rate of three percent, and the balance is US $4.4 million. 

The health service rehabilitation got US $5 million at an interest rate of three percent, and the balance is US $4.87 million. 

The Technical Education Project got US $7 million at a rate of three percent, and the balance is US $6.39 million.

The total cost is US $25 million at the rate of three percent and the balance still outstanding is US $17.69 million.

Madam Speaker, as the negotiations went on, Uganda stopped servicing the loans in 1998 and the interest rate plus the principle has accumulated to US $5.9 million to date. 

Through the HIPC initiative, the poor countries are given relief on the loans they owe to the countries and organizations involved in the HIPC arrangement. 

Uganda accepted to get a relief of US $2 billion over a period of 20 years. On average Uganda gets about US $20 million annually from the HIPC arrangement. These are channeled to the Poverty Action Fund. 

The equivalent of relief given by such countries or donor organizations are provided for in the national budgets for the provisions of the services agreed upon, for example health and education. Uganda has accessed this facility from the following donors: IDA, International Monetary Fund, ADB/F, IFAD, NDF, EIB, BADEA and IDB. 

The following bilateral donors also offered their share of the relief: Germany, France, United Kingdom, Israel, Italy, Australia, Sweden, Finland, Norway and the United States of America. 

There are, however, some countries or other organizations that have their own laws that do not provide for writing off loans. Such organizations include OPEC, which Uganda owes US $17.69 million as shown above. 

However, OPEC agreed to extend a loan totaling to US $5.9 million, which is the total interest that has accrued to the principle since the procurement of the credits. This credit is for repayment of the interest on the existing loan and in that case Uganda’s debt stock to OPEC would be reduced. 

This was agreeable to the Government because it would deliver a net present value of US $1.6 million short of US $1.89 million fixed at the completion point.  

Observations and comments:
 
It was noted that the HIPC initiative has good intentions but have not salvaged the poor countries from high poverty levels. 

The proceeds from this loan will be used entirely for the purpose of settling maturities on the restructured loans from OPEC as and when they fall due. 

Government has to pay US $5.9 million to OPEC in order to access the soft terms on the loan facility, of zero percent interest on the old loan of US $17.69 million. This loan will, therefore, help in saving the payment of interest rate of three percent that will be used in other developments.  

Members observed that the minister promised to put a ceiling or a cap of US $200 million on new borrowings for each financial year when he was delivering his budget speech for financial year 2004/2005. The committee noted that this cap is not yet in place and that the debt strategy has not been revised since 1995. 

The money approved by Parliament this financial year is US $39.7 million for the management of mineral resource development, just one of the projects.  

The committee observed that there is poor absorption capacity of the already approved loans, which attract a service fee after some time. A copy of such disbursement is attachment as Annex 1.

Recommendations: 

1. Government should revise a debt strategy and set up the cap in order to ensure sustainability and management of the external debt burden.

2. Government should borrow for productive activities that generate revenue and add value to our local products.

3. The loans or credits procured should conform to adopted strategies like PEAP and the Millennium Development Goals.

4. The poor absorption of approved loans should be addressed urgently to avoid having idle funds that attract service fees.

5. The National Planning Authority should be involved in the development and negotiation of the development programmes to avoid duplication and waste of resources.

6. Parliament should be involved at an early stage of negotiating the loans and help in identifying priority areas for financing.

Funding:

The total funding under this loan is US $5.9 million. 

The credit facility is concessional and in line with the Government’s debt strategy and is agreeable to other development partners. 

The loan bears a service fee of one percent on the principal amount and the repayment period shall be 24 years including five years’ grace period.

Conclusion: 
The committee requests the House to approve this loan of US $5.9 million for the OPEC Fund for the HIPC debt relief initiative. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.48
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and to say that this loan is actually small. The money is to essentially help us because it came from OPEC to help a poor country like Uganda to cancel some of the loans we got.  

I look at the recommendations on page 4, “The Government should revise a debt strategy and set up a cap …” – I imagine that is the borrowing cap of US $200 million per year. But when you look at the table attached showing how much we have been borrowing - the table is on the last but one page, Annex 1, new borrowing since HIPC debt relief, 1999 to 2000 we borrowed US $310 million, 2000/2001 US $334 million, it is about 15 percent increase. Then 2001 we went from US $330 million to US $400 million, which is over 33 percent increase. Then from -(Interjection)- let me finish then you can inform me. It is up to US $507 million. In other words we are increasing and this ceiling of US $200 million –(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Actually, Madam Speaker, I am not really informing him, but we need some rescue from you because members are freezing. It is actually very cold. Some members have tried to stay but have gone out, and we might be affected because of that we do not know. Could something be done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nkuuhe, I hope the member will not take your advice.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, those who are cold are actually wearing minimal attire, and it is not yet a weekend. 

In other words, the trend has been an upward increase in the borrowing according to this record here, apart from 2003 to 2004 where I only imagine the year had not yet ended when this table was compiled. So the question is, honourable chairperson, what are you going to do if the minister borrows beyond US $200 million? What is the sanction?  

Secondly, the recommendation that Government should borrow for productive activities is very good because most of the time we are borrowing for the social sector. Whatever you put in the social sector is good but it starts producing results 40 years down the line meanwhile your economy is shrinking. So, if you look at how much we are putting into agriculture, according to the Maputo Declaration we are supposed to put in 10 percent of the budget but we are not even putting in four percent. We keep borrowing and borrowing; the economy is so small that sometimes when you try to borrow more they will say it will disturb the macroeconomic stability because your economy is so small. So, you need to expand the economy.

The other recommendation is about the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Of the eight or nine goals, if you look at the latest UNDP Report on Uganda, we are on line as far as Universal Primary Education is concerned, but on poverty we seem to be wobbling. On hunger we are not quite sure but the health indicators are really bad because you find maternal and child health, those figures are still very poor. With this recommendation here, if you borrow to fulfill the MDGs you will find that most of that will have to go into social sectors. So, that is really contradicting recommendation 2 because it is saying you should borrow mainly for productive sectors. I agree with that so that we can grow the economy. But then a lot of the Millennium Development Goals are social: to supply water, sanitation and all those kind of things.

Otherwise, if we could use this money for the purposes for which we are borrowing, generally speaking we would be a rich country. This country does not import food in a substantive way and yet poverty is increasing. If we do not use the money we borrow very productively then we shall really be in a lot of trouble. 

I support the chairperson that we should set the ceiling at US $200 million and then try to generate money internally. Because if Kenya can get 93 percent of its budget from internally generated funds, why can we not? Mind you, Kenya has about four million people who are hungry and they have to feed them, for us we do not have that kind of number to feed, so in theory we should be richer than Kenya. But Kenya funds 93 percent of its budget from its own resources and therefore can direct the development agenda. For us we have to depend, for about 50 percent of our budget, on donors. That is a very dangerous trend and really we have to change our way of doing things. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. After hearing the chairperson present this report I wondered whether if Uganda were a company it would not be in receivership. The way matters are being managed is as if we are a company in receivership and this means that if this goes on we may never get out of receivership. Very few companies will ever get managed out of receivership to development.  

The statement on top of page 2 is important. “Uganda stopped servicing the loans in 1998 and the interest has accumulated to US $5.9 million”. The question is, why did it stop servicing the loans? What have we done to enable Uganda to be able to service the loans? What guarantee do we have that after getting this loan at this time we shall be able to service it? These are questions, which are not answered by this report.

And as if that is not bad enough, then the damning recommendations come in. The observation at page 3 says, “Government has to pay US $5.9 million to OPEC in order to access the soft terms …”. So, we are really receiving a loan in order to enable us to get another loan. Surely, we need a little more explanation as to how we are going to handle a situation like this one. Yet this is happening when the same committee notes on page 5 that there is no debt strategy because we have not revised it since 1995. I wonder whether the committee ever asked the ministry to explain why this has happened. This is not contained in the report that we have. Then the committee adds, “The committee observed that there is poor absorption capacity of the already approved loans …” as if to say that although we cannot pay, we have no means to pay and we cannot even absorb what we are borrowing, we should yet borrow more. Does that make sense? Surely we need a little more explanation to be able to make a decision in this regard.  

I am worried, Madam Speaker, that this country is doing so much politics that she has forgotten the economic activities in this country. We do more politicking and we do not address the economic issues. One of these days we are going to ground to a halt. Perhaps the honourable minister present here will be able to explain why we have got such poor absorption capacity and despite those circumstances we borrow more? But since the committee in its wisdom, after all that says we should borrow this money, it should help us out. 

My next question is, what steps have you taken to ensure that this country produces in order to be able to pay its debts and also start living like other countries? We cannot yet balance our budget to that extent, we are borrowing more, we are not producing and the policies themselves are preventing us from producing. So, Madam Speaker, with those observations, I want to seek more guidance from the committee as to how we intend to move from where we are. I thank you.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Madam Speaker, honourable members, I support this motion and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, and the minister. I just have one or two questions on the report that I would like a clarification on. 

I do understand HIPC and I think one of the reasons we are having problems is because somebody has not explained HIPC to us in relation to this. If it had come out very clearly one would have realized that one of the conditions were probably to stop borrowing and stop paying certain loans and come up with some sort of short measure gaps to bring about relief for some of the debts that we have. I think if that had been explained deeply we would have understood why this has to be done. I understand that. My only worry is actually brought about, first of all I am asking the honourable chairperson to correct her report on page 2 at the bottom where she cites 5.9 percent. I was wondering whether that was not US $5.9 million? I just want to make sure we are all moving together. 

Secondly, the observation - according to her - in 3.1 it was noted that HIPC’s initiatives have good intentions but have not salvaged the poor countries from high poverty levels. It would be nice for us to be told the weaknesses of this particular initiative, which was taken on by the different countries and the World Bank, so that we probably understand it as we go along. This should not stop the borrowing of this money. I am just saying that Parliament and the committee should help us to bring these points out so that we could understand them.

My biggest worry really is about the absorption capacity. I looked at the different charts that they gave us, at a glance, and unfortunately I could not comprehend them very well. I would want the chairperson to help us and really give us an insight on this failure of our different departments to have the absorption capacity. In case of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, we are like a sponge. I would find it very difficult for us to fail to absorb anything, especially when some of our roads are in the state they are in. What are the problems? Could it be –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Well, the minister is bragging about the way they are absorbing the money and that they cannot fail to absorb it, but I think the ministry is more of a patching one. If you go to all these roads, it is like somebody having a cloth, which is now getting old and instead of buying a new one he is just putting patches and repairs on it. That is exactly what your ministry is doing. So, I do not think it is something to be very proud of, Mr Minister.

CAPT. BABU: You know, I like hon. Omara Atubo’s maverick way of description of poverty. If that is your description of our country and its ability and capacity to be able to patch up so that you can go to Lira, then it is unfortunate. But definitely one of the problems we are faced with particularly in this country is that most of our roads, especially the good ones, if it is a new road most of it is on borrowed money. We borrow money from multi-lateral organizations and we do make some of these roads. In some cases where we have to patch up, even that is borrowed. 

Hon. Omara Atubo, having known this, I wonder why he could not help us to give us a better way of doing it? I am quite sure he is a senior man in this House and he has the ability to advise and give us a way forward. I would like to thank him for that information.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, how can the National Planning Authority and the committee work together with the Executive so that they can come up with this teamwork that is suggested in 4.5 and 4.6? They said that Parliament should be involved in the early stages of negotiations of the loans and help to identify priority areas for financing. I find that rather difficult but probably the chairperson could help us and direct how they could work with the Ministry of Finance so that we could find ways of working as a team and we can achieve negotiations within the rules that we work with. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.04
MR EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the report and raise a couple of questions, which the minister can help in explaining. The first one is, the HIPC Initiative was intend to help countries, which could not meet the debt service obligations from their exports, therefore the initiative was to relieve them of that debt. But as we are talking right now –(Interruption)

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for a member of a committee to contribute to the debate? Hon. Kamuntu is a Member of the National Economy Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, are you taking issue with your report? She says you are a member of the committee.

MR KAMUNTU: Yes, I am a member of the committee, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking issue with the committee report?

MR KAMUNTU: No, I am not taking issue with the committee report. I was only helping the chairperson to respond to -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the chairperson has spoken for the entire committee.  

4.05
MRS MARGARET ATENG (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not able to give my position yet on this loan request until I am clarified on some of these issues. But before I do that I would like to know from the chairperson whether what she read on page 2, third paragraph, is US $20 million or US $80 million. I heard US $20 million and the writing here says Uganda gets about US $80 million. That is one.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the purpose of borrowing this money is for us to be able to pay interest on loans. I find this very disturbing. I concur with the committee when it says that we should get involved in productive sectors. So, for this purpose I would have loved to know from the committee how the sector for which the money was initially borrowed has performed. We need to be upraised so that we know how money borrowed is put to use and to also know whether it has been used efficiently.

Lastly, it has been the request of many members in this house that we should be updated on how indebted we are. I feel it is really necessary for us to know this so that in future when we are handling loan requests we know how to proceed on this matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, when the 1995 Constitution gave the constitutional duty to Parliament to approve any borrowing, it was not because the Government would just get away with it. It was not a matter of formality to let Parliament approve loans. This constitutional responsibility is based on two historic reasons. 

One is that as a matter of oversight by Parliament, you should not involve the country in matters of such financial gravity without the sanctions of Parliament, and also issues of corruption and so on. But more important is the fact that borrowing has landed most third world countries into serious economic crisis. If we want to look at our Gross Domestic Product (GDP), put it against what we have borrowed, then look at our debt servicing ratio and our ability to do so, and so on, you may actually find that what hon. Kawanga is saying is that we are in a state of liquidation as a country. But of course a country is not a private company, which you can just liquidate like that.  

So, I want to thank the committee for its report, but the committee has this time been rather brief but very succinct in that it has brought out all that we in Parliament need to know. In other words, they have recommended approval of this loan but subject to our recommendations; and that is what I really want - in a minute - to conclude with. 

Parliament should not take approval or request by the Government for loan borrowing as a matter of formality. I have been in this Parliament for a number of years, I am subject to correction, but I do not remember any occasion when this Parliament rejected any serious borrowing. We might have postponed it but later it is corrected and returned. In other words, basically when government comes with a request for borrowing we tend to approve.  

It is also important for us to know that we have talked about the absorptive capacity of these loans. We need to know the records. How much have we borrowed, especially in this Seventh Parliament, and how much has been disbursed? How much has been utilized, and has it been utilized to our satisfaction? I do not want to drive on Kampala-Lira road through Luweero and I find people very busy patching up the road with gravel. 

You know that if you travel along that road you see a lot of potholes. The ministry and the contractors are very busy; the same contractors I see on that road every year. I do not know whether it is a modern method to repair roads with gravel and with murram. You find a tarmac road and murram is being put there. When it rains then the potholes are re-opened. I do not know whether we are using our local funds for this or is it money that is borrowed? And this is really what I want Parliament to be strict about. The money, which we borrow, is it being properly used? Because it is also possible that that loan can be misused.  

So I conclude by saying that the issues, which the committee has raised, need to be followed up because it is just not a matter of writing this report and we keep quiet. The observations, comments and their recommendations are very fundamental and they go very deep in addressing the issue of our borrowing. I do hope that when we are going to borrow again, these issues that have been raised by the committee should first be addressed before we handle any future borrowings. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, I do recollect that this House rejected some loan applications because we were not satisfied with how they were going to be used. That we have done, and I think the capacity is also picking up. 

The other matter relates to the report on our indebtedness. I know that the Budget Committee brought a report here but perhaps it was too close to the budget. Perhaps we need to find separate time for it? I, however, know that the Budget Committee brought a report on our indebtedness here.

4.13
MR ROGERS MATTE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. The way I see the objective of this loan, it is in the interest of making sure that the loan is serviced for the remaining period so that it can all be paid, and the terms that were agreed and the time of borrowing can be adhered to. I have a few comments I would like to make. 

When I look at the way the loan was used, a big percentage of it - more than half - had been given to enterprises, which were supposed to make some economic returns, like the second line credit to UDB and the Kinyara Sugar Rehabilitation. Those two took US $13 million, according to the value here on page 1. When you look at the balance in terms of the payment, those two are having a smaller amount of the balance that has to be paid as compared to the other part of the loan, which went to health service rehabilitation and that which went to the Technical Education Project. It is an indication that the loans we get perform much better when they are given to activities associated with the private sector or things to do with activities involved in production of marketable products.  

When I turned to the appendices, there is a table, Annex 1, which shows the sectoral loan disbursement from 1999 to 2003. I looked at the way the loans we have got have been distributed to the various sectors; I still notice that the private sector has not been given much attention during the borrowing. 

For instance the private sector here we see has received 3.8 percent from 1999 up to 2003, yet sectors like health, which are for consumption purposes, have received 10 percent, yet we do not expect an economic return immediately from there despite the fact that health contributes to economic growth. 

So, my recommendation is that our government should consider giving more priority to private sector development loans than social service projects because we expect that those loans given to the private sector will perform much better than the ones in the other sectors.  

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, let me also mention one aspect concerning our borrowing as a country. I was made to understand that since we became a British Protectorate, up to the time when our government was led by the Movement Government, if you compare the two periods, this period under the Movement Government has borrowed much more money than was borrowed in those other years. So, I do not know –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much. It is also important to look at the level of development since 1928 up to the time when we got independence, and since independence to 1986. Look at the infrastructure, level of development and other benefits Ugandans have got. The lots of money we are talking about has gone to UPE, has gone to tarmac roads, has gone to health centers, to mention but a few. So, I think that level of borrowing - we actually need about twice as much to accomplish what the Movement would like to do in the next ten years. Thank you.

MR MATTE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. I am not objecting to what you have said but all we are saying is that whatever loans we get we should make sure that we contribute to sustainable development of the country. Probably as Ugandans we need to go ahead and compare, for the case of developments, which loans have performed more than the others over those two periods. It is not the subject of discussion now but we could go into it.

And we should also note that as we grow, if you look at the curve of growth you realize that there is a time when there is deterioration, the rate of growth reduces. The rate at which you grow will go on decreasing but increasing at a decreasing rate. That now calls for our planner to look at the causes of that deterioration because there is a possibility of reducing that deterioration such that the rate of growth does not reduce at an increasing rate and the deterioration does not increase. In other words we should be able to register increasingly growing GDP and growth in other sectors. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.21
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for what it has brought up as a key area and a very important one. First of all on recommendation 4.1, I do believe that government strategy on debt servicing will depend mostly on the situation analysis of how this money has been borrowed and how it has been dealt with in addition to accountability and transparency. The moment you analyze this, you get a value chain analysis. You are able to identify the key areas where you need to invest more, and actually the committee has put up a very serious recommendation that the Government should look into. It will help us to lessen the debt burden we have.

Another point I want to supplement is economic returns. As we are going into the East African Federation I think the Government should identify the key areas, particularly in industries, for more productivity. You find that these private sector industries, for instance, government must look into a way of how the production capacity could be cheaper. It could even put more money into power as a key area for subsidisation so that industries can prosper with a cost of production, which is cheaper.

I also think that the Ministry of Finance should work in conformity with the National Planning Authority, as the committee recommends in 4.5. They have to work in conjunction with each other because these are the people who are going to get the plans of the Government and ensure that they are followed up. They have the technical committee to see to it that at least what the current Government recommends as a programme and plan are achieved, and this is a very important point. The Ministry of Finance should look into it and implement this.  

Parliament also has an oversight function since sometimes you find that the negotiation of the loans needs deeper and wider consultation. The members, representatives of the people, should actually know what is going on and they have to give an input, which can help in negotiation of the loans, like good percentage of interest, in order to take a business and financial decision where government can invest a lot. Thank you.

4.24
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of failing to service the loan is what is causing us this problem now. This is exactly the operation of these international financial institutions. When they realize that you have failed to pay the interest or the loan, they lure you into a trap of getting another loan in order to pay back their loan. But this is something that should not be allowed to operate in an ailing economy like ours. They are telling us that, “We shall be able to now advance you other loans at zero percent”, but what is the interest? 

The interest of this US $5.9 million, which we are going to borrow, is not zero percent. It is just to lure you such that you are able to borrow more money from them because these are people who are driven by their profit motives. So, I think as other members have already stated categorically here, you must bring the people who led to the failure of servicing these loans, to account. What happened? It is going to cost us a lot of money now in this process. It is just failure in debt management policy. If you had a proper debt management policy this situation would not have arisen.

Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the minister about the proposed ceiling of the loans that we intend to acquire, of US $200 million. What was the criteria of arriving at this? I do not know whether you did explain this to the committee or the chairperson. What was the criteria of arriving at this US $200 million?

Have we looked at our export projections vis-à-vis the import projections over the next year when you are proposing to put the ceiling here? And when is this ceiling effective? The committee has put it that since 1995 the debt management strategy has not changed. Why has this happened? The committee is lamenting here: we have low absorption capacity. You have identified this and it has been going on for so many years. If you look at the annextures, it has been running for some time. Now we are only speculating on putting in place a ceiling. I do not know whether this is a strategy to address this problem.

Madam Speaker, the issue of absorption capacity is a big problem. When you look at these annextures, out of all the total loans of about US $1.7 billion, it is only 46 percent, which has been disbursed. And we want to get more loans yet we cannot even absorb 50 percent of the total loans? What are you doing to improve on our absorptive capacity in order to enable us borrow more money? I need the honourable minister to clarify this issue to the House.  

When you look at this, you do realize that agriculture, which you always keep praising as the backbone of this economy, is only getting 4.4 percent of the total disbursement. That is 4.4 percent of the 46 percent. I need clarification on this from the honourable minister, Madam Speaker, before I can accept to support this loan. Thank you.

4.30
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for this very serious report.  

You will realise that this particular loan has attracted a lot of contributions. It is because their recommendations, the observations and the comments made on this loan are very provoking. I am particularly concerned, perhaps I should say I am thankful to the lenders of the money to this country who in spite of reading these observations, comments and recommendations and our failure to have the money disbursed, can still go ahead and lend us more money. This calls upon us to pull up our socks and it is for this reason that I am rising to request this House, which plays an oversight function over the expenditure of the Executive for the development of this country, to go a little bit further and act on this very report.

Figures show that the poverty level in this country is increasing. When you look at the amount of money borrowed, although the totals and the debt burden has not been brought to our attention - and I would like to request that the committee should in the near future help us extract the total burden from the Government and from the Ministry of Finance. It is a shame to see that our level of borrowing is increasing while at the same time our people are getting poorer and poorer. And then we are informing ourselves, the country and the world that we do not have the capacity to utilise and absorb this money? This is a very serious observation in this House.

I would like to ask the ministry to explain to me and to explain to us where the problem is. When you come to the House to borrow the money, you give conditions and reasons fully justifiable and the whole Parliament is convinced that we need the loan, and we are given lucrative conditions. What happens after we have approved the loan? I think this House should take the Government, especially the Ministry of Finance, to task. 

I, therefore, want to go ahead and propose that as we approve this loan - and I have no doubt we are going to approve it because if by passing this loan we can access more HIPC funds for debt relief, I have no worry with that. However, my specific request to the committee and to the Ministry of Finance is to organise a comprehensive workshop for the House in the near future so that we can sit down and exchange ideas, in a nationalistic and free atmosphere, on the debt burden and then the absorption of the debts. 

What is wrong? Is it the capacity? Is it the political will? Are we being sabotaged by the civil servants? Do we have the political capacity and the will? Are we being diverted into more politicking than development? I think I can only have these questions answered not on the limited five minutes of contribution here and the response of the minister, but in a comprehensive workshop so that the utilisation and the disbursement of money can be explained to us.

I used to belong to the Committee of Natural Resources and year in year out we recommended that the mineral sector is a productive sector for the economy and that more money should be sunk into it so that our economy can improve. 

When I look at the list of disbursement and I realise that the loan we approved for the mineral sector is not utilised, I feel disheartened. That is why I am recommending that we interact and hold more dialogue so that we can move together; and I hope during that time, we shall put the politics aside –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Biira Bwambale, for giving way. I am a member of this committee and the information I want to give concerns the request and the concern by the members of the committee over this very matter you are raising. These concerns have been raised by members of the committee and we think that we need a deeper understanding of the way our loans are being utilised and the way our loans are being directed particularly where we think that they should be directed. I want to emphasize this need to the minister because at one time it had been promised and it was cancelled. We were not given an adequate explanation. We only speculated that the ministry would not want us to know more about these loans. So, I am happy that this issue has also been raised on the Floor of the House. We call upon the ministry to organize and avail its technical staff to tell us what really is the problem. Thank you very much.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much for supporting my contribution. I will go ahead and move at an appropriate time, to support hon. Omara Atubo that we put an embargo on borrowing so that the minister can only come here to borrow more money, or Government should come here to borrow more money in a sector that is productive. We should also give a timeframe for the utilisation of the funds that we have borrowed and if that is breached, then we do not continue borrowing money that is not being utilised.

My second area of observation is on the recommendation of the failure of government to adequately utilise the National Planning Authority. Madam Speaker, honourable members, it took us so long after passing the Constitution to have the National Planning Authority in place. And many of us who advocated for the National Planning Authority to be in place and to be adequately funded were hoping that the Authority would help us to absorb and utilize the little resources we have, optimally. It is very sad to be informed by our own committee, to realize that the National Planning Authority is being marginalised. 

I attended the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) workshop for Members of Parliament and the Chairperson of the National Planning Authority presented a paper. He lamented that even in the revision of the PEAP as a major policy of government, the National Planning Authority was being marginalised. Honourable minister, what is happening? Can you explain to us? In fact I would be very grateful if the National Planning Authority was also invited to attend the proposed workshop so that all the stakeholders play a complementary role. Ours is legislative, the Executive implements and initiates a policy, and then the institutions that are supposed to assist in this problem can be together so that the following and the remaining years of our five-year time of the Seventh Parliament can be better utilised.

Finally, the sector of tourism; the Chairperson of the Trade, Tourism and Industry Committee is going to speak after me. Madam Speaker, I am very disappointed at the way our NRM Government is neglecting the sector of tourism development. It is high time we realized that tourism development is a very competitive sector. I would love to see, hon. Minister of Finance, the next borrowing to be for the sector of tourism development so that we can reduce the debt burden.  

On HIPC debt relief, I was in the United Kingdom and I was questioned, “Why is Uganda’s capacity to borrow multiplying when HIPC was supposed to alleviate the debt burden, but instead the debt is tripling? Is it worth it continuing with debt relief if by giving debt relief more debts are going to be incurred?” We are raising these issues in bits because we are time-constrained, but if we were in a workshop as I have proposed, we would be able to expound on these issues, which we are raising. Thank you very much.

4.40
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will confine myself to three issues. 

The first one, reading through this report I get the impression that the committee did not consult any stakeholder on this issue of the debt burden. For example the Uganda Debt Network would be an extremely important stakeholder to consider. Normally the reports, which come to this House, indicate the people that the committee invited to listen to, to have their input, to discuss and to give recommendations –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give, because every member is pointing it out, is that the budget framework that we had on the indicative figures, which had short-term and long-term of 2004 and 2005, it had all those figures showing the debt we are incurring and the amount we are expecting to spend. It was brought and tabled by the Budget Committee. The only problem, which is in place now, since the National Planning Authority came into place, is that it has a basis of long-term and short-term periods so this money can be utilized in such a range. Otherwise, the Budget Committee brought those reports and they were given to us. We have the figures.

DR NABWISO: Thank you for that information, but I am not sure whether you understood my point. My point is that when Parliamentary committees meet to discuss any issue, they give chance to interested parties in the issue that is being discussed to come and give their input to what is being discussed. 

Of course when we are talking about debt relief or strategies to deal with our debts, there are many interested parties in that subject. This is why this report, in my view, if we were serious we would not discuss it; we would throw it out. We would request these people to go and do their homework again, invite all the people that are interested; the chief stakeholders in this subject, and give us their inputs–(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I did not want to interrupt hon. Dr Nabwiso, but the procedure on loan requests, which are normally brought by the Ministry of Finance, is that unlike a Bill brought before Parliament which will have a lot of stakeholders, the Ministry of Finance is obliged to come before the committee and maybe the concerned sector. In this particular case where money will utilized by various sectors by borrowing through the banks, maybe it would have been the banks to come before the committee to say they need these monies to be taken out there. But for loans, the procedure is that we normally interact with the Ministry of Finance and the sector minister or ministry interested in this money. This is not normally the same procedure for discussing a Bill. I thought I should just highlight that so that we are not looked at as if we did not do our job. I think we did our job.

DR NABWISO: Thank you for that information. I hope the chairperson will clarify to us which sector ministries were invited to discuss whether these loans were wanted or not. I think this is the issue that I am trying to raise. But what I am also trying to emphasize here is that the civil society and these NGOs, which have been talking about the increasing debts to this country, ought to be brought in discussions as our partners.

I want to move on to the next issue, which has already been elaborated on by colleagues, and these are the recommendations contained in section 4.1 to 4.6. I know that the government can easily ignore these recommendations, and what I want to ask the committee is, supposing the Government does not pay any attention to these recommendations, what shall we do next? Maybe it may be necessary in the future for this Parliament to come out with specific conditions upon which Parliament will accept to discuss loan requests. These conditions should be clearly spelt out and satisfied. The absorption capacity and all these should be pre-conditions before Parliament considers another loan request.

The last point, Madam Speaker, is that in the last two days some us who are members of the Agriculture Committee have been having discussions with the President of Uganda on the Cotton Sub-sector and the general economy in this country. I think time has come and even His Excellency, the President has agreed, that we need to review the economic strategies of this country including these loans, which we are getting, and how they are impacting on the economy. I think this is the right time for this committee to seriously consider how these loans are really impacting on the economy. Whether we are mortgaging this country forever we should also say so, so that we sell our shares either to Kenyans - I do not know who will buy Uganda, and we call it a day.  Madam Speaker, I thank you.

4.59
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start off by thanking the committee for a good report. I will make one observation to begin with - the arithmetic on page 2 where Uganda expects to get relief of US$2 billion in 20 years. So, arithmetic suggests we get an average of about US$100 million per year.  I do not know why they are saying US$80 million; maybe I will need some more clarification there.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, there are many issues that have been raised by my colleagues, but as you are aware, our economy is controlled by some of these other institutions outside Uganda, like the Briton Wood Institutions, namely, IMF and World Bank. They recommend things like structural adjustments, retrenchment, liberalizing your economy and all that. Of late some of them have been realised to be bad. I do not know whether Government is seriously thinking about shifting from that paradigm prescribed by IMF and we get one, which is either home grown or borrowed from some other countries.  

I am happy we are still creditworthy, but as my colleagues have asked, what is the maximum debt per capita ratio? How much should we borrow to know that we have gone beyond? I wish to support the recommendation of the committee that in case Government has borrowed it should spend it in the productive activities. This has also been the recommendation of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

Tourism, trade, industry, natural resources, those are indeed productive sectors.  But I am aware the lenders normally dictate the terms as to where we should spend the money. It is high time Government comes up with a strong stand about this borrowing. Either we suspend – we cannot say suspend paying back - but we have to sit down and negotiate with the lenders so that we find the best way out of this vicious circle of borrowing to pay interest; not to pay the loan but to pay interest accrued on the principle.

Madam Speaker, it is now an established fact that borrowing alone is not a solution, it cannot bring about development. There are some contradictions, however, Madam Speaker, in 4.4. The Committee mentions that the poor absorption of approved loans should be addressed urgently to avoid having idle funds. What happens to these idle funds, Madam Speaker, where are they? Are they taken back, are they somewhere lying there? So, I still need some more clarification on where these idle funds are, and what happens in that case.

Then also in 4.5, the committee informs us about the programmes to avoid duplication and wastage of resources. Maybe we needed some more information on where there is such duplication. When we are talking about the National Planning Authority, I do not know whether we are going back to central planning or is the Authority to coordinate and regulate the plans by various sectors? That one is still not very clear at least from the way I followed discussions.  

The conclusion of the committee is that the House approves this loan. Sincerely, it is a pathetic situation; we should borrow the money and pay interest on the loan. I support their conclusion.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I am very grateful to the committee, but, Madam Speaker, the committee mentioned clearly that we are going to borrow this money to pay an interest, then they finally gave us a small chart, an Annex 1, which stipulates a number of amounts of monies that have been borrowed for various reasons. Madam Speaker, if this paper here is taken to my constituency, it may be very difficult for them to agree with the committee though under a very complicated situation that we imagined we are going to be able to borrow this money and pay back the interests of the loan.  

Madam Speaker, I will give you at least one component of the items in Annex 1. In budget support alone, we used close to US $ 75 million for structural adjustment within a short period of time, and I cannot understand where all this money went. 

In the next item, Agricultural Sector, a lot of money to the tune of US $ 8 million, was given to Lake Victoria Environmental Management Plan (LVEMP). Madam Speaker, I live both in Lake Victoria and along the shores of Lake Victoria, but if you evaluate what LVEMP has done with this money, most especially at the time when we are supposed to come to this House again for the approval of such monies, it may be difficult for us to talk about it today. 

Worst of all there is the Cotton Development Authority taking close to US $ 3 million for what they thought and what they convinced this country to do that we are seeing the outcomes today.  

Madam Speaker, there is electricity generation with a tune of US $ 69 million and this money has been disbursed and you know what we are going through today. 

Technical education in the Education Sector: Madam Speaker, I hope the shoddy work and poorly completed work that was done in Busitema National College was not a result of this money that I am seeing here.  

There is also the issue of environment, which has taken a total of US $ 25 million on Environmental Management I, Environmental Management II, Environmental Management III and the like. Madam Speaker, I do not know how the committee came to finally resolve - maybe through pain as the one we are feeling now, but it is very difficult to understand such kinds of things. 

In the Health Sector alone there was disbursement of around US $ 29 million for Nutrition and Early Childhood. One of my sub-counties happened to benefit from this project. But I can assure you that apart from some two cups of porridge that each family kid gets in that sub-county, which was given to them during that period of time, we can only boast of a small community centre. And if you look at all the money that was given to that sub-county, you cannot stand here and approve of any loan before knowing how best that loan is going to help the economy.  

There is something to do with water development. Under this very sector some monies were distributed to the tune of US $ 21 million.  Because of time, Madam Speaker, I will only say that as a representative of the people, if I reflect what this money has done to my constituency and to my district in particular - Madam Speaker, we come from the same area - you will come and see what has basically happened there. I can assure you all these monies have been spent, but today we are still at a level of 29 percent of the total Government consumption of 65 percent in the water sector. We do not even know whether or not - just as you have given us this paper, we are supposed to take them to our constituents and they will look at it. I do not know what they will tell me, and what I will come with in this area. I understand the situation that we are going through; it is a question of getting this money to pay the debt. 

But, Madam Speaker, I think somebody somewhere is letting this Government down. Since our friends thought of coming down to this House to seek permission before they borrow more money, I think it is high time we helped this Government know what is not going in some of these sectors, 

Madam Speaker, the story is so sad, and I think the people who are letting this Government down, this very good Government that we trust, that everybody is trying his or her best to see that it is here and it remains here and it becomes an example, those who are letting it down, those who are heading these sectors brought to book to answer for these things.  

Madam speaker, if you look at the last paper here, which is Annex 1 -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ochieng, I think you have made the principle that you do not appreciate how the money is being utilized because you are going to go through the entire paper and we do not have time.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I will wind up in a very short time. If you look at Annex 1, it says “New Borrowing since HIPC Debt Relief”, you will look at the percentages of disbursement and you will see those, which carry 100 percent disbursement are purely under Second Poverty Eradication Support Credit. It is 100 percent; others have been marginalized. When people are saying there are some monies lying idle, look at the whole paper, you will see areas, which have taken the biggest interest and it is something to do with either Uganda HIPC loan or poverty eradication. You can imagine who has been given all 100 percent of this money if our people in some areas of this country are still too poor and cannot even afford slippers.  

There is also this money for energy for rural transformation. A lot of money, as you can see, is idle and people are still in darkness and there is no electricity and we are borrowing more money! 

Madam Speaker, I will support this motion today and this request by Government, but I still really think something has to be done to bring those who are sabotaging this Government to book.  I thank you very much.

5.02
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to assure my good friend, hon. Ochieng, that the situation is not so sad; we should have morale and fight on. 

I support the Chair of the Committee and the Committee for the conclusion that we should borrow this loan for the purpose already stated. Having said that, Madam Speaker, I want to make some brief comments on very significant statements made by hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Matte and hon. Loyce Bwambale. 

First, the question of absorption and accountability as put by hon. Omara Atubo could not be best stated. Definitely, we must track money and see if we are absorbing it and if we are getting the result. We must also account, both the Executive and Parliament, to the people because when we pass a loan it is not just the Executive; it is a loan passed to help the people and we the Back Benchers and the Front Benchers act on behalf of the people and we should account to them. 

I think, Madam Speaker, absorption should be tracked by both parties. I am happy that in this Parliament colleagues, using the committees have been going out to the countryside to see what is going on in the hospitals, in the Water Sector.  We should use that same opportunity to track absorption. When ministries come to us to present their budget for the year, we should be interested - “You Ministry you got a loan in year X, it is three years down the line, have you absorbed this money?” I think in that way we will keep everybody on their feet and things will get even better. 

Secondly, I want to support what hon. Matte said about the sectors in which we invest, and in so doing I hope that we will persuade the chair of the committee to do something about paragraph 4.2, which says that Government should borrow for productive activities that generate revenue and add value to the local products. 

Hon. Maate talked about balancing the sectors. If we put so much in the social sector, how much do we put in agriculture, how much do we put in power? I think that is the way to go. If we pass this recommendation, unless the definition of productive activities and revenue generation is re-defined, we could have a problem at our next stage when we need to pass a loan, because to produce, you need human input, you need healthy people, you need people who are enterprising and if you do not invest in people you cannot move. So, I think the issue as hon. Matte put it is balancing; how much have we put in this sector, is it balanced with another sector?  If we only go only, that is agriculture, power, we will have a problem, Madam Speaker.  

The third point, which was made very strongly by hon. Loyce Bwambale is the question of us deepening our knowledge about debt, one could not agree with her more. I understand, Madam Speaker, I missed the occasion that in Parliament we were launching a second Capacity Building Project for Parliament.  What capacity are we building for Parliament? It must be capacity to have oversight, it must be capacity to follow the debt question, and we hold many seminars in many sectors but I think this is central.  So, I do hope that this seminar, which I also support, which should not be for just one day or two days, even if we sit for a whole week. I do hope that this seminar can be financed by that project, the Capacity Building Project for the Parliament of Uganda, then we know that the money whether it is a grant to a loan is really helping us to build real capacity. 

When we asked the hon. Minister to come and give to us a revised Debt Strategy, for us to be in position to judge him or her we need our own strategy. We need to look at the strategy that exists before the Minister comes, we could tick it and when he comes we can have an equal debate. Otherwise if we depend on only the Minister, it will not be an equal contest and we may not make the correct decisions. So, I also strongly support this issue of the seminar because yesterday we were here, people were saying we should borrow money to give subsidy to crops. Now if we borrow, here is the reality today that the debt is climbing, so shall we sustain that proposal?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. colleagues who have said poverty is biting, but for the sake of record I would like to advise as follows: First, overall poverty has been falling. It was at the highest level of 54 percent when it was first accessed I think in 1992. It fell to 35 percent and then I think about –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way, and thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, yesterday we had a social evening with the second highest person in this country, who is the Vice President of Uganda. He has been moving to villages, he even went to the extent of entering into a – he was narrating all those things, Madam Speaker. He was telling us that people are sleeping on the ground, people are being bitten by jiggers, people have nothing to do, people are almost walking naked, people are just going without food, people have no shelter, people are poor, and according to him we must wake up as leaders and help these people. 

But when you read the last page of this statement, on money borrowed in 2003/2004 from IPAD, Rural Financial Services Programme, US $ 19.993204 million; this I think is meant for rural financial services. But according to this report, nothing has been disbursed to these rural areas so that they also come out of this miserable situation they are in. Now, hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga, what shall we do?  What should we tell our people? 

Last time, when we went for a workshop in Mombasa, we were discussing with some Kenyan Members of Parliament and we were asking them, how has your new government helped the people? One leader - I do not know whether she was supporting Kibaki’s Government or not – said that first of all, they exempted them from paying the old loans from micro-finance projects, and they re-lent them new loans. They gave them new loans in rural areas and they have managed to clear their gardens, they have managed to produce and they are paying at a very minimal interest rate, which I think is a good example we should follow and see to it that our people come out of this miserable situation they are in. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have really smuggled a contribution. I thought you are taking issue with the National Political Commissar (NPC) as to whether he is right to say that poverty has gone down. I thought that is what you are really asking.  Are you agreeing with him that overall poverty has gone down –(Interjection)- no, you leave; you have finished you contribution.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I have nothing useful to add to what you have just said. When we say poverty is 54 per cent, what does it mean? That for every other person in the country - that alone was bad enough, even when we say 35 or 38 per cent, that is still a very serious situation. But for communication purposes, I think we need to appreciate that the situation is bad, but it is getting better. So, when we go to 35 per cent, then we get a slip back to 38 per cent, our anxiety now should be to watch where we shall be when they do the next survey. If it goes on to 40 per cent, then we are going in the wrong direction.  

Madam Speaker, really some of the reasons for poverty are there for us to see. Because when you disaggregate these poverty levels by region, you will find that Northern Uganda is upwards of 60 per cent. Two out of every three people are living below the poverty line, and the biggest contribution there is the security problem. The money is there; NUSAF is there, NAP I and NAP II were there, but we could not get the achieved objectives because of the situation there. So, Madam Speaker, I support the Chairperson, but I request that paragraph 4.2 be reconsidered. Thank you.

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENTANDIIKWA)(Mr Agard Didi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the job well done and to thank colleagues for their contributions.  Basically everybody has accepted the need for this loan to be accessed. Somebody has asked why the loan was not paid since 1998. If you look carefully in the committee report, it was indicated clearly that when we joined the HIPC, not everybody was paid at the same time because we had to agree who was entitled and who was not entitled. But since then, we are performing in all our payments on HIPC except this particular loan.  

Somebody also asked, why borrow to borrow? I think again in the papers it was clearly explained that if you discharge this obligation, then you will go under the HIPC arrangement to go back to borrowing at zero instead of at three per cent. So, we would have that three per cent saved for other activities.  

Somebody said, why was the loan fixed for US$500 million? I think this was in our discussions with our donor partners. I think for debt sustainability a figure was arrived at so that for us to continue, for our economy not to under-perform, for the next few years you should have this kind of money. All these are agreements, which were agreed on.  

I do accept what my colleague, the NPC said.  Maybe we need a kind of a seminar so that everybody is brought on board in this question of debt sustainability. We shall look forward to ensuring that this is done so that we bring in people who can give us all the briefs, because I can stand here and be briefed by my officials, but that does not make me an expert. So, I think it is important for a teaching so that we all sit and have all these matters resolved. But for purposes of answering –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister, for giving way. I would like you to inform me at what rate the US$5.9 million we are borrowing will be paid; is it at zero per cent or is at one per cent? I would also like to know from you, as a Member of the Executive branch, why you decided to facilitate a businessman with US$10 million to fund projects whose business viability has not been assessed, and now you are calling on us to borrow US$5.9 million, yet it seems we have the capacity to pay some of this money without borrowing.

DR NKUUHE: What I have, Madam Speaker, is a bit of information and I want a clarification from the minister. This capacity to absorb, some of it is actually a number of factors. But some of it you find that even when you get money, because of some conditionalities from the donors, they say you are going to disturb the macroeconomic stability. In fact, that is a critical thing because sometimes you have resources, but you cannot access them because of these conditionalities.  

I am a member of Hunger Task Force and when I stepped outside there was a conference, we were talking because our report is ready, and they told us that resources would be available. But the question we still ask is, if you give us resources but we cannot access them because of all these conditionalities, of what help is this? So, Mr Minister, are there negotiations to ensure that this so-called macroeconomic stability, all these so-called ceilings are determined in a way that helps us rather than in a way that ties us down?

MR AGARD DIDI: Madam Speaker, I thank colleagues for those questions. But it is our practice and it is even in our rules that, if you want a question on a specific matter, raise a substantive question so that the minister goes and does a research.  Like the example of my brother, hon. Wandera, since we are dealing with a specific item, I would appreciate if his question came by way of a substantive question for an answer so that it is properly researched because I do not have all the facts on my fingertips here.  

Secondly to my brother, hon. Nkuuhe, I have already agreed that it is necessary for us to have a workshop so that all these issues are raised, because that will be the time for the Executive to interact not only with colleagues, but we will also bring on board stakeholders or other people in planning so that there is a comprehensive approach.I think in that way, we would be doing a more wholistic justice to all the issues.

 But coming back to the matter under discussion, when you say again, is OPEC known for production? You know, somebody has asked us a question. Of course, you know OPEC is supporting the HIPC thing, but you know OPEC is an organisation of the oil producing countries. And you know that for our tractors, for all the transport fuel is a basic requirement. So, you can tie it in, like the NPC has said. If you ignore education, if you ignore health, you may find that you are not addressing the question of production comprehensively, because you need all those additives. That is all I can say.

Now, when you say we are borrowing too much, again in that workshop this is where I think we should seek answers, but I can say a few things. At around independence, our population was around ten million, now we are 26 million. We have new programmes like the UPE, even the cost of public administration, let alone these specific sectors like roads and so on. When you see the amount of activities going in water sector and so on, you will find that our commitments are much larger than if our economy was much smaller. 

In fact, on that note, Mr Mutuluuza, when you talk about one figure on the schedule, I think that figure refers to funds earmarked for the micro finance outreach programme, and the reason why maybe it was rated here as zero was because the disbursement or the implementation is through a private company, but it is a Government subsidiary company. But I will get more details and if necessary, I will interact with you so that we come back on that one.

Already somebody, I think it was hon. Ateng Otim, said that she was not comfortable until we attach all the loans we have borrowed. There are schedules to this very report, which shows monies borrowed recently. But if there is need for us to go further back and bring a bigger up-date, I will make sure that the ministry works on that and reports to this House.

When you talk about nothing to support local entrepreneurs, this is not the total budget, this is the borrowed component and I think we should – in any case, all appropriation is done by the House. I think those are the questions we should ask, why is this percentage not going when we go either by ministry approvals. But right now, when we are dealing with a particular case, it may not be easy to answer you specifically.

Finally, I do agree with the NPC that the recommendations of the committee are good, except that 4.2 should be rephrased to accommodate this value addition and productivity as a priority, but also bringing on board auxiliary activities incidentally thereto. I believe that this is a very simple request and the committee has done a good job. I recommend that we do approve the motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister.

5.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank Members for their comments and concerns. Hon. Nkuuhe was worried about what would happen if Government borrows - I would like to point out one thing. It is not the committee, which recommended the cap at US$200 million, it is the honourable Minister in his budget speech and during that time, he even mentioned that the debt levels are not sustainable.  So, we are taking him on his word. But, when we went in depth, he had an escape route. He said, “The debt strategy has not been revised.”  Now, Government cannot borrow without our approval, so we have to agree on how we move forward and I am glad that even Government is accepting that the debt levels are not sustainable. 

Why did we stop? That is the problem; we simply did not have money to pay. Honourable members, I think we are entangled in a debt trap. We are borrowing this US$5.9 million to pay interest, and as it has been stated, it will be paid at any interest debt of one per cent. But this one will enable us - there is no new money being borrowed by the way, I hope you followed very clearly. This one will help us to get a relief on the old loan of US$17.69 million, which previously we have been charged at three per cent now it will be zero per cent.  

Hon. Babu wanted to know the weaknesses in HIPC.  They are very many. The purpose of HIPC was really to help Government stop borrowing. Have we stopped borrowing? Two, the assumption was that, once you are relieved, this money you do not pay will go for the PAF programmes. It is clearly demonstrated by this loan, but there is no money to pay.  Therefore, even if they relieve you of this, you will not have extra money to go into the PAF fund.  So, we need to look at HIPC closely and really evaluate it and see how we are going to benefit.  

How can Parliament work with the Executive as far as loans are concerned and identification of priorities is concerned? I will answer that at the end because they are related.  

Page 2, hon. Ateng Otim, it is US$80 million, I did not say US$20 million and somebody asked why we are getting US$80 million instead of US$100 million according to arithmetic. Government expects about US$2 billion, that is just an expectation, and this US$80 million per year is just an average; it could be more, it could be less.  

How have the sectors for which you have brought this money performed? Honourable members, your good committee is doing a very good job. As we speak now, we have tasked the Ministry of Finance – yes, the debt status report was laid before Parliament, but the performance of these loans, the constraints why the loans are not being disbursed as expected have not been explained to this Parliament. We have asked the Ministry of Finance to come up with a status report, explaining the reasons why we are borrowing money yet there is money redundant somewhere somehow. So, we are going ahead, we are not sleeping. And I will inform you, as you are aware, there are many loan requests which have been presented before this House, and we are putting Government to task to clearly explain to this nation the viability and importance of these loans.

The constitutional review, hon. Omara Atubo, it is this Parliament, which is mandated to approve all these loans and I think we are playing a very big role. But as far as utilisation and performance after we have passed this loan is concerned, Parliament has really played a very marginal role and we are requesting Government in that collaboration that Parliament should not stop at only approving loans, but we should go ahead and monitor some of the impact, some of the achievements on the ground and we are serious about this one. 

For those loans, which have been acquired in phases, we have put it as one of the conditions that we must see what the previous loans have done.  So, that one we could expand it; we may not take the whole Parliament but at least we will go through all these, maybe in a workshop or a conference.

Hon. Maate, I agree with you, your analysis was very good and that is why we are insisting that we should borrow for productive sectors and the committee recommendation stands. I can only add that at an appropriate time, Government and Parliament should come up to define the productive sectors. We are saying this because we have given the Executive the mandate to allocate resources, but when you go through they will tell you priority is agriculture, the priority is this, but the allocations going to these sectors are really very minimal compared to the other areas, which are really not productive. So, we are saying, let us have a hand also in determining the productive areas. So, honourable Minister, that recommendation still stands until we together, Parliament and Executive, come up with a definition.  

Parliament and National Planning Authority should be involved in the debt – you know, before the Budget Act was passed, it was a taboo for Parliament to know most of the details in the budget. But after the budget was passed and now Parliament is getting involved, people are realizing we did not mean bad and our contribution is so good. So, we are saying let us extend that approach to these loans. We have a lot of resources, a lot of brains in this Parliament and I do not see why Government should not consult us, involve us, make us participate in some of these negotiations. And you are aware, honourable Minister, that Parliament has helped you on several occasions to fine-tune some of the loan requests and some of the projects.

The cap or debt management by hon. Okupa, that one I have explained, and the earlier you do it, honourable Minister, the better. Because when you bring more loan requests, Madam Speaker, I do not want the committee or this Parliament to be accused of delaying the passing of some of these loans. At times we request for information, at times we request for policy issues to be streamlined before we proceed with the consideration of some of these loan requests. So, next time, Madam Speaker, I am informing you in advance, we have asked Government to come up with a cap to explain how they are going to manage the debt before we can contract more loans.

The issue of the conference is so good, and the committee had a similar idea. But, Madam Speaker, I would like to request you and the honourable members, that when this conference is organized, kindly find time to attend. Early this year, there was a workshop organized by Ministry of Finance, facilitated by everybody from Bank of Uganda, Governor, all the technical people from Ministry of Finance and these other institutions were there, and specifically to explain this debt issue to us to understand. I can tell you, I will not quote the figures, but we were very few. The technical people were listening to themselves, which I thought was very unfortunate.  

Hon. Nabwiso, about consulting stakeholders –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson for giving way for me to seek this clarification. I think now and again the Speaker’s Chair has guided many people who would like to interact with Parliament through workshops, seminars, dialogues and so on and so forth. History has shown that, if you want to organize a workshop for Parliament and you go through the Chair of the Speaker so that publicity is widely made, and the goals and the achievements of the workshop are explained to the Members, the Members will be there in time. But also, when workshops are organized in distant places such as Entebbe or Munyonyo and there is an afternoon session here, many Members find if very difficult to attend those workshops. So, the clarification I am seeking is, where was this workshop organized?  Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, for seeking that clarification. I want to inform you that the Office of the Speaker was fully involved, and I think he was supposed even to close that workshop and it was right here at the International Conference Centre, Committee Room C. Those who were supposed to attend were all chairpersons of committees and the key committees were the Committee on Economy, the Committee on Finance, the Public Accounts Committee and Local Government Accounts Committee. All those committees were supposed to attend and all the chairpersons of other committees, but there were only six Members of Parliament! Anyway, that is the point I am trying to make and I will take your advice that next time we shall fully publicize and the hon. Speaker is here, she will help us in that task.

Hon. Nabwiso must understand the nature of these loans. Hon. Zziwa explained and the key stakeholder was Ministry of Finance, because it is the Ministry of Finance, which is supposed to pay all these loans we acquire. So, we interacted with officials from the Ministry of Finance fully.

Most of these things will be fine-tuned and answered. How will the loans impact on the economy?  That one, by the way, we have already asked but we can concretise it in depth during the conference.  

Hon. Mugambe, I have already answered the arithmetic. And where are the idle funds? These are the funds, which were borrowed but they have not been disbursed. This phenomenon has been partly explained and we want also to find out, what are the other challenges Government is facing and is not able to access some of the funds we borrowed?

Hon. Ochieng, disbursement vis-à-vis what is done on the ground: This is very complicated and also I would like to answer it with hon. Kiyonga, tasking Members of Parliament to follow up some of these loans in their constituencies might be very difficult. I will tell you, even my own will not tell you that this money is coming from this particular loan. People just come, especially those which are from the centre, they put up something and go away and the certificates are signed. But where we can, we will do it, but this cannot happen with individual Members of Parliament. I think it is important to facilitate Parliament as an institution to track these loans.  

I have said, and I want to repeat here, that our recommendation is that only productive areas and those that generate revenue and add value should be allowed to borrow. And by the way, this is a commitment from the Ministry of Finance. They told us that they want to borrow for only productive areas. Now, when the Minister of State comes to plead with Parliament when it was actually them committing themselves, I find it a little bit funny, but let us collaborate.  This term can be defined. I know if you have to do something you need water, you will not say that is just social services, if you want –(Interruption)

MR KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Chairperson. I need a clarification. I think there is a weakness in the committee in that the loans seem to be a consumable; we must take loans for production. Has the committee, for example, pointed out ways of raising money so that production can be done? For example, if you were serious on property tax, it may not be even possible to borrow. Is the committee aware that loans are a commodity someone is selling to us in the same way that a person in Kinkizi may have juice in the house and then go to buy soda? Have you explored other ways that we can raise money for productivity without consuming these commercial loans?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, for your clarification. We have done that extensively, and while Government is not taking our recommendations - that is besides the point. If you read through our recommendations on these loan requests, not this particular one, you will find it there. And we know for them they are doing business, but it is us who are really bearing the burden. That one we are aware and we have suggested - even one time we suggested that we borrow from National Social Security Fund (NSSF) funds instead of going out, and it was never taken. Now maybe they will consider it. Internal borrowing, the property rates you are talking about, everything we have to consider them and we have concretely suggested to Government. 

We have put those recommendations and suggestions to Government and we shall continue doing that, and I hope in that conference, we shall be able to even put more recommendations and pressure to Government to reduce on the borrowing. Even what you are suggesting is much better than this, that let us stop borrowing, let us look at internal resources and re-allocate them and maybe we get a better deal.  

I thank you, honourable members, for all your contributions and your concerns once again, and I beg to move that we pass this loan. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work we have done this week; we have accomplished quite a lot. But for technical reasons, we shall complete this matter first thing on Monday. So, accordingly, the House is adjourned to Monday at 10.00 a.m. in the morning. We discussed this on Wednesday and we agreed 10.00 O’clock on Monday. 

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 20 December 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)

