Thursday 13th December, 2001

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to repeat what I said yesterday.  I was very happy yesterday, that you were able to complete the business on the Order Paper. And today, I equally request you that we also complete the business on this Order Paper, so that we see how we proceed for our Idi fitri, Christmas, and New year.  So, please, let us expeditiously, deal with these items.  I see hon. Aggrey Awori is going to say, ‘when is rain going to rain’?  I understand preparation is being made to pay whatever is due to you this month.  So do not worry.

Equally, we are also making arrangements to pay some Members the amount that would facilitate them to get transport, so that they can efficiently carry out their functions as Representatives of the people.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am raising on a point of procedure.  I have been part of the sixth Parliament, and I am used to a situation of the Order Paper which always put the Oral questions first.  I would like to know, why we are not following the same tradition today?

THE SPEAKER:  Do not worry; it is because, I think your question just came yesterday, and according to our Rules, they must be three clear days before a question is put. You should not worry, it will be dealt with.  So, you sit here up to the end, and you will hear the answer.  

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I quite agree that we did a commendable job yesterday, and we are prepared to put in the same effort to complete this work.  However, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of procedure.  Section 10 of the Budget Act, is causing me a problem, and I would wish to seek your guidance on how to proceed.  Section 10 reads as follows: “Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after its coming into effect”.  My understanding of this section is that, the provision of the Budgetary implication is mandatory and not discretionary, and a number of Bills, which have appeared here, do not appear to have actually fulfilled that legal requirement.  I am seeking your guidance on how to proceed, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is not that every Bill has a financial implication. It will depend on the nature of the Bill. For instance, if the Bill’s intention is to change the nomenclature, that is the name of an office from Secretary General to President General, what financial implications will that Bill have?  So, it depends.  I understand, last month there was a problem with Education Service Commission Bill, and when this was raised, we did not proceed until the financial implication was dealt with. Yesterday, I think there was the issue of the Inspectorate of Government Bill.  Again, a statement was made that there is no financial implication.  So, I you wait when there is a Bill where you think there is a financial implication, and then you can raise the matter.  Otherwise your point is in a vacuum, in that a situation has not arisen.

LAYING OF PAPERS
STATUTORY REPORTS ON THE IMPLEMENTATION FOR THE PERD STATUTE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION (Prof.Peter Kasenene): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the PERD Statute No. 9 provides the legal framework for the implementation of the reform and divestiture of public enterprises.  Section 27 of the PERD Statute requires the Minister responsible for Finance to submit a semi-annual report to the legislature on the implementation of the various provisions of the Statute.  Accordingly, this comprehensive report is for the periods of January to June 2000, July to December 2000, and January to June 2001.  I beg to table it.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is the appropriate committee on Finance which will give a report on it, and therefore, it should handle Reports.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO AMEND THE SCHEDULE OF THE UGANDA WILDLIFE STATUTE 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE (TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES) (Mr. Ayumu Akaki):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay on table Papers entitled: “Motion for resolution to amend the Schedule of the Uganda Wild Life Statute 1996, and the Uganda Wild Life (Amendment of Schedule) Statutory Instrument, 2001”.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the resolution be handled by the appropriate committee for consideration by the House.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 8 TO SUSPEND THE RULE 100 (5) IN ORDER TO ENABLE THE HOUSE TO PROCEED TO THE 2ND READING 
OF: 

(1) THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

(2) THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE SPEAKER: I think you should separate the two, instead of having a motion on the two Bills, when they are not connected.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move under Rule 8 that Rule 100(5) of our Rules of Procedure be suspended to enable us to proceed to the Second Reading of the Bill entitled “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill”.  

Whereas the Bill entitled ‘the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001’ was published in the Gazette on the 8th day of December, 2001; 

And whereas the Bill was read the First Time in Parliament on 11th December, 2001; 

And whereas it is essential that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be passed by Parliament expeditiously; 

Now therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Rules 8 and 44 (d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Rule 100(5)(Second Reading) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is suspended to enable the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 to be read a Second Time before the 14th day after the publication of the Bill in the Gazette as required by Rule 100(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.   I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Justify please.

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read a second time.  In terms of Article –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The justification I am seeking from you is on the suspension of the rules. When you deal with that, then you can move to the other one so that we dispose of that matter and then we can proceed.

MRS.MUKWAYA: Thank you for your guidance, Mr. Speaker. I request the House to suspend the rules because I do not have 21 days on me to display the register before the elections, which will take place before the 5th of January.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read a second time.  

In terms of Article 181(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Electoral Commission must organize, conduct and supervise local government elections at least 60 days before the expiry of the term of the existing councils, in this case not later than 5th January 2001.  The terms of the existing councils expire on 6th March 2001.  

The Electoral Commission has completed the computerized photographic card voter registration of all eligible voters in the country. The exercise has revealed that there are 8.2 million voters. The Electoral Commission has collected all the diskettes and is now merging the photographs with the bio-data of each voter to produce a voter’s card with both the photograph and the bio-data.

The Electoral Commission is now faced with the problem of shortage of time to accomplish all the remaining tasks before the above-mentioned constitutional deadline, for the following reasons:

The printing of the national voters register for the computerized data needs eight days. The Electoral Commission requires at least three days for the distribution of the register throughout the country.

The Electoral Commission requires three days to retrieve the displayed register.

The Electoral Commission requires eight days to edit the displayed register and finally print the same for use on the polling day.

The Electoral Commission requires four days for packing and distribution of the ballot kits before polling day.  

The above tasks or activities, except for the display period starting from 30th November 2001 to the polling day, require a total of 26 days. This means that if the 21 days for the display of the register required by section 25 of the Electoral Commission Act 1997 are added, the Electoral Commission requires 47 days. However, the number of days at the Commission’s disposal, from 30th November 2001 to 5th January 2002, are 36 days. 

Clearly, in order to enable the Electoral Commission to meet the constitutional deadline of 5th January 2002, there is need to reduce the above-mentioned 47 days by 11 days.

Section 25 (1) of the Electoral Commission Act, 1997 provides that the Electoral Commission shall display the register for a period of not less than 21 days. In view of the time constraint facing the Commission, as indicated above, the Commission will not be in position to comply with the constitutional deadline, if the period for display of the register is not shortened.  

Consequently, there is need to amend section 25(1) of the Electoral Commission Act, 1997 to reduce the display period from not less than 21 days to not less than 10 days. This is what the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 is seeking to do.

In view of the time constraints facing the Commission and the constitutional obligation to conduct local governments council elections not later than 5th January 2002, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill be read a Second Time. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Adolf Mwesige): Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs scrutinized the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 as required by the Rules of Procedure of this House.  

The Committee discussed the Bill with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The Bill seeks to amend section 25 of the Electoral Commission Act, 1997 to reduce the period of display of the voter’s roll for each parish or ward for scrutiny, from not less than 21 days to not less than 10 days.

The Committee observed that the Bill is intended to reduce the period of display of the voter’s roll for only the local council elections scheduled for January and February 2002.

The Amendment was necessitated by the need to meet the constitutional deadline for the said elections. The Committee was informed that the problem arose due to inadequate skills in the Commission, which, we were informed, are being addressed.

The Committee was assured that since the problem is being addressed, after the local council elections referred to, there would be no need for a shorter period of display. In subsequent elections, therefore, the period of display would be not less than 21 days as provided in section 21 of the Electoral Commission Act, 1997.

The Committee therefore recommends that the Bill be amended by making specific reference to January and February, 2002 local council elections.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. GEOFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Minister and the Committee for coming up with this amendment. I hope as the Committee has put it categorically, that this be specifically for local council elections, it is still very fresh in the minds of the people of Uganda that the court ruling on Presidential elections identified one of the loopholes as inability of the Electoral Commission to respect the clause of displaying the register as required for 21 days.  That is still very fresh and the ruling is there.  It is very important that as Government and the Minister, you move towards strengthening, if not overhauling the whole Electoral Commission. Because everyday you read in papers, commissioner so and so is in prison; IGG is investigating the Electoral Commission.  So, this has really weakened the ability of the Electoral Commission to implement the law as required.  Please, let us make this amendment, but move towards overhauling and strengthening the Electoral Commission such that we have democracy that stands the test of time. Otherwise, we have a lot of things that we have to move on, and if everyday we amend one clause to the other, it will waste our time.  I want to support this amendment, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

MR.REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa county, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to support the amendment but with some observations. I would like to get the position from the Minister in cases where the Electoral Commission will fail to display the voters’ register for 10 days; what will happen?  Because I represent a constituency which is not easily accessible and there are a lot of problems. What would happen in such circumstances? 

Secondly, we have also had the display delayed as a tendency to rig elections. And in some cases, the display officers are always not available there; they are in their homes and it becomes extremely difficult for our people to access the voters’ register, and check if their names are available.  Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of problems with the Electoral Commission and we are heading for very important elections - the local government elections. 

I would also wish to get assurance from the Minister responsible that she will do everything possible to make sure that the voters’ register display is effectively done. Because in most cases, it is announced in Kampala and it takes days before these registers are transferred.  Right now, LCV candidates are going for nominations, but in some cases they have had a lot of problems that the registers have not been available. And you know, there has been this element of verification of people seconding nominations of these candidates for LCV chairpersons, and we have had lots and lots of problems with the Electoral Commission. For example, in Gulu, the registrar just returned yesterday from Kampala to pick this register and yet these registers should have been sent to the district much earlier. I do not know how long it will take because in some cases, people whose names will not be found on the registers will definitely have to be registered; and how long would it take to finally get the final register of the population intending to vote?  Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I support this amendment.

MR. WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion. However, I want the Minister to clarify to me a few issues.  The hon. Minister is aware that the constituency I represent, Buvuma Islands, has very many Islands and we fall under Mukono District.  Even before the previous law of 21 days to display the register - I remember on Presidential they displayed the register for not more than two days.  Parliamentary they did not display at all. Mukono District always claimed that they received the funding very late, by the time they received funding the duration was already over. This also happened during the LCI elections.  We held elections four days after the official date of 4th. 

So my worry is, if we are reducing the days from 21 to 10, I want the hon. Minister to – because the hon. Minister represents some Islands, she knows the problems we face.  When we talk of a parish, a parish may be having about 15 Islands, and the voters will not be facilitated to move to parish headquarters, so they also move at their own leisure.  

I want the hon. Minister to assure me, and this august House that when we reduce these days from 21 to 10, the people I represent will actually have access to the registers early enough. At least if the registers can be there for 5 days, it could be okay. That is the clarification I want from the Minister.  Thank you.

MR. JOHN ODIT (Erute county, South, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I definitely support this amendment, but I have a few questions of concern.  One; when it comes to the period of elections the electoral commissioners become very busy with radio announcements.  We know that even the 21 days were not effectively well utilised, they kept on extending dates.  Now, if they could not manage within the 21 days, I want the Minister to assure us that the 10 days will be sufficient to handle the exercise. And they should not keep on shifting dates again over radio announcements.

Secondly, often there were reasons that because of the monetary factors, it would be difficult for the electoral exercise to be accomplished within the time scheduled.  I believe that this time they are more prepared to handle these challenges. 

My third concern is, as a Christian, I feel very disappointed that they rush in the last moment to give us Sunday as the day for elections, giving very flimsy excuses.  Government has five or six days in which it could do its work and it should leave Sunday for us really.  Now that we are giving them enough time to suggest good dates, I would not like us to go to a scenario, where they would say they only found Sunday being free for election.  They should get good time so that we also worship our God, because after here, we should also live well in heaven.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think what is happening now is that, the Electoral Commission should be able to set the team which is going to the field early enough and these people should be very prepared.  Why I am saying this, is because even this mere exercise of capturing our photographs using electronic cameras has taken a long time; dates were extended, the equipment were lost and even up to now, we are not sure whether the voters have all got their photographs, and so I really appeal to the Minister to take charge of this exercise, so that the election, which is scheduled for January and February, is handled much more efficiently as an example for us to bank on for future elections.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  While I support the motion, I would like the managers of the electoral process in this country to appreciate one important fact.  There are two ingredients that constitute a successful election.  The first one is registration; the second one is polling.  If any of these does not go on well, the election cannot be successful.  But there has been very little respect, if at all, for the registration process in elections.  In fact what you find is that, at the very last day, on the polling day, the Electoral Commission disowns the whole register.  One simple announcement on radio writes off the entire register and they keep saying, ‘if their names do not appear, let them vote’. ‘If they are not on the register, allow them to vote’.  Then you have disowned the entire process and that has been the biggest ill in our electoral process. The managers of the process should learn to respect the aspect of registration.  In fact the Constitution demands that it is a continuous process and only have cut-off points during election time.  But even the cut-off points are not very clear.  Nobody tells you that now we have sealed registration to prepare for an election, which is coming.

We are now being told that the Electoral Commission has found itself in this process, because of inadequate skills.  But this Electoral Commission is coming to its seventh year in office.  It is completing its first term in office and we are being told still of inadequate skills.  What does it take?  What does it constitute to put the skills in place?  These types of excuses actually sometimes result in the violence that takes place in the elections, because no clear-cut arrangements are seen to be in place and everything comes into a game of chance.  We want to have a reliable register.  

We want a register that can be seen by everybody.  But, if the display register is going to be in someone’s bedroom, how can we call that a display? This is the practice.  In most of these villages, you find people going to somebody’s home to find out whether their names are on the register, and the fellow goes back to his bedroom to come back to say, ‘yes, your name is in the register’.  But that is not display.  The purpose of display is for me to be able to scan the entire register and know whether so and so, who passed away a few weeks ago, his name is still in the register.  How shall I know, if the register is a preserve of somebody’s bedroom?  We want importance attached to the registration process, and we want to be sure that this amendment will lapse immediately the LC elections are over.  The Committee has recommended so, but I think it should be phrased differently to make sure it lapses immediately the LC elections are over.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the issue that is before us is dear to all of us, because I am not an exception to a bad register.  I am not an exception to inefficient Electoral Commission Officials.  I am part of you, and I am part of the process, and if the process is good, I also enjoy it.  So, I understand why all of us are concerned.  I will try to do my best.  

Let me go to the specific concerns.  Hon. Ekanya, I am aware of the court ruling.  That is why the Ministry of Justice is presenting this amendment to you.  But, I want also to state that all the inefficiencies and the weaknesses within the Electoral Commission have not affected substantially our elections, because those who have had problems have petitioned –(Interruptions)- yes, let me tell you.  Those who have been affected by the inefficiencies have had remedy from the courts of law and we have respected the court rulings, and we are all Ugandans, we are here, and we know.  Some of these are our children, some of these are our relatives and you know that we have very few knowledgeable people in IT (Information Technology).  

The facial recognition technology is new in Uganda and getting manpower to manage this from the Electoral Commission, besides the Consultant, I laboured and I explained to this House, and I had thought that I had managed to convince you.  Capacity building is a problem in many developing countries, but we shall continue to build our capacity.  

There was a colleague here, who asked that, “What will happen where the Electoral Commission fails to display the register for ten days?” I am saying that we shall make everything possible to dispatch the registers to get there on time, notwithstanding the rain and insecurity.  So, those are the parameters where I am operating.  I can only guarantee to that level, beyond that, we leave it to God.  

Then there was a concern, yes, I agree, but I also think that as colleagues, we need to build our institutions and help them to grow.  The lowest ‘Kasujja’ in your district, is the Chief Administrative Officer.  I know that because of the resource envelopes, some districts do not have registrars, but we are trying to decentralize, to have a registrar and a deputy registrar in the district. So, all the inefficiencies carried out by those officers who take their registers to their houses, should be reported immediately to the Chief Administrative Officer. And I trust that the Chief Administrative Officers have the capacity to discipline these people.  That is the only guarantee that I am appealing to you, that if there is any inefficiency on part of our election officials, the Chief Administrative Officer should take the blame.  If the Chief Administrative Officer does not act and report to the region, probably, Mr. Speaker, I should appeal to colleagues to link up with the Chairman of the Electoral Commission to tell the Commissioners who are in charge of your regions, because you would link up with Commissioners who oversee those regions.  What I know is that, Mr. Kitariko is in charge of the bigger western.  I know that Commissioner Winyi is in charge of the greater North; I know that Madam Nkurukenda is in charge of the mid-East, starting from the Nile going all the way to Karamoja.  I know that the Chairman and Commissioner Miiro are in charge of the Central.  So, if you have a problem with your Chief Administrative Officer, link up with the immediate Commissioner in charge of your region.  If the Electoral Commission does not help you, my office is open and I welcome any complaint from a colleague. 

There is a Member who was concerned about the LC5 who are being nominated, and I do agree that that registrar who came to Kampala to pick the register is inefficient and must be disciplined, because we have a timetable and all the Returning officers and Registrars had a time to pick the Registers.  So, picking the register yesterday is unacceptable to me. 

Let me also draw your attention, hon. Colleagues, that you know, we want to be voted, and we want to solicit everybody to register and vote, but registration is a voluntary action, that is what the Constitution says, unless we sit here during the Constitutional review, and we say, ‘registration and voting are mandatory’.  People volunteer to register and vote, so I cannot drag them, that is why when you are vigilant, they register 90 percent, if you are not active, they register 40 percent and there is no crime for a constituency to have only 20 people per cent voting out of the voting population, that will not nullify your election. So, the Constitutional review is going on, I want to urge you to participate in this review, let us review our Constitution and put in place whatever we want.  

Buvuma, Koome and Kalangala, I also represent Koome, as he represents Buvuma and Kalangala, and hon. Mutekanga here. I will do my best, but also try to talk to the elders of the lake that the lake is tamed -(Laughter). 

My colleague from Lira –(Interjection)- yes, I take note that when the going gets rough, it is only the radio that can give messages to our people, it is not by design but we try to do what we can. I remember the last time I read the Bible, Jesus said that, ‘when you have your animal that has fallen in a ditch, would you leave it to die on a Sunday or you get it out of a ditch’?  So, when the only day remaining to me is Juma, the Moslems will have to vote, if the only day remaining to me is a Saturday, the Christians will have to vote– if it is a Sunday we shall pick the animal, so says Jesus –(Laughter).  

So, for hon. Mwondha, yes, I agree. I have taken note of that and I am promising that we shall do whatever is within our powers to do that.  One of the reasons that I gave was that we have no skills, I am not talking about other skills, and I am addressing myself to the IT skills.  You see what has happened is that, we hired consultants who are knowelegable in IT technology, but we don’t have similar officers in the Electoral Commission who can measure to the IT technology.  For example, we do not have a programmer, we do not have a network manager, we do not have an Information Management Officer and we do not have an IT, who adds these three to be the actual manager. That is what I am talking about, we are going to improve.

 Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, there is a concern about when we are going to improve the display. I think my colleague is here from Finance. He remembers very well that the Electoral Commission planned that we buy permanent display boards where we shall display the register, but the resource envelope could not allow us to do that.  Mr. Speaker, I think I have answered all the questions, and I thank you for your support.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL 2001

(Clause 1, put and agreed to)

Clause 2

MR. MWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 2 of the Bill be deleted and be replaced with the following clause which reads as follows: “(2) section 25 of the Electoral Commission Act 1997 is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section 1 the following new subsection: 1(a) In the case of the elections to be held for local government councils in January and February 2002, for the period not less than twenty days, referred to in subsection (1) for the display of a copy of the voters roll, there shall be substituted, not less than ten days.” Mr. Chairman, the justification of this amendment is, the Committee felt that the twenty day period of display in section 21 of the Act should be retained, and ten days should only apply to this election after which this amendment should elapse.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 2 as amended, put and agreed to)

(The Title put and agreed to)


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Mukwaya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)
   
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001” and passed it with an amendment, which I had no objection to.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE                           WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations, the Bill is passed.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 8 TO SUSPEND RULE 100 (5) IN ORDER TO ENABLE THE HOUSE TO PROCEED TO THE SECOND READING OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move under Rule 8 that Rule 100 (5) of our Rules of Procedure be suspended to enable us proceed to the second reading of the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2001.  

Whereas the Bill entitled the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2001 was published in the Gazette on the 8th day of December, 2001; 

And whereas the Bill was read a First Time in Parliament on 11th December, 2001; 

And whereas it is essential that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2001 be passed by Parliament expeditiously; 

Now therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:  

That in accordance with Rules 8 and 44(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Rule 100 (5) (Second Reading) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is suspended to enable the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2001 to be read a Second Time before the 14th day after the publication of the Bill in the Gazette as required by Rule 100 (5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

THE SPEAKER: The question is, what is the urgency? That is the justification you have to make.

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, under section 8(7) of the Local Government Act, providing for the creation of new counties, the Sixth Parliament did pass Bughendera as a county. But that Parliament’s lifetime ended before this county was created legally. 

What do I mean? That same Parliament did add to the Parliamentary Elections Act a schedule that indicated how many counties we have in the country.  When you go to this schedule, item No.3, under Bundibugyo, you will find that there is Bwamba County and Ntoroko County. So, in order to create a county legally, I must move an amendment to this schedule to indicate Bughendera as a county, in order to enable them to have a Member of Parliament. This was a legal opinion. 

The Members of Parliament and the elders from Bundibugyo District have been in my office and to the Electoral Commission demanding; and the Constitution is very clear, once a county is created, the Electoral Commission has to organize elections for that county. But the same Constitution also provides for how counties can be created. 

This county was not created as a review; this county has not been created out of a census; but Parliament, in its wisdom, created a county.  So, the same Constitution demands that this county must be represented in this House.  Hence, a legal opinion was sought from the learned Attorney General, who advised that I move this way, to create a county in order to get a Member of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, you have to deal with the role of the Electoral Commission in conducting elections. The Electoral Commission deals with general elections and by-elections. What is the purpose?  Do you want a by-election? Do you want an election? What do you want?

MR. MWANDHA: I do not think that the Minister addressed your question, because at this stage, we were still considering the urgency of the Bill. We are not looking at the merits of the Bill, but why is it urgent that we should proceed like we are proceeding at the present time?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Ayume Francis): Mr. Speaker, when the Sixth Parliament curved a county out of Bwamba county, to be named Bughendera county, the assumption by the people of Bundibugyo who are now inhabitants of this newly created county, obviously agitated for a representation in Parliament.  According to them, they thought that the moment Parliament created a county, they were therefore automatically entitled to representation. And I think they read this from Article 63(2) of the Constitution, which with your permission, Mr. speaker, I will read. And it reads as follows: “When demarcating constituencies for the purposes of clause (1) of this Article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure that each county, as approved by Parliament, has at least one Member of Parliament; except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.”

So, basing themselves on that, they obviously agitated for this.  I am not going to the merits or demerits but that will come later.  I am trying to say why it has become so urgent for Parliament to address this particular issue.  That is one explanation that is arising out of this constitutional provision; Bughendera County argued that they are entitled to be represented in Parliament although they did not appreciate the procedural aspects before their county could be declared a constituency. And that I think would be the subject of the Minister’s motion with regards to this particular Bill. But I am merely explaining the background to the urgency of the matter.

THE SPEAKER: But what are you going to do with Article 63(6)?

MR.AYUME:  That seems to take us now into the merits of this Bill. Mr. speaker, there were two arguments advanced with regards to this matter.  The first one is the one that I have disposed of.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you read it to us.

MR.AYUME:  Yes, I am going to read it.  The first one is the one I have just explained in relation to Article 63(2) of the Constitution.  

Now, the second one, is the one relating to clause (6) of the same Article which reads as follows:

 “Where the boundary of a constituency established under this Article is altered as result of a review, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament”. 

It really means that if, for example, Bughendera County has been created as a result of a review of the Constituency under that clause (6) which I have just read, then we would apply different rules, because if you read clause (5), it provides -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney General, the problem is this. I think the resolution, which created this new county its effect came after the resolution of the last Parliament; and that’s why we could not hold election then because the county did not exist. So, now the existence of this county has come after the election for this particular Parliament. So, really if you are going to handle this problem - because we can do it here, but then you will face a constitutional hurdle in 63(6). 

I am just pointing out this that you may solve the other problem, but you will not be able to achieve what you want to achieve when Article 63(6) is there. Because it is going to tell you, well this county came into effect when you were to carry out elections for the 7th parliament. Therefore, if it has to become a constituency, it will only be after the dissolution of the 7th Parliament.  So, I think what we need -(Mr. Wacha rose_) 

MR.BEN WACHA: Thank you, Sir. Maybe I could help the Attorney General.  Sir, cognisant of this problem, but the issue is more complicated than that.  The problem arises because the resolution of the 6th Parliament says it would take effect as from the 1st July; that was in the next Financial Year, which is this Financial Year.  The next Financial Year after that Parliament.  Now, the 1st July was before dissolution of the 6th Parliament, which took effect on the 2nd of July.  

So, the problem arises as to whether now there should have been an election on the basis of the new county or not. But as the Minister has now brought the matter here, I think she is trying to follow the right line, because Article 63(1) talks about constituencies being prescribed by Parliament.  If a constituency is not yet prescribed by Parliament, a county in effect is not yet a constituency. Now, the constituencies that were prescribed by Parliament, I think under the Parliamentary Elections Act, the Schedule did not include this particular county.  Now, the Minister wants to include this particular county as a constituency. As to what she is going to do with it, is another problem because -(Mrs. Mukwaya rose_)- no, let me explain because it is a complicated matter.  

The constituencies which were prescribed by the 6th Parliament, were for purposes of the general elections of the 7th Parliament. It was not for purposes of any other election.  Now, if you are prescribing this and hoping that you are going to get a Member of Parliament after the prescription, are you going to hold a general election?  Because the prescription does not take into account a by-election.  You see what I mean?  There is no review; the Attorney General is very correct.  There is no review because under Article 63(5) of the Constitution, a review can only take place after a national census. And once a national census takes place after 12 months, there could be a review by the Commission, but there is no such review.  

Maybe the Minister might want to tell us what she wants to do with this resolution. And secondly, whether really it should come now. Mr. Speaker, this problem should alert us of more problems to come, more problems because people are pressurizing for districts.  Inevitable districts will give rise to counties.  Counties will, if handled properly, give rise to the need for more constituencies. How big will a House of Parliament in Uganda be? 

That gives us speculations that may be people who were fighting to have constituencies on the basis of population quota were right. Because every time you create a district, you are going to have new constituencies, you will end up with a House of 800 people here. Can you manage that?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I think there is a motion to suspend the rules to deal with this –(Interruption)- I want to put the question -(Mr. Mwandha rose_)

MR. MWANDHA: In view of the complicated nature and I wanted the Minister really to listen to this. In view of the complexity of this matter, I think the best way to get out of this is to call upon the Minister to withdraw her motion. Thank you.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, I do recall that when we created this county in the Sixth Parliament, the assumption at that time was that a new constituency was going to be created. I do not have the Hansard now, but if the Hansard can be checked, the assumption was that a new constituency was going to be created. So, if the people now have a county and no constituency, then they will have got air. And I think the Minister needs to go back, check the law, check the Hansard, and maybe come back to Parliament with a proper case. But I do recall that we created this county for the purposes of a constituency, and now if we say there is no constituency, we shall create more problems.

MR. AYUME: That argument does not represent a legal position. Parliament, under the Local Governments Act, can create counties or other sub-counties, local government parishes and other administrative units. But by so doing, it does not imply, in the case of counties, that by creating a county they are automatically creating a constituency. 

Constituencies are prescribed by Parliament under Article 63(1), and that is the procedure, which the Attorney General advised on in as far as creation of constituencies is concerned. 

The question really is, if Parliament is persuaded to prescribe Bughendera as a constituency in terms of Article 63(1) of the Constitution, should the elections for that constituency be held immediately or at some other time? That is a different matter, but the procedure for creating a constituency is under Article 63. And as I indicated earlier on, in this particular case, Article 63(6) does not apply, because this county was not created as a consequence of review.

THE SPEAKER: But the question is, when we held elections in June, did the people in this particular area participate in the election of the Member of Parliament? If they did, then for you to hold another election, you will have changed. The constituency which was used then, had different names, and you are now dividing that particular constituency by creating another one. You are reviewing! 

And since those people participated in elections in June, to go back to participate in another election, that would be a by-election. We are not talking about whether it is proper, but we are just talking about legal complications, which we want to clear once and for all.

MRS.MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, much as I appreciate what the Speaker and other learned Friends are talking about, could they also help me understand. If I belong to Bughendera County, and I read Article 63(1), which says, “and each constituency shall be represented by one member of Parliament”, that means that the county where we held elections was Bwamba. Now a county has been created, so as a Member of Bwamba, I am not eligible to go to this Bughendera area, because it is not my county. And officially, it is a county, so what will happen?

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister has not taken into account one important word in that sub-article, and that is “prescribe”. Until Parliament prescribes a county as a constituency, it is not yet a constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, we are going into the merits of the case. Let us dispose of the motion to suspend the rules and then we shall deal with the merits of the Bill when we proceed with the Bill. I will now put the question to the motion by the hon. Minister to suspend the rules, so that we can deal with this Bill now.

(Question put and negatived)

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF KAMPALA CITY/DISTRICT ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LTD

LT.GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek guidance on a procedural point in regard to the motion of petition. I was looking at the copy of the petition before us, and the Members who have signed in support of the petition are possibly Members of a family, a kibanda, a kimeza or akafunda of Ggaba. I want to know whether we should have these types of petitions for Parliament to handle.  

Should my family sit and bring a petition on behalf of Kampala District? Most of us stay in Kampala, and I wonder what would happen if every kafunda in Kampala was to bring a petition here. I fear that we could be setting a precedent, and how shall we handle it?

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, I may not be in position to comment on this, because as far as I am concerned, the petition has not been presented. So, how can I rule on it before I have seen it? I have seen a copy of the intended petition, but as far as I am concerned, the petition has to be presented before I can see what to do with it.

Well, according to the Order Paper, it is the hon. Member for Makindye East, to present the petition.

MR. MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am delighted to perform the duty of presenting a petition from the residents of Kampala City/District, and we were aggrieved by the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank.  Mr. Speaker, at this juncture, I beg to move that the Petition be read and that a select Committee of Parliament be set up to look into these grievances at the end of this.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the petition?

MR. BYABAGAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, with great concern, I wanted to know whether it is procedurally correct for a Member to bring a Paper, which is a fake document, it is a fake document in the sense that the people who signed behind this document have got the same registration number-  (Interjection)- No, the petitioners are supposed to indicate their registration numbers, not the box numbers.  This is an indication that this document is a one-man made document, which he has brought on this Floor.  

THE SPEAKER: Would you please read the relevant provision, which you are invoking?

MR.BYABAGAMBI: Mr. Speaker, considering the advice I have got from the hon. Members, I withdraw my statement-  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: So, let the Clerk read the Rule.  Now did you move a motion that it is read?  Was it seconded- (Interjection)- Okay. Then read it.

MR. MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kamapala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This is a petition by the residents of Kampala City/ District to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.  The humble petition of the residents of Kampala City/District presented by me states as follows- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the Clerk will read it.  I think your motion is that, it be read.

MR. MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

 (Question put and agreed to)

The petition was read to the House.

PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF LUWERO TRIANGLE

LT. WILLIAM KINOBE (Katikamu, County North, Luwero):Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity, to present a Petition on behalf of the residents of Luwero Triangle, under Rule 24 of our Rules of Procedure.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Petition be read and referred to a Select Committee.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

 (Question put and agreed to)

(The Petition was read to the House)

MR.WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr. Speaker, I raise under Rule 24(4) of our Rules of Procedure, that the Petition be rejected in that it is very unlikely to achieve anything new.  We already have a Government assurance on this issue, that actually the people of Luwero are due for compensation.  We were even informed by the Minister responsible not more than two weeks ago, that arrangements were underway to pay these people.  The referring of this Petition to a Select Committee of Parliament is likely to have an effect of delaying further the processes of actually paying these people – (Applause)- The Minister who should be actually chasing the people to speed up payment will be bogged down until the meetings of these Select Committee is there to look into issues, and it appears as if Government will be acting on the basis of this Petition rather than action already initiated.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$100 MILLION FROM THE IDA TO FINANCE THE NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND (NUSAF)

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (MR. Mwesigwa Rukutana):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be passed to authorise Government to borrow from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank for the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF).  I beg to move that the resolution be in the following terms:

“WHEREAS a loan agreement for the United State dollars 100 million is to be concluded between the World Bank International Development Association and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing a programme to support the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for  approval and authorisation.  

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan from the World Bank International Development Association (IDA) upon the terms and conditions therein stated”.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

MR.MWESIGWA RUKUTANA:  Mr. Speaker, the intended loan is supposed to cater for reconstruction, development, peace and reconciliation of war-ravaged areas of Northern Uganda. It covers the following districts:Arua, Adjumani, Yumbe, Moyo, Nebbi, Apac, Lira, Gulu, Kitgum, Pader, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Kumi, Katakwi, Pallisa, Moroto, Kotido and Nakapiripirit.

Mr. Speaker, the terms and conditions of the loan are as follows: It has a grace period of ten years; it has a maturity period of 40 years; it has a service fee of 0.75 per cent, and a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent. 

The money is already included in the present budget, and it is intended for the purposes I highlighted.  Everybody, Mr. Speaker, acknowledges the fact that the Northern Uganda has lagged behind for quite some time, and I call upon Members to support this motion.

The resolution was presented to the relevant Committee of Parliament, which has done a very good job and I have looked at the report of the Committee.  I now move that Members do support this resolution.

THE SPEAKER: What is the Committee’s recommendation?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Nathan Nandala): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, this is the summary of the report of the National Economy Committee on the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund.  

All of us are aware Northern Uganda is in bad shape as far as poverty is concerned, and in many fora it has been talked about.  This fund is to go to 18 districts and the Government of Uganda will fund US$10 million, IDA US$100 million, Local Authorities and Communities US$14.7 million, giving a total of US$124.7 million.

The general observation is that Northern Uganda is in total poverty.  So, it needs to come up to the levels of other districts.  There is need for peace building and conflict management, as you are aware there have been wars.

However, we have to accept that NURP 1 had failures, but Northern Uganda Social Action Fund is being brought up to bridge the gap, which was caused by NURP I.

Recommendations and Resolutions:

1. The causes of failure of NURP 1 should be addressed before embarking on the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project.

2. The work-plans of the communities should be respected because they know better what they need to fight poverty in their areas.  The funds should be monitored by the local leadership other than setting up other parallel structures. 
 
3. Government should be conscious about the continued use of expatriates in the fields where the local capacity is already available. Of course, we know better Northern Uganda than the white people.

4. The Committee also resolved that the approval of this loan should be seen in light of the need to access an advance of 0.8 million dollars to kick-start the proposed mechanisms, to finalize the project preparations and implement pilot activities in selected sites in the projected areas.

5. After the project preparations, this Parliament and other stakeholders should be involved in designing the implementation of the programme in order to avoid the NURP 1 scenario; especially, the MPs from Northern Uganda.

6. Vehicles and equipments to be used should be those, which were used in NURP 1 of 1992, and in the districts in which the project falls.  In short, we are saying that the NUSAF money should not be used again to buy more vehicles when there are already others.

7. After project preparation, the document will be submitted to Parliament for approval of accessing the balance of the money.

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the level of poverty in the 18 districts to benefit from this project is known to all of you, and I would urge you all to approve this loan request.   I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  I should put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 20 MILLION FROM THE IDA FOR THE COMESA REGIONAL TRADE FACILITATION PROJECT/AFRICAN TRADE INSURANCE AGENCY 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE  (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be passed to authorize Government to borrow from the International Development Agency for the COMESA Regional Trade Facilitation Project /African Trade Insurance Agency in the following terms:

WHEREAS the Government is to conclude an agreement with the International Development Agency of US$ 20 million, for purposes of financing the African Trade Insurance Agency for the COMESA Region;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for the approval and authorization;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government of Uganda is hereby authorized to secure the said loan / loans from the International Development Agency upon the terms and conditions stated.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; please explain.

MR. RUKUTANA: Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, the biggest bottleneck to private sector led growth and export diversification in Africa is the fear by the big foreign financiers of the high political risks that bedevil the African Continent. Some of the political risks are wars, civil commotion, UN embargo, imposition of exchange controls, inability to purchase foreign currency, expropriation, interference with the debtor’s ability to control the insured assets or to operate business, actions against insured goods, conciliation of import licenses, restrictions on import of insured goods, imposition of arbitrary increases of import taxes, to mention but a few.  As a result of apprehension or fear of these risks, there is minimum financing for private sector commercial transactions.  Even the little that comes in is subjected to high costs in an attempt to cover the risks.

Hon. Members, you may be aware of political risk cover from commercial sources to export private agencies, which is not available at all for most countries in Africa, including Uganda.  On the contrary many insurers, categorically put these claimers in their policies on acts of State, and on war, those are not insurable risks.  For that matter, it was found important to put in place an agency that will provide insurance cover to these political risks, and this insurance cover is supposed to cover both imports and exports from COMESA countries, that is the African Trade Insurance Agency.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, Cabinet has looked at this project and Government has already taken steps towards its implementation.  The 20 million US dollars we are seeking a resolution to borrow, is supposed to be our contribution towards that project.  The implementation of the project was tabled before the relevant Committee, which has made a report, and it is a noble cause, and I call upon hon. Members to support this motion.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear the views of the Committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY(Mr. Nandala Mafabi): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, again this is the Report of the Committee for this African Trade Insurance Agency, requesting a loan of 20 million dollars. As the Minister has explained, African Trade Insurance Agency was established in February 2001, and was officially launched on 20th August 2001, in Kampala at Munyonyo, during the SMART partnership meeting.  There are seven countries involved, Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Malawi, and Zambia. This is the first of its nature. It will help investors both local and foreign, as far as political risks are concerned, which our local insurance companies cannot handle.  

The loan is on concessional terms and Government of Uganda has signed the Participating Agreement, rectified the agreement, paid its nominal capital of 100,000 pounds and has identified the implementing body, which is the Uganda Investment Authority.  This loan as I said, will serve as a gap created by local insurance covers, which do not cover the acts of social or civil commotion and war.  

The arrangement will be the confidence in investment and trade sectors, as the ratified treaty will protect both foreign and local investors.  

These funds should be held on account in a 1st first class bank in London. The interest, which will accrue at commercial rates in the 10 years will be put on Government income account for other use.  

Recommendations:

Government should create and empower the middle class, which can effectively participate in the regional trade.  

Government should create awareness among the public of the benefits of this arrangement.  

Government should take this chance to promote inter-regional trade, especially in the agricultural produce.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, the Committee affirms that this project will promote investment and trade, which are the major areas to address in order to effect economic development. I therefore, beg Members to pass this loan resolution.  Thank you, I beg to move.

MR. LARTIF SSEBAGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I am aware that we cannot meet our budget without external funding due to the resource envelope, and I am aware that if we are to progress in all fields, we must seek assistance from abroad in terms of loans and grants.  It is my humble request that indeed the loans that we are committing to Ugandans are put to good use, because as we talk now, we are still paying the loans, which were passed or secured by the recent regimes.  It is my humble appeal to the implementers, because loans are coming to be approved here in the Parliament of Uganda, and at times we are not fully involved in the implementation.  So it my humble request that in as much as we approve all these loans, so that we commit Ugandans, our grandsons and granddaughters, it is my humble appeal to the implementers, that let all these loans be put to good use, so that we could really benefit from all the loans the Seventh Parliament is likely to approve.  I thank you so much.

MR. WAGONDA:  Mr. Speaker, I understand that this is a regional project, which is going to be co-financed by the participating countries.  Under 5, in the Committee’s Report, they are talking of all participating countries, the total funds for the project for all participating countries being 11 million dollars, and yet Uganda is paying 20 million dollars.  I do not know whether this is a typing error or what, but I seek clarification on that.

MR. NANDALA MAFABI: We apologise; it is a typing error.  It is 110 million dollars.

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, we are in a hurry to approve a lot of these loans.  But when you look at it logically, the things do not add up, because, we say, there are many people who are likely to be unemployed, there are people who will be dropouts and therefore put up polytechnics.   I would like to see the evidence.  Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance 

THE SPEAKER: I want to put a question

(Question put and agrees to)

MOTION FOR A RESOULUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 2.509 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPPING AND FURNISHING OF COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be passed to authorize the Government of Uganda to borrow from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) US$ 2.509 million for financing the construction, equipping and furnishing of community polytechnics, and that the resolution be in the following terms: 

WHEREAS a loan agreement for US$ 2.509 million is to be concluded between the Islamic Development Bank and the Government of Uganda, for purposes of financing the programme for the construction, equipping and furnishing of community polytechnics;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorization;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorized to secure the said loan from the Islamic Development Bank upon the terms and conditions therein stated.  I beg to move.    

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, it has been seconded.

MR. RUKUTANA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the purpose of the loan is to supplement Government’s efforts to fulfill its pledges to construct 930 polytechnics in each of Uganda’s sub-counties.  Definitely, the amount of money required to construct the 930 is so huge, but IDB is desirous in assisting in this venture.  However, for a start, it has offered us only US$2.509 million, which it intends to use as a pilot project to see whether it should continue assisting us in the construction of the other polytechnics. So, Government has concluded an agreement with IDB that this initial money be brought, that the polytechnics be constructed to completeness, and IDB reviews the performance of the entire project in order to give us further assistance.  

Definitely, the importance of this project cannot be under estimated.  Hon. Members, know that we have so many primary seven and senior four ‘graduates’ who have nowhere to go.  Hon. Members, know that the country lacks a lot of skills, and if any donor intends to assist us in this bid, we should do nothing but to welcome whatever he gives us.

Mr. Speaker, the terms and conditions of this loan are very good.  They are highly concessional and they are in line with Government’s debt strategy.  They consist of a maturity period of 30 years, including 10 years of grace and they are subject to a service charge of 0.75 per cent.

The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Sports, and all the necessary groundwork has been done to access this funding.  The relevant Committee has reviewed the intended borrowing and has made a report; and I request that Members to support this important cause.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  Yes, hon. Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, again this is a report of the National Economy Committee on the loan request for construction, equipping and furnishing of community polytechnics of 2.509 million dollars. As we are all aware, we have 930 sub-counties, and each was promised a polytechnic to cater for primary and senior four dropouts.  

The project is to construct 14 community polytechnics each with five classrooms, four workshops, administration block, boreholes and semi detached houses for four instructors.

The loan is on concessional terms with a grace period of 10 years, maturity period of 30 years, and interest rate 0.75 per cent per annum.  The total project cost will be 2.708 million dollars of which Government of Uganda will contribute 10 per cent, which is 0.279 million dollars.

These were the criteria used to select the 14 districts, which will benefit from this loan:  

1. That in that district, there is no polytechnic.  Of course, the first 14, which will benefit do not have.

2. That a site is nominated by the LC V, executive.

3. The willingness of the community. 

4. Whether a district has no Government/ Government- aided training institute.

5. Whether the area has a high degree of ex-servicemen.

6.Of course, even some special consideration. 

We have category 1 of phase 1 (2001/2) which will be 12 community polytechnics, and will be established in all the four regions as follows:

Northern 3, Eastern 3, Central 4,  Western 2. This will be done by Government. 

Then category 2, where there is existing polytechnics, but are having financial constraints. These are becoming now grant-aided with effect from 2001/2002.  Again the four regions will benefit as follows: Northern 1, Central 1, Western 2, Eastern 1. 

Phase two of category three, which is for the loan we want you to approve, covers the districts that do not have any polytechnics:  Northern 5, Eastern 3, Central 3, Western 3. 

Then we have category five. These are the ones, which are private, but the German Development Bank, under KFW, wants to assist them. For the Financial Year 2000/2001, they assisted up to 25. This Financial Year, 2001/2002, they want to assist another 25.  

Then we have category four, for conversion; that is converting the existing structures in some areas to polytechnics. This is going to be done by Government. It consists of 23 institutes. But we were informed by the Ministry Officials, and the Minister herself, that they still need more places to be converted.  

Observations:

There is a growing number of school dropouts who need technical skills in order to be good job-makers. 

Under UPE, there will be a bulk of primary school leavers due to pass out by the year 2003.  

The 930 community polytechnics may not all be necessary, bearing in mind the existing technical institutes in some of the sub-counties. 

Some technical institutes have been abandoned for long, and the machines there are obsolete. Others are just blackboard institutions without any training tools.

Recommendations:

The selection criteria outlined above should be adhered to in order to ensure that there is value for money. This means that where the polytechnic is established, it should be effectively utilized and not be a ‘white elephant’ in rural areas.  

Community polytechnics should be monitored to keep standards of training by employing relevant and qualified personnel.  

The dilapidated buildings or institutions should be repaired and regularly maintained.  

Government should not embark on more polytechnics where they already exist, before fully equipping the existing ones in those areas.  

Hon. Members, I want to assure you that all districts have been taken care of. You do not need to raise hell and say they have not been covered.  

In conclusion, we request the House to approve this loan so that we can take care of this bad situation in our country.  I beg to move.

MR.MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The motion we are discussing this afternoon reminds me of some very interesting men in my village. You find a man who has a wife, and for ten years he has never bought her a gomesi or a dress. Then one morning, he goes to a neighbour and says, ‘You know, next week I am bringing a new woman. You lend me money to buy a dress because she must come in a new dress.’ 

You know that there are technical colleges in this country.  I have had the privilege to go to some of them. They are poorly equipped and they urgently need rehabilitation.  Instead of Government thinking of equipping and rehabilitating those that are already in existence, the Government is thinking of money to put up new polytechnics.  My worry is that if Government has failed to maintain those that are there, what guarantee is there that those that we shall construct will not be mismanaged or neglected like those that exist.

The other point that I would like to make is that education is an investment to households and society. And like any investment, people spend their money on their children to go to school, expecting returns. Returns to investment in education can only come if people get jobs. My biggest worry is that we are going to construct 930 community polytechnics and each of them, I am told, will have four classrooms. Assuming that every year each polytechnic will bring out 30 people, my worry is, will the sub-counties be able to provide employment for these people? - (Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, those who think differently from the hon. Members of this House also have a right to express themselves.  

I had the privilege of looking at a study carried out in Tanzania. In that study, they discovered that about 60 percent of the people who had gone to technical schools were doing clerical jobs; jobs that did not require the technical skills they acquired from the technical colleges.  When people who have got technical skills do jobs where the skills they acquired are not relevant, it becomes a serious cost to society.  

I therefore urge Government, that as we plan to give people skills, we should make sure that there is a component to enable these people create jobs. For example, if you are going to teach people carpentry or building, there should be a component to help them get the tools that they will need to create jobs. That is my submission, Mr. Speaker.

MS.WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I would like to thank the Government for coming in to build the skills of our young people, and for preparing for the first graduates from UPE.  However, I have some clarifications I am seeking from the Minister and from the Committee, if they have the answers.  

The first one is just a general concern. As we are debating and approving these loans, I see that the documents from the Committee are being circulated as the Minister is making the formal presentation. I find this very disturbing because the power that we have to borrow, we ought to take extremely seriously. 

We are committing the future. It cannot be right for even one Member of the House to sit here and debate and approve a loan on a basis of a two-minutes reading of a document.  A document should come in time and to each and every Member. I would like to remind Members about the recent report about what is happening to Argentina, a much richer country but heavily indebted. It is facing the consequences of borrowing carelessly and not thinking about the time of repayment.  That is my general concern. 

Specifically, on this project, I am concerned about the issue of staff for these polytechnics. I wonder what the Ministry has prepared in terms of providing the qualified staff for these polytechnics. We can take into account the fact that Kyambogo, which used to be the main institute that turns out technical people, has now become a fully-fledged University, turning out university graduates in the field of engineering. I would like to inform the House that engineering and technical or vocational education are wide apart. They are not the same subject. An Engineer cannot competently train people in a technical institution. So, what is the Government doing to prepare the qualified staff who will train these young people in every sub-county?  

Secondly, I am concerned about the issue of sustainability of the project. We see a general statement that one of the criteria is the degree of community willingness to establish community polytechnics. To what extent are we getting a commitment from the districts to manage these institutes in every sub-county? What about the cost of the inputs to these polytechnics? 

Polytechnics are not like secondary schools. They are not even like some faculties at the university, like the Arts faculties. They have very highly costly inputs. You are talking of machine components, you are talking about wood, you are talking about many expensive inputs for these polytechnics to function, and being bought annually for these polytechnics. Have we considered what cost this will be to the recurrent Budget and whether it is going to be sustained?  

Fourth, there are criteria set out, and I am pleased to see the criteria, although I think they should be improved.  What guarantees do we have that the Ministry is going to faithfully stick to these criteria, given the past experience of Government setting criteria and going ahead to renounce that criteria and distribute institutions on an ad hoc basis. What guarantees are we going to be given that the criteria will be used faithfully? 

Coming to the special criteria, I see that one of the criteria is where the area has a high degree of ex-service men. I think that this is a limited way, and it masks the serious effects of conflict in many regions of our country.  There are areas that have been war-ravaged but where you may not find many ex-service men because, perhaps traditionally, those areas were not sending their children to the army. What about them?  

I would like to see this perhaps turned into something that covers all the war-ravaged areas. I am thinking about not only the districts of Acholi, but also Teso, Bundibugyo, Kasese, areas where there has been serious conflict and there are many displaced young people.  

What is special consideration? I wish it could be broken down a little more, because under there, it can also be provided to cover any diversion from the established criteria. Either you are specific, or you take it out. You should be specific. You should not provide in any set of criteria something so general that you can use to smuggle in other reasons that may come later. So, I would really think that special consideration should be removed if we are going to have faith in these criteria.  

Lastly, but not least, an issue that is very close to my heart; I would like to have assurances of gender inclusiveness of this project.  What guarantees do we have that the courses that are going to be offered will be available for both our young men and young women? I would like to know that the predominately male areas like carpentry, masonry and so on will also involve as many girls as boys. And also, other courses that are mostly in the area of women like tailoring and catering will be part of the courses for every polytechnic. These are my concerns, Mr. Speaker. If I would be satisfied, I will very happily support the motion. Thank you.

DR. NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sorry, my apologies for speaking ahead of time. We say in physiology that actually we hear with our brain, because my neighbour here was debating and although my eyes were on a different thing, I thought we were debating this.

I was reading a document, which came from the Committee on National Economy, about our debt portfolio. And if I recall, the figures I got showed that in the Sixth Parliament, we borrowed about 1.2 billion dollars. And in the sixth month of the Seventh Parliament, we have already borrowed 300 million dollars. So, we are borrowing at a very high rate. 

That aside, this project is very good politics, but in my view, it is not very good economics. This, to me, looks like entandikwa. Entandikwa was very good, very well conceived. It was very good politics, but when you looked at the economics then it was a different matter. 

When you say every district, every region, every county, it sounds okay because we all want something in our region, but at what cost and what effectiveness. For instance, were there any studies to show that as a result of so many polytechnics, you create so many jobs?  

I lived in North America, and situations like these used to occur. What they would do was to create what they used to call a comprehensive high school. The high school would be equipped to give a lot of the skills that you are planning to give in the polytechnic. They will be the same group of people, and the teachers will use the same sort of infrastructure, and therefore, you save resources. 

If you are going to throw all these polytechnics everywhere, first of all, where will you get the teachers and the curriculum? I have had an opportunity to volunteer my time to study this issue with Ministry of Education. My interest really was, if you want to train technical people, what are the subjects that are creating jobs. And we were looking at the knowledge-based subjects that are creating jobs. We found out that the curriculum was not even there. In fact, Ugandans here volunteered, and also Ugandans outside volunteered through the Internet, and we were able to suggest a curriculum, which is being implemented by the Ministry of Education.

But, there are many, many problems.  I think we should put politics aside and concentrate on economic and job creation, because, to say, ‘we want every district to benefit, people are moving’.  Do you know that Kampala grows at a faster rate than all these other districts put together?  The people migrate to Kampala because that is where they think there are jobs.  

There is a study which was shown, even the Ministry of Transport and Communication has shown it, that every time you put a phone line in the rural areas, you create four jobs.  I wonder why they do not share that information in Cabinet and say look, ‘if the emphasis is on jobs, what is the criterion, what is the driving motive for this project’?  Is it to create jobs or is it to create an employment?  We know that, if we put one phone line, we create four jobs, then that is easy, we start with that.  But I am telling you, what you are going to have, if you continue along this, we are likely to have glorified high schools we call polytechnics with equipments that are not well maintained; the staff, syllabus and so on, with half baked products who cannot find jobs. By the way, the people you are trying to put in there, are what you call dropouts. I do not simply regard them as dropouts, but obviously they are not the smartest of the lot.  When it comes to creating jobs, do you know you are kidding, so you are looking for the lower percentile and you expect them to make miracles?  I think we should really review this project -(An hon. Member rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish.  Please wind up. 

MR. NKUUHE:  Okay.  So, in my view this project since it is going to go in a phased manner, they should review it very, very seriously, so that if you have made mistakes you have time to correct them.  Otherwise, we shall go head on, and find ourselves 25 years down.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I request the Minister of Education to give us his contribution.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Dr.Khiddu Makubuya):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for moving this motion, and I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy and his Committee for the analysis that they have presented.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, the arrangement for the construction of these polytechnics is part of Government arrangement to absorb the UPE bulge, the first big group of UPE graduates, which will be upon us in the year 2003.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, this year, we are talking about 350,000 pupils taking the PLE Examination.  In the year 2003, according to accurate data arising from school census, there will be not less than a million children taking PLE, and you need to provide forward linkages for these people.  First of all, we have to take into account the fact that, UPE is a major revolution in this country, where we have moved from an enrolment of 2.5million to now an enrolment of 7 million.  This is a good system. All experts, including hon. Nkuuhe, advise us that when you invest in primary education you are investing well. The problem is going to be that when you complete that primary cycle and you have no forward linkage, and then this very good investment must collapse.  So, these Community Polytechnics are really part of this forward programming, so that the UPE can be sustained.

In short, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, we need this money. This is a necessary social project, and we need the money because the national coffers alone cannot meet the cost of starting this programme.

Mr. Speaker, we are not abandoning the arrangements for technical education which exist.  It is not as if we are closing those that exist so that we start these ones.  No, we are supplementing the existing arrangements, we are adding to them.  The new ones will not be neglected, because it is part of the financing arrangement that you manage the programme and you run it properly.  

There is the question of employment, Mr. speaker, whether we are creating job seekers.  No, we are not creating job seekers, we are in fact training people to employ themselves and apply these skills directly in the communities.  This is why I accept the recommendation which says that you need to add more training tools and possibly a programme for financing.   Yes, this one I accept because they should not just go out and say, ‘I am looking for the job’, no, and let us begin somewhere.  

Under ideal and optimum circumstances, yes, documents should be circulated well in advance so that they can be properly scrutinised, and I would like to apologise that on this occasion, we were not able to circulate them in advance, but there is a Committee of this House, which scrutinized the details of this loan on behalf of the House, and in my submission, they have done a good job.  

The training of Staff for these Polytechnics - you see, Government also thinks ahead in some of these matters, maybe not always, but on this matter, we have thought about training staff for these Polytechnics.  We have established 11 Instructors for colleges and these Instructors are expected to produce 110 graduate Instructors in these polytechnics, next year.  Please take into account that the Government commitment is still a polytechnic per sub-county.  Now, we are planning on training teachers on that basis, we have taken care of it.

The cost of sustaining this training programme, yes, you see, this is an important social programme; this is an important educational programme, this is an important training programme for our economy. In that light, ultimately it will be the responsibility of the National Budget to sustain these arrangements.  Now, we are just starting with a loan and thereafter, the responsibility will be taken over.  

I would like to thank hon. Winnie Byanyima for appreciating that we have set a criterion. Maybe we had problems in the past, but we have been quite open about it in this august House.  The issue now is, will the Ministry faithfully stick to this criteria or are we coming here for window dressing, thereafter, we shall do our own things?  How can we do our own things with this Parliament here; really, how?    It is not possible, we must come with a policy statement every year, where will we hide tricks; no, no, that one is not possible?  But, I think we operate in good faith, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, that we undertake faithfully to stick to the criteria.  Yes, you know these proposals are good, and my policy normally is to say, ‘I accept these as proposals, but I need to say something, for example, about covering some parts and not others, and then focusing on areas where ex-service people are concentrated and so on and forth’.  

I clearly insist on polytechnics in the meantime to cover the whole country, but you know, there is this special need for re-integration of ex-service people in the community; and where they have no skills, I think it would be good thing to assist them to acquire the skills, so that they can easily achieve re-integration in the society.  That is why we are focusing there.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, gender inclusiveness is a constitutional requirement, and we do not want to boast very much, but we are a Ministry which actually has a national strategy for girls education at all levels. Yes, and so gender inclusiveness is like second nature to us in the Ministry of Education. I sympathize with the points which have been made by Dr. Nkuuhe.  But, these are really put on the record and considered in the future. 

But there is one thing which I need to react to. He says that this programme is good politics, that it is not a good economic programme.  I do not know, because what you are saying is that everybody must have a piece of the cake. That is not good economics; it is good politics. Let me avoid going into the merits of this and l just read from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. 

Principle 12: “balanced and equitable development: 

(i) The State shall adopt an integrated and co-ordinated planning approach. 

(ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas”.  

I think that the arrangement for the spread of Community Polytechnics using the criteria we have used, is in consonant with this provision.  And so, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, we are only asking that this programme starts, so that we see how it works, we can evaluate and expand it nationally.  I appeal to you hon. colleagues to support this motion.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I beg you to lend me your ears over the presentation of a question for oral answer.

It is now two weeks since a large group of war debt claimants (veterans) from Luwero have been parading and camping in the premises of Parliament and H.E the President’s Office demanding that they be paid.

(i) Is the Minister in Charge of Luwero Triangle aware that the continued presence of the said group could be a security risk, a health and environmental hazard in terms of human waste disposal and dumping of materials like polythene papers?

(ii) Is it true Government has not paid the Luwero War Veterans? If so, when will they be paid? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LUWERO TRIANGLE) (Mr. Tim Lwanga):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to thank hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, Member of Parliament Lubaga South, for coming up with these questions. I will seek clarification first before I give him my answers.

You say war debt claimants, known as veterans. I do not know whether veterans are the same as war debt claimants. My way of understanding it is a bit different.

In question two, you say, ‘it is true’ or do you mean ‘is it true’ –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, answer the questions as you understand them.

MR. LWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As far as question one is concerned, the relevant Government organs responsible for security are present, and I understand they are alert and are watching the situation.  

When it comes to environmental hazards in terms of human waste disposal, I believe the people out there are citizens of this country. Some of them are members of this city, and probably they pay taxes to the city council. So, I think that is an issue I cannot really handle. We should leave that for the city council to handle. Thank you very much.

The issue that really concerns me is whether it is true that Government has not paid Luwero war veterans. I would like to inform the hon. Members, and in particular hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, that veterans have got a board called the Uganda Veterans Assistance Board (UVAB). It has been in existence since 1997, and many of the veterans have been paid. 

The last time I was in Luwero, I checked at the Luwero district headquarters, this is one of the districts which makes up the Luwero Triangle, and there were only 36 veterans who had not been paid. This is in respect of the veterans. And the reason they had not been paid is because their money had been misled and it was a police case.

However, when you talk about claimants, the war creditors, I think the statement as is shown on the paper is not true. Since 1987, Government has been paying compensation to very many claimants in the Luwero Triangle. Some of them have been paid cash, others have been given cows, some have been given iron sheets to build houses, others have been given cement for building houses, and indeed others have even had their children get scholarships to go to school. All this is as a way of compensating them for not being able to live normally after the war.  

I believe hon. Lukyamuzi is aware that the payments to the war claimants or creditors have been handled differently by the various areas over the years since 1987. At one stage, they were being handled by the Minister of Defence in Mengo. At another stage, some people were paid through the welfare office at State House. Currently, they are being handled by the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle through the Office of the Prime Minister. And when we handle them, we handle them in liaison with the Minister of Justice, who actually holds the pass. We do not pay the people. We ascertain the debts and we pass them on to the Minister of Justice who pays them. And I understand many have been paid.

Indeed, in March this year, about Shs.91 million was paid to 138 creditors who were owed under Shs.1 million. This was under instructions given by His Excellency the President on 19th February in Lugogo. So, hon. Lukyamuzi, it is not true that they have not been paid. They have been paid.

For the last two months, as I stated previously in this House, a special war debt verification committee has been going through and auditing various files and records. I must tell you that we have gone through 4500 files, and a final report is expected to be ready before Christmas. In fact, it was supposed to be ready by Tuesday, but because I will not be around, I will look at it after Kyankwanzi.

This report, if I may restate, will give the position as to who is owed what. Thereafter, a programme of how and when to pay these people will be drawn. In January, when His Excellency the President meets representatives of the creditors from Luwero, he will be able to present this programme to the people. Thereafter, hopefully, the payment will start. But this is the payment of those who have not been paid as yet and those who have been verified since the last verification.

God willing, by the end of January or early February at the latest, payment will be made. That is all I have to say, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Normally the person who puts the question is given the first opportunity to ask a supplementary question. That is how we will proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Obliged, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister in Charge of Luwero serious about the answer he is giving! Although my question was directed to Luwero per se, I was specifically addressing the group now camping in front of Parliament. For a living and functional Government, two weeks is too long a period for Government not to have taken action to stop the situation from getting worse! If I was a Minister, I would either resign or take action. And this is serious, Mr. Speaker.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I have had occasion to talk to that group.  And as I speak now, the information I have got is that about four people have died because of the bad living conditions. Is the Minister aware that His Excellency, the President after talking to the same group in Lugogo delegated hon. Minister in-charge of the Presidency Prof. Bukenya, to handle the affairs of that group?  According to the group they were told to return to Kampala on the 29th of November 2001, and that - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, the problem is, if you are asking the Minister in-charge of Luwero, do not ask him questions that should be answered by the Minister in charge of the Presidency.  Our rules do not allow you to do that.  So, you concentrate on matters that fall under the portfolio of the Minister currently answering the questions.  These are the rules.  They are clear in our books.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Obliged, Mr. Speaker.  My final question was, is the Minister aware that the group claims that they were told to come back here on the 29th of November in readiness to be paid by 30th November? Up to now they are waiting for their payment on contract, because they got some contract with the President.  I am saying in a situation where you have a whole Minister assigned to handle Luwero affairs, how can you settle and come here and tell us about the NEC meetings without first solving the problem of the Luwero people?  Are you serious?  Should you remain Minister?  

MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons With Disability): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Knowing that these people have been out there in the open, rain powering on them and when it shines, the heat becomes too much, being a reasonable man, is the Minister considering getting permission so that he can sort out the Luwero issue, since the report is going to be out, so that he can actually join the Kyankwanzi training later?  I will be happy if he can solve this problem so that he does not exalt any hardships to these people than necessary since the report as he says is now ready?

Secondly, there was doubt as to whether there was a law on the basis of which these people could be paid.  The Minister says, they have already been paid and he has also said that more money is going to be paid to them.  Could the Minister tell the House under which law is he paying these people?  Thank you.

MR.EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The issue of Luwero Triangle and most especially these people coming to Parliament has been recurrent.  I just want the hon. Minister to help me understand what exactly is the role of the Minister in-charge of Luwero Triangle?  

Secondly, understanding that question will help me determine whether the recurrence of this problem has been just an inherent failure within the Ministry of Luwero Triangle to execute the required responsibility.  

Hon. Members, you will appreciate that the Luwero Triangle Ministry is one of the oldest Ministries and has had five Ministers from hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, hon. Janat Mukwaya, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, and now hon. Tim Lwanga.  With that rate of turn over of Ministers in that Ministry, does hon. Tim Lwanga see himself that if the trend continues, he will have performed his duty or if that time comes he will also go in a similar manner like his friends?  I thank you very much.

LT. JIMMY WILLIAM KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luwero):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the opportunity for the people of Luwero to be heard in details was frustrated by hon. Member from Buikwe North of Mukono of Luwero Triangle, may I use the opportunity to ask these supplementary questions:  

Mr. Minister, you are aware – (Mr. Wagonda rose_)

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to suggest that one Member of Parliament can actually pass a resolution binding Parliament, or otherwise, and in this case actually a motion was moved and was supported by Parliament?  Is it in order for him to impute that, it is the Member from Buikwe North, who frustrated his move?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, frustrating an effort is malicious; if somebody uses a term frustrating, it is malicious. Then a Member who brings a motion and that motion is passed by the House cannot be termed as having frustrated the project.

LT.KINOBE: I withdraw the statement, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to know from the Minister whether he is aware that after 1986, Government put in place the Luwero War Rehabilitation Fund and that the fund never succeeded?  A Select Committee was put in place to investigate the circumstances, which led to the failure of the Government efforts to rehabilitate Luwero.  Unfortunately, that report has never been submitted to this House.  When does the Minister intend to have that report published, and debated so that we get to know the details of how much Government had really pumped in Luwero, and the impact created by that fund?  

Secondly, we have just passed a motion allowing Government to borrow under NUSAFU to correct the shortcomings of NURP I. When is he requesting Government to pass or borrow more money to correct the shortcomings of the Luwero War Rehabilitation Fund?  

Lastly, apart from the claims of those desperate people who have patiently waited for sixteen years to get paid, what other programmes does that Ministry have in place for Luwero Triangle, like his counterparts of Northern Uganda have NURP and NUSAF?  Thank you.  

MR.JORAM PAJOBO (Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me a chance to ask the Minister concerned whether the statements which appear in the Papers, that they neglect these people so that they can continue staying there as much as they want, are true.

Secondly, why are they demonstrating? It seems the Minister does not give them attention. I do not think that it is good for us to continue coming and entering here and then we go and leave those people there. How long are they going to sit there? They will get tired and they go. In actual fact, how many people have been demanding from Government and how many are still alive? Do they want them all to die so that they leave their claims? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is really a major question. If you ask him for numbers from the Floor here, you think he will be able to tell you the numbers just from the supplementary question?

MR. PAJOBO: Mr. Speaker, thank you for your guidance, but these are painful issues which we cannot continue to see and keep quiet. For 16 years, people have been dying, and they had been claiming. We do not know the number. And now their children come, and some people have been saying how can these children who are below 16 come here and claim. But they do not know that their parents have also died. Many people died in that war which has made us sit here peacefully today. So, to see these people suffering is really a painful matter.

I may be termed emotional, but I am really touched, and I hope that the Minister responsible for Luwero Triangle will go and get us these figures. I am not asking for the figures to be given to me now, but they can be given some other time.  Thank you.

MRS. KULANY: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am equally very disturbed over the conditions these people are subjected to. On humanitarian grounds, while they are sorting out their problems, surely can’t the Minister get these people some shelter in form of a tent or so?  

I say this because I have seen a child of less than six months there. I have also seen elders of over 70 years. Surely, if we value life, we should not subject these people to such conditions. These are Ugandans, and if it is true that the Government owes them money, surely they should take steps to make sure that they are comfortable where they are.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWERO TRIANGLE (Mr. Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members, thank you for the supplementary questions.  I will try to answer them as best as I can.

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, am I serious? I am asking you a question; have I ever lied to you before? I have never lied to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi before, so, yes, I am serious with my answers. They are based on research and on what I have read in the files. They are based on my two months’ auditing as an auditor for Government even when I am a Minister. So, I know exactly what I am talking about.  

I have looked at the files, and I have seen the fraud in those files. I have seen people claiming 600 chickens for one person, 4,500 bunches of bananas, 180 cows for the same person, and one person claiming shs.28 million, and that was in the year 1982. When the report comes out, the facts will come out.

About the four people who were said to have died, I was touched when I heard that people died. I took trouble to find out whether people had actually died. I managed to find some of them. I asked some of them, and they said, ‘Oh yes, so and so died, but we do not know where he is, we do not know where he was buried’. I asked them whether they went to Mulago. They said, ‘yes, we went to Mulago and checked, and there was no body’. 

Eventually, I talked to Lt. Kaggwa, the first person who collapsed in that place. Lt. Kaggwa was a Kadogo. He is about 28 years old now, and he suffers from epilepsy. He has been helped many times by the President’s Office.  Indeed, since I became a Minister, he has been a frequent visitor to my office, and once in a while I help him from Government funds and sometimes from my own pocket. Kaggwa appeared on television and confirmed that he was alive. I do not know where hon. Ken Lukyamuzi gets his information, but if he was more informed, he would know that these people are alive.

I did explain last time that it is true that on 3rd October, and not February as hon. Ken Lukyamuzi would like people to believe, the President promised to meet representatives of creditors from Luwero Triangle. I did mention that he could not meet them because of the inauguration of the East African Community. 

I also did mention that we took all the trouble, all the means, to inform everybody concerned that the President was not able to meet them. We had three weeks to do that, and we did it. The leaders in the areas, like the L.C.V chairmen and the RDCs, confirmed that the message had gone across. People still came. Their coming was voluntary. But as I understand, at the moment hon. Ken Lukyamuzi tells us that he has had a chance to talk to these people, and I got information that actually he was financing some of these people -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, Article 29(d) of the Constitution of Uganda creates a privilege for any Ugandan distressed circumstantially to demonstrate, provided he does so in a manner which is not injurious to others. 

All of you know that I am committed to human rights protection. As a Member of Parliament, I am a national figure. If I see people suppressed circumstantially, it is my duty to stop, talk to such people, and find out how they can be helped. So, is it in order for the Minister in charge of Luwero to insinuate that by talking to them, I financed their presence there? If he cannot justify, is it not proper that he withdraws that statement?

THE SPEAKER: Would it be out of order for a Member of Parliament to go and help the Members stranded there by giving them money? Is it something outrageous if that compliment is given to you? (Laughter)

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  That is exactly what I was implying to you, Sir.  Now, hon. Mwandha, I am a humane person, and I believe that it is true, hon. Mwandha has already contributed to some of these people out there to make sure that they are more comfortable than they were.  However hon. Mwandha – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just answer the questions.

MR. LWANGA: I am sorry.  However, Mr. Speaker – (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, there is some insinuation which is coming.  I do not know what the hon. Minister means by contributing to their being out there.  I made a statement in this House, and informed the Members of the House that among those people there are disabled people and I advocate for them.  I do not know whether he interprets that as contributing to their being there?

THE SPEAKER: Please, answer the questions and direct your answers to me.

MR. LWANGA: I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, what I meant was that these people need food, and he has been helping them out. Whether I stay here over this coming weekend or not, His Excellency, the President will be out of town, until Kyakwanzi is over, and until he has looked at the Report, I cannot say that the Report is ready, that is the reason for him not being able to meet them.  

Regarding the law under which people are being paid, I have already contacted the relevant Ministry, to tell us whether there is a particular law, but so far the little I know is that as long as Government has accepted that they have a debt, then the debt has to be paid. 

Hon. Dombo, ‘what exactly is the role of the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle?’  My portfolio in brief is co-ordination of reconstruction and re-habitation of Luwero Triangle, politically, socially and economically.  Since, I became a Minister that is what I had concentrated on until the debt issue came. He wondered; before me there was Dr. Makubuya, then Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa, then Nankabirwa and then myself!  When you look at them, Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa I think is an Agriculturist, he has a Phd. Dr. Khiddu Makubuya is a lawyer and he has a Phd in law; and for your information, Mr. Speaker, he was the first man to get a first class from Makerere University; and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, is a fine artist, and this time, I am an accountant.  I do not know whether that means anything!

Hon. Kinobe, am I aware that in 1996 Luwero war rehabilitation fund was set up and that there was a committee set up to study, why it did not work?  Yes, I have heard about it, but to be honest, I have not read the Report because I have not seen it.  However, Mr. Speaker, I will investigate and see what that Report was all about.  

Again, from hon. Kinobe, ‘Are we going to borrow money for Luwero Triangle?’  Well, you see, when people talk about Luwero Triangle, many of us have never been there. When I was appointed Minister, Mr. Speaker, I spent two weeks sleeping in Luwero District.  I went from sub county to sub county; I know what developments have taken place there and – (Mr.Wilberforce Kiwalabye rose _)

MR. KIWALABYE: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to tell this House that he has gone throughout Luwero Triangle since he was appointed a Minister two months ago, whereas he has not been to Kiboga for instance, and Kiboga falls under Luwero Triangle. Is he is order, Mr. Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, it is a question of a statement from you and a statement from him.  I am not in position to decide who is telling the truth.

MR. LWANGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Actually, I meant that, I went to Luwero District; that is where I started off.  I am sorry, if that has mislead anybody, but if I said that I went to a sub county – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed with your answers.

MR. LWANGA: Now, whether we are going to borrow money for Luwero, this is what I was on before I was interrupted.  A lot of money has been spent in Luwero.  Some sub-counties in Luwero have got as many as 80 boreholes, I do not know if other sub-counties in Uganda have so many boreholes?  There has been development-taking place, a lot of money has already been spent, and I will not go into details, Mr. Speaker. 

‘Do we have a programme for Luwero Triangle?’  Of course we do.  The programme we are working on at the moment is the transformation of Luwero from a peasant economy to a commercial economy. That is why we have been dishing out coffee stems, seedlings, to try and make people work and earn a living.  We are going to do the same with cotton, vanilla, fruits and so many others.‘NUSAFU – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We are tired, we want to wind up this matter

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, NUSAFU is a continuation of the effort of reconstruction for Northern Uganda.  So, really, we do not have anything similar to NUSAFU.  

Hon. Pajobo stated that no attention has been given to the people out there.  I want to state that Government has given a lot of attention to them.  I have been, apart from yesterday and today, talking to them everyday. But not only that, last week we raised money and paid some of them, those who accepted the money, we paid them money to go home and actually many went.  But then, Mr. Speaker, when people realised that there was money being given, many more came – (Laughter) –we investigated this issue and found out that a lot of those who came live around Kampala.  So, Mr. Speaker, all I have to say is just like we have asked the Luwero people, we want to ask on behalf of Government, I want to ask hon. Members, that those who have got ideas that can solve the Luwero problem in less than six months, your advice is welcome. It has taken us 16 years, we have been working for two months, and we think by January, we will have a final list and be able to pay the people.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This brings us to the end of today’s business, hon. Members.  I thank you for having completed what we had on our Order Paper, and I wish to inform you that the Business and Welfare Committee decided that this week, we start the X-mas/New Year recess. But before we come back, some work has to be created; when we come, there should be some work. In due course, certain Committees depending on what we have on our table will be informed so that they come to provide reports, so that when we come back we are ready with work to deal with. 

I wish to thank you for what you have done since July when we started.  We have accomplished a lot. We dealt with the budget, and I think we have been able to pass over 10 Bills. This is a record. (Applause) It is a new Parliament, but we have been able to do that.  So, I want to thank the Ministers who have been providing the work, the Committees and all of you for having dealt with this work in such a manner.  I hope we are going to improve and maybe next time when we come, a lot will be accomplished. 

Now, I think as for your welfare, the Commission is looking into it.  And as I indicated, I think today or tomorrow, we shall start giving some money to some Members of Parliament to be able to purchase vehicles.  We have done all that.  We shall start with certain groups.  Maybe to inform you of the formula which we thought should be used - we were informed by the Ministry that it could not provide the entire sum to all of us in that exercise of motor scheme.  So they provided us with some money.  But we decided that maybe it is fair that we start with the new Members. I mean those who were not in the 6th Parliament and who were not Ministers because the Ministers may be have some transport. 

We decided that there are new Members with smaller constituencies and others who have bigger constituencies.  We realized that the special group representatives have bigger constituencies than the normal 214 constituencies.  So with the funds available, we shall start with the new Women Members of Parliament.  I believe they are about 31.  Then we shall deal with the Youth MPs, because all the five are new.  Then we shall deal with the Workers. I think we have got two who are new, and then we shall follow the alphabetical order. Well, we can also look into the Army. But for the rest of you, by next month, I think we shall be able to deal with everybody so that you can solve this problem of transport.

CAPT.GUMA:  Mr. Speaker, we are going for recess - I am sorry, I interfered with your communication, but we may not come back until somewhere near the end of January.  But if you read the Budget Act, the Budget Act enjoins Parliament through its Budget Committee to be part and parcel of the debating process of the Government budget.  Now, in light of the fact that we are going, I do not know!  The Chairperson, I do not see her here.

THE SPEAKER: We shall look into that, whether it is necessary. We shall look at the law and should it be found necessary that they come during the recess, we shall definitely get in touch with them.

CAPT.GUMA:  Secondly, you have brought this matter of the welfare. I can just make a statement that the 14 million shillings, which we have heard cannot buy a vehicle.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is 14 million.  That is your statement.  My information is different from what you have.  I want to assure Members that the amount, which was decided to be given to you is 20 million and we shall give you that 20 million –(Interruption) - of course, it may attract tax.  If it does, well, this question of tax is not new to this Parliament.  The 6th Parliament received 18 million shillings last time, it was taxed and I assure you if this tax is to be imposed, it will be staggered over a period of 48 months.  So, a question of 14 million does not arise.

MR. EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to seek guidance on an issue regarding the Constitution and the law, and well aware that as a Parliament of Uganda, we were elected to make legislation. I have a communication from the Clerk to Parliament addressed to all Members of Parliament and it is copied to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. This communication says that the Members of Parliament will be paid part of their salary this month, and they are going to be paid the old rates.  Mr. Speaker, this Parliament did pass a resolution in compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and once a resolution is passed in compliance with the Constitution, it becomes effectively part of the law and it can only be amended with recourse in the similar manner that the original issue was passed.  

To get a circular saying that the old rates will be paid, I presume it to be in total contravention of the resolution and goes against the spirit of the Constitution.  It is on this matter that I really seek to be guided.  And besides that, Mr. Speaker, to send a Member of Parliament to the village - and that is the issue on which I seek guidance, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it is not in our interest that this issue is always on the floor of this House. Hon. Member, I think when dealing with this issue, which I have just seen, you should have construed the entire document as it is. The entire document is to the effect that the balance, that is the new amount that was increased, will be paid as arrears. There is no contradicting the resolution, which says the emoluments will start from November.  Please, do not deal with this matter every time and again. It is not in our interest! I pray that we do not deal with this matter because I have just read here, it is very clear, and it does not require any clarification from me. And I do not see any contradiction, the resolution was made and it has to be implemented.

But I think that matter, hon. Dombo, we should end it there honestly.  It is not in our interest that whenever we sit here, we talk about a matter that was concluded.  It was concluded and I want to assure you that every part of the resolution that we passed will be implemented.  You can get this assurance from me. 

MR.LOKERIS APARITE:  Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure on what, because I am adjourning.  Unless you want some question.

MR.LOKERIS APARITE:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking procedure on the issue that our district - because of a lot of work in our region - was not represented in NEC.

THE SPEAKER: Which district?

MR. LOKERIS APARITE: Nakapiripirit.  So, I am informing the House that our district is represented by hon. Lokeris Peter, Chekwii County.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I rise on a point of procedure –(Interjections)- I am entitled to say something! Why should –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: But I have said yes. Hon. Lukyamuzi, please be considerate to others. I am sorry to say this, but you stood up, and I said yes. Be considerate to others please.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Obliged, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on Natural Resources, I am seeking some guidance.  There is a matter in our Committee related to Butamira Forest Reserve –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I said that we shall deal with this issue. It is not this House supposed to deal with that particular issue. This is what hon. Guma brought up about his Committee and I said we are going to look into all this and we shall communicate to you. So, if it will be necessary to communicate to you, we shall do that.  

Hon. Members, I have got a note here to inform Members of NEC that they have a meeting on the fourth floor.    

LT. KINOBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The meeting is for Members who represent this Parliament in NEC. They are supposed to convene on the fourth floor, Training Suite, in the North Wing to receive documents of the agenda to be discussed in the NEC meeting.  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again, I thank you, and I wish you an enjoyable Idi El Fitr, Christmas and a Happy New Year.  The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned sine die)
