Thursday, 15 December 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr A. T. Owiny Dollo.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEGAL NOTICE NO. 1 OF 1986

Amendment No. 2, Bill, 1994.

(Debate Continued.)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill and I believe that we should support this Bill because, it is not because the NRC wanted to pass an extension for itself or the NRM, but circumstances have dictated that we have got to extend the life of NRM so that we can have a Constitution in place.  

I am also happy to note that we have now seen an indicative plan of what actually is going to be taken over time in order for the Constituent Assembly to finish its work in time and in order for the election to take place in time.  

I am happy to note that it seems that we are going to be able to have the Constitution by June next year and that means that, we will be within the six months that have been allotted for the Constituent Assembly to work.  But we must also note that probably they have wasted a bit of time, in that, they were not as serious as we thought, they would be and we call upon them therefore, to ensure that they realise the Constitution making as an issue of consensus and give and take, and that they should always be in time to be able to finish the work in time.  Otherwise, if no quorum is realised, things will be bad.  

The indicative plan clearly shows what one would have thought would be the problem in this Bill; because in order for elections to take place, there are so many functions that must be done and one of them is to have a timely appointment of the Electoral Commission and Electoral Commission to be able to do their job especially on demarcation of constituencies.  We also believe that if we are going to be in time and not have another extension, it is important that the updating of the Registers of voters be done in time so that we are actually seen to be serious and not wait until the end and then things start getting off the truck.  

My only worry, is that the amount of money required must be looked for in good time, otherwise, that kind of colossal sums of money if not looked for in time, we shall have problems in being able to manage not only the Constituent Assembly work, but also the Electoral system.  There was some wish of some Members that we should have a time frame showing exactly how many months we must have immediately after the Constitution has been put in place.  That would be a very good idea, but time frames can actually have problems of their own and if they have a problem, it would be very dangerous for us to come back here, and have another extension to avoid that time frame.  I think instead of saying an exact date, we should talk about an exact period - a period not exceeding a certain period rather than saying that on such and such date, elections shall be held; because there are some unforeseen circumstances that can befell and we find that we have got to have another extension and I hate coming back here to talk about another extension.  I think if we really set ourselves to the end of next year 1995, I think it will be a good target rather than saying on the 12th day of December, we shall do this and that.

It is also important to note and this is not just conjecture, that in case the Constituent Assembly passes that there will be Presidential elections, it seems there are some people who would want to challenge - to have a go at them, so it may be very important to give them enough time after the Constitution is in place and be able to campaign.  But I hope we shall have only one candidate -(Laughter)- nevertheless, in case we have to have more than one, it may be important for that person not to think that we have rigged the elections by not giving him enough time (the candidates are here) you should not have a situation where somebody says that, he was actually rigged, because he was not given enough time because, for instance, to go around the 39 districts, you need at least 78 days which itself is about 3 months and that means therefore, although indicative plan says, within 2 months campaigns can be through, certainly, if it is a Presidential candidate, you need more than 2 months in order for him to do that.  But I just believe and hope that we already have the candidate and he is enough.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, two days ago when we were having this debate under the sponsorship of the Think Tank Foundation, the President pointed out that in some countries where there has been no democracy, they have tended to have one Presidential candidate and the President himself said that was not a very good thing.  I would like to advise the hon. Member on the Floor to follow the spirit of the President, that we need more than one candidate in Uganda. (Applause).

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, I was not saying that there cannot be another candidate.  I said, if there is another candidate, he should have enough time and hon. Tiberondwa is going to have a go at it. (Laughter)  I think we should pass this Bill and put in place other factors and have an extension but we should also warn ourselves not to have a further extension, after this extension which I hope will not exceed one year.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I raise a clarification at an early moment in our today’s deliberations, concerning he issue of the election of the lower RCs, that is I up to V.  I would think that the RC.V are expiring as well as the lower ones in February.  I would like to find out the position of elections at those lower levels; because it seems nothing has been mentioned - the Minister of State and nobody has raised it.  So, I wanted to raise it so that Members of the august House can also pay attention.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the proposal of the Bill we will have to take note and given an answer during the time for winding up.  Take note of that.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I want also to first - this is my first time to catch your eye, to congratulate our colleagues who have been somersaulted in the Front Benches and promoted from various areas of work to higher ones and also to regret that we have lost some of our able people from the Back Benches, who have been now taken to the Front Benches.  But we hope that they shall keep the spirit as we have been having here, but at the same time, I am pleased that we have also gained some very good people in the Back Benches, whom we have also been missing, like hon. Abu Mayanja -(Laughter)- I am sure - these are known for their debating prowess and the country is waiting to hear them back on line between the Back Bench position.  I also want to congratulate the Vice President and to congratulate you, Mr Chairman, for the country has not lost your abilities and you are now sitting there, managing the affairs of the State.

Mr Chairman, I bring you greetings from my Constituency; we have received a lot of rains and for a change, you will not hear me disturbing you about water; except our road has broken down and I call upon the engineers to go and assist us so that we can be back on line with the rest of the country.

Now, coming to the Bill, for me, this has been a very big disappointment.  I really thought that we will not come to discuss an extension again after the Kanyeihamba debate.  A timetable was drawn, issues were declared and work started.  The time for elections for the CA was not to come by until months later; as a result of that, we have had problems  In the month of August, the Uganda Think Tank Foundation held a seminar to discuss and invited people to discuss what is going to happen, come January 26th, 1995, and it was in that Seminar decided that the programme was to follow that the Government should come out and make some immediate solutions.  The Government did not seem to move, we hoped the Minister for Constitutional Affairs would have moved.  Unfortunately, no one behold, nothing was done.  This was very, very clear, we appealed for an Interim Electoral Commission, this has not been addressed, we said that, to be able to calculate on a particular day, you need scientific judgement, not just generalised armchair thinking.  This was not done.  

Two days before the end of the deadline for the CA, a Bill was brought here, and we were called for an emergency situation which was not an emergency situation, which was so obvious from day one.  It makes me feel that there are some people who really do not care about their jobs or if they do, or may be -fortunately, I can follow my words now, because in the CA, I was under the Chairmanship of the Minister for Constitutional Affairs now to draft the Rules of Procedure for the CA.  Among the nine Members who were elected then, I was one of them, and the Minister now became the Chairman of that Committee.  I also know that he is on the Business Committee, I also know that he is the Chairman of the sub-Committee which has been trying to plan the dates and now for a change, the Minister of Finance shall not be blamed to cause delay, because they have been - inspite of a few problems which were mentioned yesterday by hon. Nekyon, they have been meeting some of their obligations and Members have not come because of that.  

However, what I do not want to see repeated and what I do not want to endorse is for me to endorse now; he must be aware that he is going to get our endorsement on condition that he will keep up the spirit he has been having when he was with us, when he was in the Back Bench.  If he wants to change that position and join the Front Bench and continue, and get into the bed and cover his head with a blanket, I am sorry we shall be very, very disappointed.  But unfortunately the disappointment will not be on him, it will be on us who have passed the law.  So, we have a problem, what do we do?  Do we just trust the man?  Well I would not have trusted the man myself being a law maker, I was not going to trust the Minister for Constitutional Affairs inspite of the history as I have explained of it and as I know him to be a hard worker.  I would not have trusted him until he was smart enough to make sure that before I make my speech, he circulated the programme of his - action programme.  This is a bit more convincing.  I hope that it will not be the same programme like Kanyeihamba brought here; where we endorsed, thinking things are going to work.  This seems to be more concrete.  

However, there are so many things in it, which still appear to have escaped the attention.  The question was touched on lightly by hon. Manzi this afternoon, the question of the Electoral Commission.  Nothing can take place for an election unless, first the Government solves urgently the question of the Electoral Commission.  These words and these programmes will come to note, if the question of the Electoral Commission is not addressed, now my attention has been brought, that there is a line of activity on the last page for July 1995, appointment of Electoral Commission and demarcation of constituencies in July 1995.  

Now, this is being done, I assume and I may be mistaken, because it is assumed by that time, the Constitution will be out, the Electoral Commission will be known, then they will put in place, then it will draw the demarcation of constituencies, the appointment of election officers, then training of Returning Officers and Assistants, then nomination of - but that exercise to be given two months is completely unworkable; whether you like it or not.  Whether you like it or not, there is no way Government can appoint the Electoral Commission in July, get all the people as Returning Officers, demarcation of Constituencies, registration of people, the up dating of registers, organising the work, it is impossible to do it in two months; absolutely impossible.  

Now, to convince me that we can have those two months to do that work, I think the Minister must explain to us in detail how that is going to work.  However, this can take place if they start now, if the computers are in place, if the rudimentary staff is in place, if the Administrative officers are trained, if the people who conduct elections - because elections will be free and fair and by secret.  So, this is known, if they train these type of people, if they ask Parliament now to give the current Commission some power to organise something like that, but if they do not ask Parliament to give permission to organise and authorise some organisation to do that, it will not definitely work.  

To say that you want to wait for the Constitution to be finished and then start organising elections, and when the election is in December, is a story, it is not based on any scientific assessment, it is not.  Which makes me then feel and fear -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member’s question that, the Minister should inform us, how starting so late is going to work might be better put like this.  That the Minister should inform us why it does not start now.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would have preferred to make this explanation when I reply, but I think in the interest of saying time, and the anxiety of the Members, I will tell the hon. House what exactly we have in mind. The Electoral Commission anticipated in the new Constitution; there is a proposal for a Permanent Electoral Commission, but I want to inform the House that even before I took office, a Bill had been published, proposing to set up an Interim Electoral Commission.  

I have had a meeting with the committee of this honourable House, which deals with legislation, we have had very useful exchange of ideas and I can promise this House that I am coming up with a law as soon as we come back from recess; which will enable government to put into place machinery that will handle preliminary work, either through that Statute, that Bill or through a Bill amending the CA Statute to empower the Electoral Commission now, the Constituent Assembly Commission to handle some of the preliminary work while waiting for the permanent Commission to be appointed under the new Constitution; so that when the permanent Commission is constituted, it will be taking over from where the Commission that will have been authorised by this august House will have left the job.  I am not intending to have a miracle to perform these functions in two months, but that is what I have in mind.  Thank you, Sir.

MR KARUHANGA:  In light of that, Mr Chairman, that then puts my heart in place.  But how many Bills have we been promised in the past that they are coming, they even circulate them, but they never see the light of them; that is another promise and we have to buy that too.  

The other promise I want to touch is the work in CA for which I know this House has already passed its powers and if I have any suggestion to make, may be the right form is not this one.  But be as it may, Members of this House have been making comments saying that, this expectation is brought abut by the CA’s failure to reach its deadline.  

Now, on the proposed programme here, you will see the kind of timing of various committees in - I think it is not all here - yes, how the committee will be spread out to work.  One of the most disturbing committees in CA is Committee 5, the other Committees really are doing their work, I have been escalating in them and I am not going to pass blame but Committee 5, because it has a very high dose of politic so what happened is that Ministers, what you call the big shots, are on that committee and they have no time to be on that Committee, they are too busy.  Now, I hope that the situation will improve with the return of the people who had walked out.  

However, I would have preferred that they be made to make their reports earlier than the other committees; so that they can be forced to work, because now, they are almost reporting last in April.  So, may be that way, they would be pushed to do some work, but I am sorry, I think our Chairman, is a Member of that Committee, so I better say very little about that, but I think the message has reached through our Chairman.

Lastly, my intention has been earlier n, was to come and introduce a date when all these will end, but I have now on reflection noted that, we can put - once we make a date - a law, then whether things are working or not working, the following day becomes a mistake and then it might require that then Parliament will summon to come and have another debate.  We just want to a complete undertaking from government and the Leader of Government Business, because it is not enough for the Minister steering this Bill through, it should be a commitment of Government and Leader of Government Business to come here and really convince us and assure us that what has been promised is going to be done on a serious basis.

MR NDEGE:  Point of information.  From what I hear on the Floor in the CA, is that they are even going to set when elections - Parliamentary and Presidential elections are going to take place and therefore, why I am supporting my hon. Friend is that, we should not set a date because, I think 99 per cent - the CA is going to set a date when elections are going to take place, I have not been on both sides.  So, I think let us leave issues and not dream about them; let issues take their own course until when they are ready, it is not up to us to set an election date, I think I quite agree with him that the election date will be set by the provision of the new Constitution.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, first, I would like to inform hon. Ndege not to mislead the House.  The CA is giving time scheduled for any further election.  I would not like to tell - I hope he is not trying to tell the House that when he is talking of February, we are having elections next February, not true.  

Then secondly, I would like to inform hon. Karuhanga that the question riding on the back of government especially on the presumption that they must do a good job, cannot take this country further.  We are saying, there must always be a law in place.  Therefore, to tell us, we should live this Bill the way it is on the assumption that the cadres in NRM are always good boys and girls  and they will always do a good job, is presumptuous and we cannot allow it.  You must put a law in place and government has to run its programmes according to what we have put in place.  

Otherwise, I would ask hon. Karuhanga to tell me how many of those provisions we put ourselves to undertake for the next five years when we came here and extended for the next five years.  The Ten Point Programme was thrown out and yet, there was a well established line up of what we would have achieved after years, tell me, how much of that we have achieved, if we have to assess he problem of the Minister now.  Thank you. 

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up hon. Elly Karuhanga.

MR KARUHANGA:  Let me start with hon. Marwas’s point first.  You know hon. Marwas recently went to Law Development Centre, so now, he is studying laws, so he is very -(Laughter)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is hon. Elly Karuhanga in order to personalise issues when we are debating these matters and this Marwas going to Law Development Centre has nothing to do with what he is going on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But I think hon. Elly Karuhanga was trying to clarify.  You know the normal knowledge that his Colleague has just acquired in recent time. (Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA:  I am grateful, Mr Chairman.  I am obliged to your ruling about hon. Wanendeya’s interference.  But the problem with hon. Wanendeya, he has too much knowledge, but the knowledge is not in order. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please proceed.

MR KARUHANGA:  So, Mr Chairman, the issue by Marwas is that, he thinks that some - it is important that we write a law, yes, we do and we are about to pass one, there is a law just now, which we are discussing, we are not taking in air; there is a Bill here, it is 5th December 1994 Bill, Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, Amendment No. 2, Chapter 94; it is the one we are about to pass.  The question is, we are discussing which details we will put in the Bill and I am saying -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you try to wind up?

MR KARUHANGA:  I had wanted to make a detail, which I am now convinced not to put that detail in.  Secondly, I think that the question of elections which was raised -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, apparently had the same problem with me, and my amendment was seeking to address that and he is saying now, he seems to be convinced.  Now, would hon. Karuhanga clarify to me what is the legal basis of this piece of paper I am seeing in your hand and he is trying out?  Although the Minister has not formally presented his - because of the lack of the legal basis of this would hon. Karuhanga still convince that it is sufficient for him to look at this administrative arrangement indicative and as a good lawyer, and I know he is a good Parliamentarian, is he still being convinced that there is no need to have a proper legislative provision to take care of this whole page?  Thank you.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I remember in 1989, we were - when we were explaining the NRM given similar status which had been worked up, what guarantee we have with these, in 89 we were given similar papers.  So may I know whether this is a guarantee and therefore, to be depended on by contributions?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga, could you try to wind up?

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I am sorry, let me start with hon. Wanendeya first.  He says that in 1989 we were given the same papers, but the thing is that, we never got these papers before; they are papers I have now, this Bill and this one, I have never seen them even before, so they are not the same, let me know that.  So, now let me go to hon. Omara Atubo.  I think he has asked a pertinent question that there is no legal basis for this but there is a logic basis for it.  

Now, the logical basis or it is that, we have already passed the CA extension ourselves, nobody else, nobody passed that CA extension; we are the ones who passed the extension of CA.  In the extension of the CA, we were very dear with, we did not give them the deadline date on the 15th of.  Now and we know that after CA has passed -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I see that people are now debating this paper here.  I also see that nobody is standing.  Mr Chairman, is it not a hoax, is it produced by the Government?  Who produced it?  Is it not a hoax?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That is a working Paper, I think.

MR ONGOM:  But who produced the working paper?

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, when I come before this House to make a speech, I do not just stand up and speak.  I do research before I make my presentation; I had my misgivings, I have told you my misgivings about this Nil, I have gone to see the Minister for Constitutional Affairs now walking out and he is my witness; to his office to raise my problem and he produced this document himself and said, here is our official position and gave it to me.  When I got into the pigeonhole, I found a copy of it.  I, therefore, know that this is an authentic document based on the research I have been making in order to make my contribution; and therefore, I would like my Colleague to adopt the same method of work to research before he comes in the House.  Now, Mr Chairman -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up?

MR KARUHANGA:  Yes, Sir, I wanted to address the question of hon. Omara and as my trend of thinking before, I was interrupted was that, this document really assists us to know, since we have now given power to the CA, now CA has been given some time to work along a certain line which we ourselves have said, and we realise that after their work, we are part of the promulgation for the Constitution that there will elections, and we are the ones to pass these laws.  Now, if we write a date in the law, the next date becomes an illegal date, yes, an unworkable, un- enforceable date, so we have - and I have seen an amendment by Omara Atubo.  In fact, it was one of the reasons why I went to see the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, because his amendment has swept me.  I was for it, I was going to speak for it, for the date.  So, when I went and we had this long altercation about this, I realised that there was a point in us not following the Amendment by hon. Omara Atubo, which appeared on the face of it to be a very good amendment; because we were saying come December finished and it would look okay even when you look at this - in fact, it seemed as if hon. Atubo was writing his amendment using this same document, but my advice now to him is that, why do we not pass this law as it is and since he is also a Chairman of the Rules of Procedures Committee makes sure that the time table is complied with; instead of just disturbing the people of Uganda, coming here with so many people to discuss extension and extension and extension.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up please.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you. 

DR LUYOMBYA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill and my reasons for supporting it includes that it is trying to fulfill the wishes and aspirations of the NRM struggle.  One of the reasons why that struggle was undertaken and some of us participated was that it was going to return power to the people.  The NRM promised a fundamental change and one of these changes is that we are going to create or set up a culture of transferring power peacefully, rather than through that.  

We are all committed to handing over power to the people peacefully and the method we chose was to go through the process of Constitution making; and we do not want to stay indefinitely in power.  In fact, there are quite a number of us who would like to quit active politics or active administration.  An example is hon. Kyaligonza here, he is Brig. Kyaligonza and the position to leave the Armed Forces and join the civilian life -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, the Constitution making process is a process by the people, it is not a process of the NRM Administration and its the people who are saying that the time we allocated them is not enough for having a meaningful Constitution.  Therefore, we should not just rush them and for that matter, if we have to hand over that power according to the Constitution which will be promulgated, I support this extension; so that the process is completed and power is handed over peacefully.  

Some Members are suggesting dates for this extension and I know we have given the Constituent Assembly six months in which to fulfill their job and I can see that they have drawn a workplan which has been circulated to us.  Well and good to have a work plan.  

But, I would like to remind Members or inform those who do not know that nature is not static; it is dynamic and it is in a dynamic equilibrium and in that equilibrium, there are constant changes which you have to accept and be prepared to adjust and change with them.  We had not accepted.  

Having worked on various Missions and Commissions, I know that much as you may want to keep the time table, if the logistics are not there, you cannot move.  Therefore, since we are not sure of the logistics, particularly the finances, we cannot crane our necks out and say a particular date, I agree with the phrase of this Bill that the new extension introduced by the Bill will expire on the holding of a general election although we can try to expedite, but we cannot be dogmatic with the date.

Having said that, let me also add that during this extension, we should also try as Members to adjust and change.  The general public is feeling the pinch, the tax payer is feeling the pinch that a lot of money is being spent in these exercises.  People say that, democracy is expensive; yes, it is expensive, but should not be wasteful.  In order to fulfill assuming that the logistics will be in place in order to fulfill the work plan, a lot of commitment will be called for from Members of the Constituent Assembly and as well as Members of the National Resistance Council and everybody in the country.  This culture of people signing attendance registers and walk away without attending to business fully should be checked.  I have heard that it is in the Constituent Assembly and I know even in this House many Members come and leave before business is finished; there are many times we have been stopped to talk business because there is no quorum.  I think we should re-dedicate ourselves and attend to our duties faithfully and with commitment.  Mr Chairman, those who are in the business world will know that one should not earn without working.

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Can I inform the Member holding the Floor that, the position of some Members who are holding their seats here and in the CA, are currently having a problem; like yesterday when we all came here to ensure that there was a quorum here, then there was no quorum in the CA.  So, I want the Member to note that that is different; it must be taken care of seriously by government.  Otherwise, we shall continue having problems of this kind as now we are here, there has to be no quorum there, so, I think the Government should take this issue very seriously.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up?

DR LUYOMBYA:  If someone is serving where he is meant to serve, I have no quarrel.  My quarrel is for someone who is meant to be attending this House from 2.30 until we leave 5.00 p.m. or 6.00 p.m. or whenever we may break off, just comes for an hour, and goes away, but he has signed and he will be paid for it.  I was saying that in the business world, people do not want to pay for no work done, and I think it was Rev. Atwai who quoted, it is somewhere in the Bible.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  You better listen to the discussion.

DR LUYOMBYA:  In fact, in the Constituent Assembly Statute, Section 27 and 28, makes attendance of Constituent Assembly mandatory, that is to full time and there are ways of invoking that, but I have not heard that those sections have been invoked; inspite of hearing that some people have not been attending, they decided to walk out and they have not been attending, and I am sure if those Sections were invoked -(Interruption)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the Member on the Floor that Members of CA who walked out of Committee 5, but Members are entitled to go and sit in any other Committee and as a result of that, many Members who walked out of Committee 5 went to other Committees like 1, 2, 4, and 3. Therefore, it is not true to say that because they walked out of Committee 5, they have not been attending the CA.  

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, all I am saying is that, man is assigned a certain duty.  If you are assigned duty in Committee 5, and you abandon it because you want to go and sit in another Committee, you could as well be regarded that you are not attending; you are not -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, could you wind up?

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, even for this House, I am not exonerating this House, I would even suggest that while we take on this extension administratively, I know it can be done that we should be paid by the man hours done.

DR A. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it has been said in this House more than once, that some Members of the government - of the Cabinet who have got houses paid for by government or who get housing allowance are also getting subsistence allowances; I believe if this is true and I think the Minister while winding up, should be able to brief this House on that very matter if this is true, I think this is a big drain on the national - on the finances of this country.  I think instead of concentrating on the nine Members who walked out of Committee 5, regarding expenses, I think Government should be able to explain or these Ministers should be able to tell when they have been getting subsistence allowance when the government is paying for their accommodation here.

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in this country, we have two institutions; one is the institution of the Auditor General and the other one is of the Public Accounts Committee of this House.  These two bodies will take care of that if it has happened; let us not worry too much about it now. (Laughter)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I thank Members for the information before and I know that Public Accounts Committee is dealing with reports which come from the Auditor General and these are postmortems  I know if somebody has got double payment or has earned doubly, he may be forced to repay, but this will be too late.  

MR MARWAS:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, this issue was raised sometime back.  I am raising a point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Ministers to keep quiet when the issue is tainted  - that was corruption.  If they have accepted to handle - twice, they are all corrupt.  Is it not in order for them to stand up and say they are not earning money twice?  And if they are earning twice, they should accept that they are corrupt.  Are they in order to keep quite? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, please -(Laughter)- hon. Members, I think the point of order raised by hon. Marwas may not fairly be appointed to the Ministers here gathered, but, you could be reminded that you should put your questions to hon. Ministers within three clear days; so that they can answer any other queries from them when they are ready.  But I think this is a general debate on the Bill and if you want these hon. Ministers to answer, please the Rules and Procedures allow you to put your questions to the Minister and give them three clear days in which to answer.  It is here provided for.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  The Clerk to the NRC here has posed questions, but ministers have refused to answer them.  What do I do? Because, for instance, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Take the matter to the Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  You are in the Chair now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But I have not received questions!  Hon. Members please, let us be orderly.  Could you proceed and wind up.  Try to wind up.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, in winding up, I am thankful for the information given to me from the various Members, but if there are people who are being housed and they get subsistence allowance, that is not honourable and it should be corrected since it has been mentioned, I am sure the Minister while winding up in his reply, he will say something about it.  Let me conclude by saying that I think it is high time that people were paid by the man hours done.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, let me take this opportunity to recognise the presence of His Excellency, the Ambassador of Spain who is with us up there in the Gallery; -(Applause)- and you are most welcome.

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill, but first, the analysis.  I wish to point out that as we debate this Bill for the extension of the NRM/NRC, the hands of this House are tied one way.  We have in the past been accused of being rubber stamps especially by the Press, except when we do something good for the Press.  This time, if we have ever stamped anything, it is this time.  We have to stamp, whether with rubber or metal, we do not have a choice.  We do not have a choice, just like the other day when we had no option but to extend the Constituent Assembly.  I do respect this House and every Member here as being intellectually blessed to conceive the ideas and possibilities.  It is inconceivable, that this House could have refused to extend the CA and allowed the CA to elapse and go home.  Then what?  No Constitution and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Information from the hon. Minister.

MR BASOGA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member that our hands are not tied, we have a choice.  In fact, many choices.  We can refuse, we can even propose something different.  So, our hands are not tied and he should feel free to express his views as they come from his heart and mind.

CAPT. GASATURA:  I welcome the good attempt by the new Front Bench but I am sure his intellectual capacity would not permit him to do anything than may be to mental stamp this Bill.  (Interjection)- Mr Chairman, I will not take another information until I make my point.  If we had allowed the CA to elapse, there was great danger.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Clarification from hon. Elly Karuhanga.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Really I think the hon. speaker on the Floor, hon. Gad Gasatura should differentiate between a consequential amendment before us and rubber-stamping.  I think he is really dragging in this Bill a negative idea when in fact, what we are confronted with is a consequential amendment of another Bill we have just passed and it is probably the other one that he can say he rubber stamped because he has so many options as hon. Basoga has said.  So, where is he?  But if he wants to rubber stamp, he is welcome to do that but not us.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I find the newly found researcher un-informed.  The Think Tank is well researched.  This House and every informed individual here is constrained and he is bound to support a reasonable amendment that this one is.  First the CA, we were bound to extend it because the alternatives were inconceivable and unthinkable and unacceptable.  The consequential amendment of extending the NRC and NRM should be automatic.  I say this with sadness.  I wish we were ready to hand over power to an elected government come 26th of January, 1995.  That is now not possible.  We have to do the only reasonable alternative.  Let me talk as a pilot.  

You have often heard of hijacks.  Somebody hijacks the airplane, he may even happen to be a pilot himself and the alternative that you have is not to fight and shoot and throw grenades but just allow the hijacker to come to the ground.  You cannot afford to fight up in the air.  I have listened to a few elderly hon. Members.  I have listened to hon. Nekyon.  I have listened to several other distinguished honourables.  When you grow old, you grow into a statesman; but I am told there are those who grow old and wise but there are saying also of the old fools.  When we hear from our friends within and without this House, some of them fuming with bitterness and venom and you compare that to the words of praise in 86 and 87 and wonder whether it has any relationship to the cycling re-cycling that somebody was referring to.  

I see in the extension of this Bill 4 distinct interest groups.  It is said to say, that the hon. Members seated right here have a well-entrenched interest.  We have self-interest to deal with.  Knowing that the extension is being given and we are the major beneficiaries, it is important to be conscious as to whether we can now focus clearly and judge objectively but we have no alternative.  There is no other House we can delegate this to.  

The second interest group is the Movement - the National Resistance Movement which would like this extra time to put the House in order before the next step.  The third interest group we had is the multi-partist group.  I notice that the multi-party group and the Movement group are two groups vying for power and when you include the first ones, the self interest group of the NRC, the three groups are an elite group in Kampala that want to continue and fight within a statute quo.  

There is a fourth group - business people and these are the taxpayers.  One might call them the animals of burden.  They are the ones paying our allowances; and they are the ones paying the CA, while we put our House in order.  When you consider these distinct groups, it is important to acknowledge the legitimacy of the different groups.  But the people of Uganda ask for peace and demand good leadership.  We have for example, heard several people talk of majority, majority rules, majority over-ride that is democracy.  

In fact, in the 80s as hon. Obwangor puts a question mark; in the 80s when UPC or DP whoever was leading had the numbers, many remember hon. Tiberondwa walking in now saying but numbers are numbers, majority is majority.  Time came when they no longer had the numbers they said, but you must also consider the minorities which is appropriate.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order, especially when he is a born again Christian to tell lies about me?  The reason why I am raising this point of order is that, I have never made the remarks he has made.  Is he in order to continue doing that without repenting before this hon. House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, as you recall the two hon. Members are non other than born again, they are both born again, and since they tell nothing except the truth, I think the Member was telling the truth.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you for bearing me out, Mr Chairman.  As I was saying of my elderly brothers, it is unfortunate but one of the jobs of aging is memory lapses. (Laughter)  We moved away from majorities in the 80s, in the 90s when our friends in the democratic party was saying look; why should you go to the people for a referendum that is when even my friends in Rushenyi who are in the democratic party quit the democratic party because they said, democratic party is now undemocratic.  Having said what I have said, when we are having our friends working on the Constitution, it is extremely important that we have leadership within the Constituent Assembly that distinguish themselves as consensus builders.  We do not, while majority principle may be accepted, the upholding of this Constitution can only be from internalization of the virtues within the Constitution and it can only come from consensus.  

Prof. Nsibambi put it the other day quite well when he talked against dictatorship by the majority intransigency by the minority, and we must overcome that.  We must overcome that during this period by even allowing those we do not - whose opinion we do not share.  We must allow the Cecilia Ogwals and Michael Kaggwa to come out and debate their points openly, and in an orderly manner.  Whether it is in the City Square or anywhere else, rather than the yielding, let them be given a proper time and let them argue their points.  Who knows, they might have some points we might pick on?  

Before I sit down, I have said that the people of Uganda demand peace, they demand good leadership.  If rightly or wrongly, the people of Uganda still that they were in the past wronged by political parties and I do not wish to offend my friend hon. Tiberondwa again.  If they feel that they were offended by political parties and the political parties want to participate again, I do not see why those in the leadership in those parties cannot take the lead of our friend hon. Aggrey Awori and apologise to Ugandans for any injuries, death and loss of the past and who know the people of Uganda might forgive them and give them a new bless of life.  While these vying parties need power, Jesus said, ‘seek ye first the Kingdom of God.’  Let us seek peace first and all these things shall be added unto you.  But again if I may quote, the Kingdom of God is not food and drink, but righteousness.  Let us stop talking about sharing the national cake; we must first create the cake.  

The people of Uganda want leadership in this forth coming year, want to be led not by the likes of the amendment, I want to finish with one amendment I saw proposed by my Colleague hon. Kanyomozi who says, he would like to extend NRC on one hand and extend the term of office on the other, but disintegrate the Cabinet so that it is re-constituted to include -(Interjection)- the amendment demands that only parties that took part in the elections of 1980, and how - names and how could his name -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  He made a mistake in that, there is no sectarianism in Uganda, we are broad based, everybody is allowed to make his choice and speak to the nation in that we have to build the nation through peace and development.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I am glad hon. Obwangor agrees with me that hon. Kanyomozi made a mistake, and while these are seen as the first interest groups, we must be careful that our vision is not blurred, but we must lead the people of Uganda to peace and prosperity so that our airship lands safely at destination.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I would like to start by thanking all the hon. Members who have constructively contributed to the debate of this short but important Bill.  I would also want to deal with the question paused by one hon. Member that what happened to the RCs from 1 to 5, 26th January 1995?

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you use a microphone?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Articles.  It deals with the judiciary, which has 18 articles.  Committee two is not reflected in this programme, and if it is reflected it will necessitates to have more than four weeks as others because it has 70 articles, it is missed out completely, it is not programmed.  Can the Minister give us a clue about that what is happening about that.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I will deal with the RC.1 to 5, I will also deal with the clarification thought by my hon. friend.  The Constitution writing exercise necessarily affects the form of Local Government we have in this country.  I am aware that the period for the RCs 1 to 5 is lapsing sometime in February, 1995.  My own view is that it would be unwise to go ahead and organise elections for RC ones to five before - in February and then we have a Constitution which may come into operation during the same year which may affect the structure of Local Government and how it is going to be organized and, therefore, may necessitates another election.  I think it is reasonable to anticipate that the Constitution writing exercise should be given time to go on and I am sure government through my Colleague the Minister responsible would be coming to this hon. House with appropriate proposals in a form of a Bill to cater for the situation.  

I am thankful to hon. Karusoke and others who have had the courtesy of pointing out the omission of the programming of the work of committee two I must say, it is an error computers normally do make mistakes but it is a computer problem probably the information said was - did not cater for that situation, but we have taken into account all the committee work all the committees and their work and we think this is a fairly safe indicative programme of action.  

I will make a few references to what has been going on and if I do not touch on everything, it is not because I have not heard it, I will have taken note of it and appropriate action will be taken.  A pertinent question was raised by hon. Atubo about the need to consult the population.  I only want to say that it was government’s intention that this Bill would be read the first time then there would be 14 days requirement in accordance with our rules of procedure and probably Christmas recess would also follow so that those Members who have been out of touch with their constituencies could have an opportunity to go and consult.  But as you remember, there was overwhelming support of view in this very honourable House that either these Bills are debated concurrently or almost concurrently or that even the Bill extending this House be debated first.  We resisted that, but my moving the House to suspend the provisions of our rules of procedure was really to take into account the demand by this House and I did so because I was confident that this matter being a matter that is very liable on everybody’s mind, Members of this honourable House have been in constant touch with their constituencies and have been consulting the public and they know what the feelings of the people are.  I thought that was the message this House was delivering.  Of course the other alternative would be to think that hon. Atubo having been a Member of this House himself and having raised no objection that, that time and revising it now, either he was saying he was not consulting his people or may be he was talking to the gallery with the view to 1995 but I do not want to go very far thank you for that.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I am fully in touch with my constituency and I rarely attract galley sorry.  When I said we should go and consult the people I was very conscious of the politics that is important behind this Bill, and I was also aware that we have plenty of time as you have said the period for expiration of the NRM was on the 25th, but two things have happened here.  One, the statute or the Bill extending the CA life was produced and debated under - in this House under suspension of rules as if it is an emergency.  Two; this very Bill before this House is dated 5th of December, Mr Minister and we have been asked again to suspend our rules and debate in view of these comments, in view of these procedures you personally has adopted and possibly the government.  I think it is very unfair to give those remarks you have made.  I would have been very happy if you had given me time even two weeks to go back to my constituency and explain the imperatives of this statute and come here and pass it with happiness and cool heart.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  I do not intend to push this very far, I am comforted by my friend hon. Omara Atubo for confirming what I knew was the position that he is in constant touch with the people and he has been consulting.  Otherwise, he would have moved a form of Motion for adjournment.  There was also the point that may be government should apologize for having caused this extension, but I did say like all Members have said, this is a situation not of our own making, not the government, not the NRC but the autonomous body we created to handle a very important exercise has found it necessary to request both government and you hon. Members to go into this exercise, and I think we are debating as mature and very responsible leaders to see what happens at this point of time.  This Bill is very short, it is very clear and straightforward and it is very, very important.  I will address the question of time and the programme we have circulated.  

True, it is an indicating programme and the reason we made it indicative is to give the Members and the country a fair idea of what we think should happen and to express our commitment to that programme.  But I agree with the majority of Members who have contributed and have said that it may not be very wise to make it part of the Constitution because we are now dealing with the Constitutional provision.  Let it be our commitment, let all of us be serious about fulfilling it. I am glad there has been healthy criticism about the CA, and we have in this House important Members in the CA who are Chairmen of our committees which are really dealing with the procedure and discipline and all delegates have been following so they have been hearing what the nation thinks about the CA.  Of course, it would have been better I think if we spared some of the attacks, we believe in attacking somebody who can defend himself.  

But all the same the - I think the message has been driven home and everybody will now realise even more than before that there is need to improve the methods of work in the other chamber so that this time table we are talking about can be realized to the interest of everybody in this House and the population we represent.  

Mr Chairman, may be one or two other points on this programme of work.  After the Constitution has been promulgated, there will definitely be need for particular laws to be passed by this august House to implement whatever decision will have been taken by the CA.  So, as we talk about the timing and the rest of it and leaving it flexible, we are really saying, let us leave room to accommodate whatever we must do because we do not know what the legislative programme will be.  

For instance, there will be need for an electoral law which must be passed by this House.  There will be need to set up the permanent commission, there will be need to debate the budget to cater for elections under the new Constitution.  So, it is these factors which we thought about and we thought it was reasonable to come with this proposal which we have come to and which I have seen that many Members are agreeable that it is a reasonable approach to the management of our affairs.  

I do not want to take too much of the Members’ time. I once again thank them for the frank and responsible manner they have debated the Bill and I call upon them, I urge them to pass it without much disturbance so that we can continue with our programme and handling other matters on our legislative programme.  I thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 Amendment No. 2 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE LEGAL NOTICE NO. 1 OF 1986 AMENDMENT NO. 2 BILL, 1994

COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 1

MR WANENDEYA:  I would like in the absence of hon. Kanyomozi, I would like to take up his amendment, Mr Chairman.  The reason is that there are a number of things which I see as not really being done right and, therefore, if we are to extend the NRM for another 12 months, it will be in the best interest of this country so that we do not have corruption to be continued and also tribalism.  

Mr Chairman, Members laugh and they think it is a laughable thing but there a number of things which have been going on, including even some of the things being done which may not be right, for instance, we had - the amendment is that a national unit government be formed and the National Resistance Council -(Interjection)- sorry.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I see hon. Wanendeya is moving the amendment at the wrong time and place, and in that respect procedure from hon. Rutaro.

MR RUTARO:  Mr Chairman, the order paper for today the 15th of December, 1994 talks about four items, one is prayers, two is administration of Oath, third was a Ministerial Statement and the fourth was Bills Second Reading; and at the end of that fourth one, there is general debate continues.  I am wondering whether it is in order to continue to go to the third reading when it is not indicated.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Rutaro to ask for procedure when the chair has already moved and of the Committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But hon. Members, I think hon. Rutaro was in order to ask for procedure to be followed.  But as you can recall, when Members started contributing and when this working paper was circulated, it became evident that most of the Members who were contributing after seeing this proposed timetable of work by government, are now almost repeating themselves; they were now repeating themselves, and in light of the little time, we have before us and knowing that even next week, we have still other crucial Bills to pass, I decided using the guidelines of our rules and procedure to proceed and this is how I took this - and this is why I took this.  And I think I am purposely in order.  So may we proceed?  I now put the question.  

(Clause 1 put and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

MR WANENDEYA:  Hon. Kanyomozi circulated an amendment to Clause 2 which reads as follows and which has been circulated.  A national unity government be formed and National Resistance Council to continue in existence up to the end of the year, Mr Chairman.  I, therefore, beg to move that this be adopted and therefore we form a government of national unity by inviting -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, I do not mean that it will be Wanendeya me as a person but -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  I wish to seek a clarification from hon. Wanendeya as to whether he can explain to me the difference between a national unity government and broad based government, because the two are the same.

MR WANENDEYA:  A government of national unity means that every party sends to whoever is forming the government names of persons who will join that government as opposed to whoever is forming the government invites individuals who have not even been voted by their parties to join that government.  In the case of a broad based government whoever is forming the government just picks anybody even if he could have been a thief or whatever it is -(Interjection)- to join that government.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR BASOGA:  Point of order.  I happen among those who were picked and I have happened to join the front or the second front bench.  Is it in order for hon. Wanendeya to insinuate that those of us who joined are thieves?  Is it also in order for him to use unparliamentary language at this stage in our discussion?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order.  Hon. Wanendeya, can you either substantiate in the absence of that, withdraw?

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, we have been talking about corruption in this very House and the hon. Member who gave a point of order was one of those people who were talking about corruption in this very House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You were talking about a thief hon. Wanendeya, could you substantiate that?

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I am not a thief but I happen to know some people, and if -(Interjection)- I will not mention their names, Mr Chairman, reason being that if names are mentioned, nobody ever takes any action even to get them prosecuted in a court of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wanendeya, if you cannot substantiate, will you honourably withdraw that allegation?

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I do not want to make things difficult for you – (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no.

MR WANENDEYA:  I would withdraw, but facts are very well know, Mr Chairman.  So, I withdraw for the sake of good order.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Hon. Wanendeya is introducing a very fundamental amendment, when you read it, to me, it seems to be totally irrelevant with a Bill at hand.  The Bill is seeking extension and is not introducing what type of government is not talking about what type of government should be in place during that time.  I am wondering whether this amendment should not be allowed.  It is totally irrelevant, it should not be disallowed, and it is totally irrelevant to the Bill at hand.  

Secondly, on amendment like this, hon. Wanendeya should have taken an opportunity while the debate was going during the Second Reading to air his views on this matter so that when it comes to Committee, he has already laid the foundation for his amendment.  But now, he is just jumping out of the blue and reading.  So, in my opinion, I would invite you to overrule this amendment, it is totally irrelevant.  

MR WANENDEYA:  It seems as though the mood does not need the government of national unity and, therefore, -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order.  If he has not withdrawn, I now put the question and the question is that -(Interjection)- excuse me, according to our rules of procedure, there is no secondment during the Committee Stage.  I now put the question that hon. Wanendeya’s amendment stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, if you look at my amendment, it qualifies Clause 2.  So after we have passed Clause 2, then before we move to Clause 3, that is when I will move it.  Or let us pass Clause 2, and then we shall qualify it after the - because that is why it is reading that not withstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph 2.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I just want to get clarification from the Minister of Constitutional Affairs whether he means, in Clause 2 the word ‘any Constitution’ because I do not think that is what he means, and if we leave the word any there, it is carrying a wrong message.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  The wording is perfect.  The reason is, if we say, ‘with the Constitution.’  It pre-supposes there is already a Constitution which must be passed by the CA.  In law and in what we did was to commission the Constituency Assembly to go, debate the draft and come out with any Constitution.  So, we cannot at this time say, ‘the’ it will attribute the wrong - description to the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 2 which we have passed now be - the legal notice - the Bill be amended as follows.  By inserting immediately after Clause 2 that we have passed the following: A; general elections shall be held not later than four months after the promulgation of a Constitution by this Constituent Assembly. (2) which is a B; general elections shall in any case be held not later than the 31 day of December, 1995 whether or not a new Constitution has been promulgated by the Constituent Assembly.  Through, Mr Chairman, C; The National Resistance Movement Government and National Resistance Council shall cease to exist on or before the 31st day of December, 1995.  

Let me speak to my Motion.  Let me first of all inform this House that in the spirit of building this country together, in the spirit of working together when I saw this Legal Notice No.1, I did approach the Minister responsible, and I drew to his attention that I am not satisfied with phrase that the National Resistance Movement and the National Resistance Council shall continue in existence until the holding the general elections.  I did this as I said in good - in very good faith and I told the Minister a Lawyer like me that this is bad drafting very honestly because I believe that your living - your creating a legislative vacuum which is not proper for a Parliament to pass such a law.  

Mr Chairman, I did give the Minister my Amendment and also a few other friends like hon. Baguma Isoke because I was very convinced that this is not a proper way in which law should be passed in this vague manner.  I am very happy that soon after that my friend who also saw this amendment hon. Karuhanga did go to the Minister and I will be not surprised, is that because of that Amendment, the Minister has seen this necessary to come with this indicative timetable.  I am very happy that somehow my amendment has caused action, I am very happy that, 

As I have said this indicative timetable has no legal basis, but even the 31st which I had in mind is contained here.  My Amendment thought first of all for the government to indicate to the people of Uganda that, that vagueness shall continue until election is held is true.  All I am asking the government to do is that, after they have come with this indicative timetable which is an administrative piece of paper, the government should commit itself legally by legalizing this timetable and including it in the statute.  To that extent therefore -

MR AKURE PETER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to support request my hon. Colleague, hon. Omara Atubo to clarify to me on the date he is talking about.  I just want it to begin this way, such a time when we go to sleep we pray, say God, help us for the next day.  Now, supposing on the last day, the 31st he is talking about, if something goes wrong what do we do so that the government comes to this House.  There is a danger -(Interjection)- this House is the eye and the voice of the people. We have to check on the government; we are the checks and balances.  Now, you are giving the government a very blank cheque to go and behave as it wants.  Now, if the government comes back how many times has government come to you, extend the life of this House.  

All we are saying is that, if the government is honest about the 31st, if the government is honest about December, then let it legalise it.  If some emergencies took place where it is impossible to meet the deadline, there is nothing which can prevent the government from coming to this House to extend the period.

MR KARUHANGA:  I know that hon. Omara Atubo is a very reasonable man and he may - he asked a question that, or he set it that we could legalize or legislate this timetable.  In other words, we make a law which adopts the timetable which has been given to us and we put it in the law.  I just want to show him the unwork ability of it, and when he recommends that, if it does not work we come back.  

For example, it is suggested on the timetable that on January 10th to 31st plenary will continue meeting concurrently with Select Committees and because of the report of Select Committee 3, and completion of Select Committee’s work.  Now, if we legalize it - if we write a law and it so happens that there is one sentence or one article remaining, on the 31st, for them to be able to move it on the 1st of February they will have to come here to make a law to amend the other law to move.  But anyway fortunately there is no such a thing of the 31st, any way there is  - 

Now, on February 1st, 22nd plenary should consider Select Committee one’s report.  Now if it goes on the 23rd then we come back here and ask for permission to amend the law.  This goes on and on.  Now you will realise therefore, that he cannot adopt this type of timetable and the same reasoning goes that if we also put a date of 31st as he wants, of December, it will also be the same problem.  And really I do not think that with his experience in public affairs for so long he wants to be bogged down in this type of details.  I think as I told him I had supported his view completely, and I was going to speak for it I thought he had a good amendment but we have now realise the truth of the matter and I would like to invite him to join me in supporting this position now.  

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Really somehow hon. Karuhanga got me wrong.  I was talking about December as the dead line.  I urge this House that as the embodiment of the will of the people, and you are charged with the responsibility to be a watch dog on the executive, that it would be badly off for you to pass Clause 2 without putting a deadline.  The government has given you a deadline of December in their timetable.  All we should do is to say that December 31st is the deadline when the government should complete its work.  So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move thank you.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, I would like to draw the attention of this House that the interest he has got that why I am trying to say my views with him, is that the 25th of January next year has been a timetable which keep everybody very happy.  That when NRM arrives there it will come down.  Unfortunately, circumstances now show that it will not be possible.  Now, I am saying, why can’t we give a timetable which is acceptable so that even 31st December, it gives us the framework.  We should really let people know where we are going to stop intentionally, Mr Chairman.  For example, our people are saying you are extending up to which time; this is what people are worried about.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member on the Floor and his Colleagues in order to confuse the House with the document which is neither Schedule nor a Bill, nor being a government document but a document emanating from the CA.  Mr Chairman, is it in order to bog us down on a document which is administrative document but not legal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You are not in order.  Proceed.  I think hon. Members please, listen, I think hon. Elyau should be clarified that this document is not part of the Bill and therefore, you should not -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, my argument is that in English when you say, ‘indicative’ it proposes that this is where Government thinks equally fit.  so, it is giving us all directions to understand.  May be from that end we shall arrive there.  

I remember two years ago, cotton price was indicatively Shs. 340/= per kilo.  Now, when time came for reality, it became to Shs. 300/=.  So, I am saying that the argument by hon. Omara Atubo is being mistaken for nothing.  We want to have timetable every year.  So, we say please, given a provision time.

MR BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member my Colleagues in this House that the Paper which they have that seems to have an indicative schedule for how the C.A will operate is not really accurate because we know that in the C.A there is a Business Committee of which hon. Omara Atubo is a Member.  It has even a Technical Committee.  Those ones monitor the operations and workings of the C.A and they are able from time to time to review how the C.A is operating.  So, it is not proper that we take this thing whole heartedly for gospel truth because it has not come from the C.A Business Committee, which C.A Business Committee requested that they needed more time to look at the - they were working; they needed more time which this august House accepted and they gave them that time.  So, it would not be proper if we followed that schedule.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his information.  But we remain to be seen as people who are willing to step down.  We should be willing to show that we give people democratic rights.  Let us be realistic.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose this Amendment not because I think it is not a good amendment, but because it is not practical and cannot be implemented.  It is nice to be scientific and have debts.  But we must also look at the politics and practicability of things in this country.  As we talk and talk of elections, we have not even realised that we have to borrow money for this elections.  We all know why C.A did not start working at the right time, because donor funds were not coming.  We also know that anything can happen with the C.A and they do not finish in time.  Does that mean that we shall not have the Constitution?  Secondly, part of that amendment says, ‘whether we have a Constitution or not, we just go for elections.’  I think that one is not practicable.  Let us have good faith that the Government will do what it can.  

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, my points have something to do with putting there a time and something of not putting there a time.  If we put there a time, there are already moves within the C.A to make sure that the works of CA are delayed and therefore, some people are going to prolong the C.A to that date to show that they can derail the process.  If you do not put there the dates, they will be forced to finish quickly so that we can have elections because they want the elections.  In fact, if you put there a date, you will have prolonged the debate; if you do not put there the date, the people in the C.A will be forced to debate that Constitution quickly so that they can have elections and after the elections, we should have a new government.  Thank you.

MRS AGADA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose this amendment.  I am on the sub-Committee of the Business Committee of the C.A.  At the beginning of the Constituent Assembly, we sat down and made a timetable for the C.A.  We were all very anxious that the Constitution be in place by 25th of January.  But in that House there are people who were not interested in the Constitution being ready on the 25th of January.  There were very many people who said openly that let 25th of January come then they see what NRM will do.  There are very many people who believe that the 25th January 1995 caught the NRM; they will be in an embarrassing position and they will be fast to form a Government of National Unity.  This timetable I am seeing here is very similar to the many timetables that I sat and participated in making.  I wonder whether the Mover of this -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, we seem to be getting derailed.  Hon. Dr Luyombya raised a point of order which I think was valid.  We are now gaining influence by this paper, which was circulated.  But what is before us is not even this one because it is not a proper amendment before us.  Mr Chairman, we should stick to the schedule.

MRS AGADA:  I was going to say that this timetable that has been presented to us is similar to the many timetables that were made in the C.A.  Is there any guarantee that the Mover of this Motion - Amendment can do?  In the C.A we have people who believe that they are better draftsmen than even the Commissioners.  They do not want to take the ideas and one person wants to derail us.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Is the hon. Member in order to state that there are some Members who are trying to kill the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you substantiate hon. Member?

MRS AGADA:  Mr Chairman, I remember a day when hon. Lyanda Komakech came up with the ten amendments on the C.A. and I think Mr Chairman, you can also remember advising him that may be he would cool down a bit.  The point is that it is difficult surely to estimate because people are so unpredictable and when you have a situation like that, a Member insisting moving ten amendments, what can the Chairman do?  So, I would propose that we leave this thing.  Thank you. 

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment. It is true hon. Omara Atubo talked to me yesterday about this amendment, but it is not true that it is his amendment which initiated the preparation of the indicative programme of action.  This is just a result of the methods of work of your Minister for Constitutional Affairs.  Now, to be sincere, I believe that it is very important for a House like this one to have all vital information when they are going to take a decision.  So, we started preparing this before hon. Atubo talked to me.  But it was a very nice coincidence.

Now, why do I oppose this?  Because really a lot of what he stated in hon. Omara Atubo’s Amendment, we have also already said it should be the work of the CA in the Statute.  It is talking about general elections shall in any case be held not later than that.  In our Statute - the CA Statute, we gave the Constituent Assembly the right to debate and enact a Constitution and then we come in at the time of promulgation.  One of the vital Chapters in that Draft is a Chapter regarding positional or rather transitional arrangement and here is the Chapter where we are going to discuss the details of the dates and the rest of it.  So, having given that power to the CA, we should continue in that spirit and let the CA do its job.

I would also hate the position where the NRC could be accused of interfering too much in the running of the affairs of the CA.  Right from the word ‘go’ we said, we want the people of Uganda to make the Constitution of their own.  We also took away the power to make this Constitution ourselves so that it obtains the legitimacy it must have.  Now, -(Interruption)

MRS MARY OKER:  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Members to keep on making noise when the Minister who is the Mover of the Motion is really trying to wind up the debate?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  They are not in order.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to tell us that we as CA are not interfering when we know for example, that we have been invited to a number of places and therefore, interfering because some of us are not the old Members? 

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I am saying that we should keep that spirit of allowing the Ugandans to make the Constitution of their own through the Constituent Assembly they have elected which we have deliberately left with a lot of independence because, if we start fixing dates now, I will be tempted to come with an Amendment to seek Government intervention in the Constitutional making process and I do not think it will be politically healthy.

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, I am glad because the Mover of the Bill before the House is a lawyer.  It is clear Uganda’s position is constitutionally.  One - in July 1962, those Ugandans who went to London, at Marlboro House we fixed the 9th of October 1962, for us to get our Independence and Sovereignty.  Secondly, at the same, Uganda Independence Conference held at Marlboro, London, we fixed under Section 26 over then the Constitution, they were holding over referenda by 1964, November.  Therefore, a law to be specific, honest, prominent, clear and for everybody.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. former Attorney General for his remarks made.  But I was saying, only last week, we passed the Constituent Assembly Statute enlarging the CA time.  We should not now be seen to pass another law which will in effect prejudice affecting the law we passed last week.  So, in all honesty, I want to plea to ask the Members to reject this Amendment and pass the Bill as proposed for the betterment of us here and the population we represent.  I beg to oppose the Motion, Sir.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE TITLE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee report thereto.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Council do resume thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has carefully considered the Bill entitled ‘The Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, Amendment No.2 Bill, 1994 and passed it without any Amendment.  I beg to report Sir.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma)  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)  With that hon. Members, we come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn until next week Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 December 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)


