Thursday, 11 December 2003

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming pupils from Buweki Public School in Luwero District. They are up in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

The second issue is that we intend to hold sittings both in the mornings and afternoons on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday next week. So, I am giving notice to members and the Executive. That is the last week we have here and there is a lot of work we need to accomplish. So, I am appealing to you to put aside time, both mornings and afternoons between Tuesday and Thursday, to accomplish urgent business.

Thirdly, on a very sad note I would like to offer the condolences of this House to one of our colleagues, Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire, whose remaining paternal parents were murdered in their home at Kibugga Village in Budde Sub-County, Mpigi District, on the night of Tuesday. They were buried yesterday. This was Mr Yosefu Nsubuga, who was 82 years old, and Mrs Rosa Nasozzi whose age I do not know yet. Maybe we stand up as sign of respect for them.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.32
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I arise on a matter of great concern to Members of Parliament from the district of Arua, and by extension to those in West Nile region. 

It is not everyday that His Excellency the President visits that part of the country. So, when an opportunity lands itself, we from that region expect that adequate information is given to us and if possible we are also incorporated in the programmes of His Excellency the President in that area. 

As I speak now, His Excellency the President is expected in Arua District today and I am completely in the dark, so are many of my colleagues, about this arrangement. I would like a competent authority, who handles these matters, to explain why we as partners in the affairs of our country are left out when the head of state is performing these duties. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.34
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, and this is on the state of the river at Buikwe-Kiyindi Road, that is, River Ssezibwa. 

Yesterday, I happened to attend a burial at Kiyindi but the rains of Monday and Tuesday left the whole place flooded. In April, parts of the culverts on that road were washed away and the Ministry of Works team came and did the work halfway. It was just like a one-way. 

For about 100 metres, water was flooded. And given that the state of the bridge was extremely weak, you drive in water and small cars can easily be washed away or even diverted. To make matters worse, when the accident happened yesterday after Mabira, those vehicles were supposed to pass there but they could not. 

So, I fear that if we get other rains of the same magnitude like those on Monday and Tuesday, there could be loss of life. Because you drive through water, you do not know whether the bridge still exists but you just assume, and it is to a level of one metre. 

I am just appealing to the Minister that something should be done. The state of the road definitely is worse, but at least repair the bridge to make us access our areas. Otherwise, we shall be in another island on the main road. I thank you.

2.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I recall before we went for recess the last time, you had promised that we were going to have a closed session whereby members could iron out a few differences here. I do not know if that still stands. 

Secondly, I saw an advert in a newspaper of Monday, 8 December by Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture Secretariat under Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They are saying they want only international consultants to come and do work in monitoring and evaluation, financial management and in human resource. 

Madam Speaker, in Uganda every year we are passing out about 10,000 graduates at all levels. When will Ugandans own such jobs when all of them are being advertised for the international consultants, who are already international and want to take local jobs? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, about the closed session, we shall do that in the first week when we return from the recess. We shall have made the necessary arrangements to convene that meeting.

I do not know whether the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs can respond to the question of hon. Arumadri. The President is in Arua and the Members of Arua Parliamentary Group have neither been invited nor informed. I do not know.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I am not competent enough to answer that question. I am not part of the protocol.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can’t you undertake to pass on that message to the relevant minister so that they answer, because it is a matter of concern to the members?

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I will take it on. I will inform the relevant minister to address it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is also the question of the flooding of the River Ssezibwa, which I think is now impassable. I hope you can also inform the Minister of Works that very soon members will not be able to go back to their constituencies using that road.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I have been noting all the questions. I will inform all the relevant ministers. Thank you.

RULES FOR THE ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE PAN- AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

2.39
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Capt. Twarebireho Tungwako): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the rules of procedure to govern the election of the members to the Pan-African Parliament.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is mandated under paragraph (f) of Rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to carry out such other functions as are conferred by the rules, or as the House may assign. It is in line with that rule that you directed that the committee should expeditiously handle the rules of procedure to govern the election of the five members from Uganda to the Pan-African Parliament.

Method of work.

The committee held three meetings and deliberated upon this matter. The committee used the Protocol establishing the African Union and the Rules of Procedure governing the elections of members to the East African legislative Assembly as working documents.  

The committee is grateful to hon. James Mwandha, Member of Parliament for Persons with Disabilities, who appeared in person and presented views on behalf of the Members of Parliament with Disability.

Background.

On 9 September 1999, African Heads of State and Government held a meeting in Sirte in the Great Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and established the African Union. They also called for the speedy establishment of the African Economic Community and the Pan-African Parliament.

Article 2 of the Protocol establishing the African Economic Community provides that:

“ 1. Member states hereby establish a Pan-African Parliament the composition, functions, powers and organization of which shall be governed by the present Protocol.

2. The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall represent all the peoples of Africa.

3. The ultimate aim of the Pan-African Parliament shall be to evolve into an institution with full legislative powers, whose members are elected by universal adult suffrage. However, until such a time as the member states decide otherwise by an amendment to this Protocol:

i) The Pan-African Parliament shall have consultative and advisory powers only; and
ii) The members of the Pan-African Parliament shall be appointed as provided for in Article 4 of this Protocol.”

Proposals for Inclusion in the Rules:

Our work was made easy by the fact that there was already a precedent provided by this committee and adopted by Parliament to govern the election of representatives to another legislative body namely, the East African Legislative Assembly. It is these rules that the committee slightly modified to suit for the election of the members to the Pan-African Parliament. What remained crucial then was the criteria to be used in determining those representatives.

Category of Membership.

Article 4(2) of the Protocol establishing the African Economic Community, relating to the Pan-African Parliament provides that each member state shall be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by five members, at least one whom must be a woman.

The committee had protracted discussion on this matter and agreed that the practical solution was to categorize the candidates into two namely, all-gender candidates and the women candidates.

The committee agreed that four all-gender candidates would be elected to represent the historical geographical regions while one candidate would be elected to represent the women.

Other Interest Groups.

With regard to the proposal made that other interest groups, for example persons with disabilities, should also be given a slot, the committee is sensitive about the aspirations of these groups and conscious of the Constitutional provisions regarding affirmative action. However, due to practical difficulties it is not possible to provide for all such groups in the House.  

The committee has, however, recommended in Rule 4(1) that during the election of the members of the Pan-African Parliament, members should vote by taking into account different categories of representation in the House.  

The committee further recommends that interest groups should interest among their number, persons with good profiles, coupled with ability and good personality, to persuade Parliament to elect them.

Conclusion.

It is therefore with distinguished honour and pleasure, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that I request honourable members to support and adopt this report together with the rules of procedure hereto attached, to enable us elect the team to represent us.

I thank you for listening to me and I beg to move.

2.45
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also wish to avail myself this opportunity to thank the honourable members of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for their hard work and commitment to African unity.  

The establishment of the African Parliament is an important historical step being undertaken to remove the artificial boundaries that were created across Africa by colonialists. We are now embarking on the process of breaking these artificial barriers by putting in place an African Parliament. 

By formulating these rules, we shall determine the nature and character of our representation to the African Parliament as well as the views and aspirations, which are likely to come in the African Parliament. 

Therefore, I feel this Parliament has an historical obligation to ensure that we make a great contribution to the revival of Africa by electing very capable, courageous and very distinguished representatives to the African Parliament. I hope that at the right time when we are electing our representatives, we shall bear this in mind. 

Madam Speaker, we are now talking about consideration of the rules for electing our representatives. In principle, I support the recommendations of the committee. But I have a very serious concern, which was articulated by my colleague, hon. James Mwandha, when he appeared before the committee.  

We said this African Parliament shall be representative of the whole Africa. Africa is not homogenous; it is heterogeneous. There are various interest groups that must be represented. In Uganda we have a constitution that recognizes the various interest groups in our country. We had clearly stated, as articulated by my colleague hon. James Mwandha, that these various interested groups must be represented as well.  

Madam Speaker, I am disappointed to note that the committee was unable to take into account our concerns. This, I must say, will have a bearing on the character of our representation as well as what they will put forward in the African Parliament. 

I am, therefore, utilizing this opportunity to appeal to the honourable members of this august House to reconsider our positions and our proposals, and to come up with solutions to address our concerns. 

I will not have an opportunity to stand and speak again on this subject. But I think there are two possible ways we can address our concerns. I am not only saying “my concerns”, I am saying concerns of all of you because I believe that you are all with me as I speak about the concerns of my people. 

One way is for us to improve upon the recommendations from the committee and have specific representatives of interest groups.  

Another way is by going with the recommendations contained in our own political thinking and our own hearts, that we have embraced interest groups, and ensure that when we are electing our representatives they should be a reflection of the various interest groups we have in this Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, with these few words, I beg to support the report from the committee.

2.45
MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I wish to join my colleague, hon. Ndeezi, in thanking the committee for fulfilling its mandated obligation.  My submission will centre on voting procedure 4(a), which basically talks about geographical/regional representation.  

Madam Speaker, when we are talking of representation at the continental level, I do not think we are talking about allotting jobs. It is for this reason that I would want to request this House to strike off the method based on region.  

Why do I say this, Madam Speaker? One, the framers of the Protocol that brought into force this Pan-African Parliament envisaged that voting would be by universal adult suffrage. Why should we as Parliament now sit out here and begin saying, “let us vote by regions”? 

Why should we vote by regions? We should vote in the interest of this country regardless of where we come from. If it is Kasigwa and a, b, c, d that are the right people to go to the Pan-African Parliament, vote them on that principle.  

Two, Madam Speaker, the subject matter is Pan-Africanism. When shall we ever talk of Pan-Ugandanism? Why should I look at hon. Onzima as a northerner? Why should I not look at him first as a Ugandan? We should look at ourselves as Ugandans first. 

I believe it is our duty as this National Assembly to promote nationalism. If we do not do that and begin sectionalising the method of voting, then I believe there is a big problem, Madam Speaker.  

My third justification is that we are talking about a national image. We have been in this House for three good years and from the bottom of our souls, we know who are capable of representing us in this Pan-African Parliament. So, based on that, Madam Speaker, I would suggest that voting remain open and anybody can contest and we vote as and how we believe somebody should be voted.

Madam Speaker, the list of justifications is endless. But finally, I would want to propose an amendment in the method of campaigns. We should include a question time for all the candidates.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

2.38
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support hon. Kasigwa on this point. When you look at what has been stated, and I thank the committee for the report, you note that the issue of regional representation may make us miss the point. The point in this case is to get people with competence to represent Uganda as a nation. The more we continue to look at the regional aspect, the more we may lose out as a Parliament and as a nation.  

The other issue, which I would like to thank the committee for and those who put the rules in place, is the consideration of at least one woman representative.  But I would also like to urge that other interest groups also be taken into account. Because indeed when you look at Africa, we should be representative of what we actually are. 

I thank hon. Mwandha for appearing before the committee and I would also like you to take into account hon. Ndeezi’s comments because equal opportunities must be respected at all levels. I thank you.

MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done.  

I would like to propose that the decision of the committee that this Parliament should elect people of good profile, good ability and with good competence is very good. 

To justify that, Madam Speaker, I would say, since in the Pan-African Parliament we are going to discuss bigger things concerning the Charter and others, we would also wish the candidates to have open debates so that we judge the ability and their representation before this House here. 

They are not going to the Pan-African Parliament to caucus; they are going to show their competence. So, for us to elect the right representatives, we need them to portray this before this House. I thank you very much.

2.56
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for drafting these rules. I wish to support my colleague, hon. Kasigwa, on this regionalization business. 

I am quite aware that it was part of the basis on which we elected our representatives to the East African Assembly. But I think it was a little bit of a mistake, depending on the objectives for which we are electing these regional bodies.  

The African Union intends to make Africa one country, maybe with one government and one Parliament. But here if we start electing on regional basis, then we are not pursuing the objective for which we are electing our representatives.

Secondly, I am a great supporter of the affirmative action, but there is a problem implementing this affirmative action in every aspect. Now we are saying we should have at least one woman for Uganda. Why one woman? We have women here, our colleagues here in this House, who are so competent. If they were to offer themselves to serve our nation in this respect, I do not think we can discriminate them simply because of sex. (Interruption)

MR ALEX ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the recommendation of the committee is that, this one slot is specifically reserved for women but it does not prevent other members of this House who are females to contest for the other four slots.  That is how I understand it. So, there is no way of saying that it is only one slot for women. They can compete for the other four slots; it is open.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I agree with what he is saying, but the information I want to give here is that not every African country behaves like Uganda where they take into account the gender and other interest issues. The Africans there who established the Protocol thought that maybe in those other countries, which are not gender sensitive, they might send delegations that do not have women. 

It is a requirement in accordance with the Protocol that at least a woman must be there, and that is the reason we had to take it up and design these rules in this nature. You cannot guarantee, although we are gender sensitive here, that in the other four a woman will be there. So, we had to abide by this. But I would agree with him that actually when it comes to elections, let many more women get there.

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  I thank you honourable member for giving way. I just have two bits of information. The first one is that, Article 32 of our Constitution says: 

“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalized on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.”  

It is well known in the whole world and in Africa that this is the only Parliament, which has a slot for people with disability. For this, we take credit.  

This year in April, I was at the Commonwealth Law Conference in Australia and I gave this as a point and we were acclaimed. Now if we go to this African Parliamentary Union and we do not show our traits there, then what will we be saying to the whole world?

MR KIWALABYE: I thank my honourable colleagues for that useful information. In fact, all of them are supporting my view.  My view was not that we should not address the affirmative action but that affirmative action is not restricted to gender alone. This is my view.  

If we are using the same yardstick, then there are the youth because they are also marginalized. The workers are also marginalized and the people with disabilities are also marginalized. But I said at times you find it impracticable. This is what I was saying. You find it impracticable because we need five people and the marginalized are maybe even more than five. 

Therefore, you starting to say, “maybe gender, maybe woman, maybe this”, at times it becomes impracticable. This is what I was saying. Can we include all of these marginalized groups in our affirmative approach to every issue? If not, should we do it selectively, because now we are doing it selectively? That is my concern. 

People with disability definitely would future here. As the hon. Byamukama has said, we were acclaimed when she put this case to that international body. We would also get this credit if we put people with disabilities. But at times we find it very difficult to accommodate each and every group of the marginalized.   

So, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we should not go in to support our colleagues with disabilities and include one of them. Yes, because we are addressing that problem now globally and continentally. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, if we are going to go giving slots to every person, I want to seek clarification from you, are you going to also have a slot? Because the groups represented here are more than five, to begin with: women, workers, army, youth, disabled and the aged. Those are six. Where are you going to get the sixth place to be able to cater for every person if we go by that?

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is my concern. He wants clarification from me, but that is my concern. We have so many groups that are marginalized and which should be addressed affirmatively. This is the question, should we do it on a selective basis? If so, who should be left out and who should be taken on board? This is the question.  

I was only advocating that in addition to this gender, we also include people with disability selectively and we leave the others out, including the elderly. (Interruption)

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to remind the House that actually this is not our own initiative. If we read what was sent from the Secretariat, this is a requirement in terms of our submission. So, probably, we should discuss the aspect from that angle. This was given and I think we are just using a formula. So, I think we have to put that into consideration. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Kiwalabye, maybe you might want to address those other four seats and make an amendment regarding those four seats, because the Protocol is very definite on the question of the woman. You might want to address the other four seats.

MR MWANDHA: I just want to inform my colleague on the Floor and reiterate what hon. Byamukama has read out of the Constitution.  

What he is saying is not a matter, which is not contained in the Constitution. It is important and I want to read that particular provision again. This is our national Constitution and anything that goes against it will be unconstitutional. Article 32(1) says:

“Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalized on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.”   

So, the honourable member is really supporting a matter, which is already contained in the Constitution. This is the information I want to give.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the Constitution being quoted is the Ugandan Constitution. What we are discussing now is the Pan-African Parliament. I am wondering whether there is such a provision in the Protocol, Madam Speaker. If it is not there, then I do not see why we are wasting a lot of time on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, although we are dealing with the Pan-African Parliament, when we came here we took an oath in this House to uphold this Constitution and all its contents. So, really, it is incumbent upon us to make sure that we are abiding by the Constitution. That is why I asked the honourable member whether he could make a proposal relating to the other four seats so that we can find a slot for the disabled.

MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, my proposal is very simple; these rules have been made to select members out of this assembly to the African Assembly. We are all here, including all the marginalized groups, so they can compete because they are already catered for here. They can stand and they should be elected on merit. Surely, in this particular case there should not be affirmative action in this regard.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a very strong supporter of affirmative action. When you read Article 32 of the Constitution, it is talking about gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition and so forth. 

Madam Speaker, because of those so many other reasons, in Uganda we thought and approved that the other categories of marginalized people include workers, youth and the army in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I do not subscribe to the people who are misinterpreting this provision. This provision is very clear and we have implemented it by allowing those categories to be here. We have more than five categories here and, therefore, if we have to have four slots, who are we going to leave out and who are we going to take?  

I will say this as someone who has studied gender; there are only two categorizations of a human being in the world biologically, you have a man and a woman. I would like to say that gender cuts across board, that within the disabled persons you have men and women, within the workers it is the same and within the army the same.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would implore members to support the recommendation of the committee knowing very well that the Protocol has already set aside one and has accepted and confirmed that there are those two major categorizations of human beings. The others can be taken care of how we elect here. 

I would like to encourage everybody to contest and when of course we are electing, we will have all those considerations in mind. But, Madam Speaker, this should not bog us down. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, wind up.

MR KIWALABYE:  Madam Speaker, this is now a game of grasshoppers because you cannot be –(Interruption).

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I rise seeking clarification from the Chair. This Protocol was entered into by the Government of the Republic of Uganda, and it was ratified in accordance with the processes of this country. 

This is the Protocol that we all agreed is going to be the basis of representation by all African countries in this African Parliament. Is the debate now suggesting that we revisit the Protocol, go back so that we influence its change, so that we do not have specific mention of at least a woman representative among the number? 

I thought that since we have this Protocol and if we are going to be going by it, we are bound by the provisions of that Protocol. And since the Protocol provides for the woman, then clearly the rules must reflect that.

The clarification I am seeking, therefore, is whether really this is a matter that we should continue to debate as if we can change it, or whether we should go by the rules of the Protocol, which we have already ratified.  Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the Minister of Defence that we have already entered into that Protocol and it has already been ratified. 

However, I would like to remind this House that this Protocol, among other things, also specified that different political shades must also appear. It is there in the Protocol the Minister is emphasizing. So, if we have to go following clause by clause in the Protocol, then different political shades must also appear to be represented in this House.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Sebaggala for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Sebaggala and this House that the elections of 2001 were done under the Movement Political System, and that all the Members of Parliament here, including hon. Sebaggala, are members of the Movement Political System. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, it is disappointing that when it suits them, then we are all in the Movement, it becomes all-inclusive. But I want to assure this House that I will support the hon. Minister of Defence in his statement that we are party to the Protocol and it has already been ratified and we must follow what is stipulated in there.  

As we follow what is in the Protocol, even different political shades must appear because we know that in Uganda we have various political shades, which must also be represented.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a question was asked and the honourable Minister wanted me to clarify how we are going to handle this matter.  I have already said that the question of the fifth seat for women is not negotiable. That is why I have been telling hon. Kiwalabye to address himself to the other four seats because the fifth seat of the women is mandatory; there is nothing you can do about it.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Something very important has just been raised on the Floor and given the way we have been progressing, I would have loved to seek clarification because we are going to come to the rules and then come to the voting.  

If I must vote and wish to take into consideration the different political groups as provided in the Protocol, may I seek clarification as to the different political groups that we have here, which we should take into consideration. Hon. Sebaggala, what are the different political groups, which should be included?

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Can I clarify? Madam Speaker, I am on the committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. When we considered these rules, we actually went into detail about this issue. 

We realized that the best way of balancing all these shades was to use the regions and then the regions sort themselves out and then those candidates are put on the Floor, because everybody is going to be given a chance to compete at that point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, if you stood do you think you would not get votes in this House?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I know that if I stand I will get as many votes as possible. But, Madam Speaker, if we are to follow the Protocol the minister is emphasizing, there is nowhere it is indicated that we must go by regions. It is not indicated at all. What is indicated is the affirmative action for the women and the political shades. These are very clearly stated in the Protocol, Madam Speaker.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker I thank all my colleagues who have given me the information, which I value very much. But I still think, in fact I propose, that we give one slot to the people with disabilities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the committee’s line that candidates to represent Uganda in the Pan-African Parliament should be elected according to historical and geographical regions.  

The thinking of Ugandans, and Members of Parliaments in particular, is according to regions.  When we were electing Members for the East African Legislative Assembly, we used regions and the exercise was perfectly carried out. So far I have never heard a compliant in this House. 

So, since the method has been tested and has been found to be suitable, and the committee in its presentation said they follow the rules, which were followed during the election of members to the East African Legislative Assembly, why don’t we do the same? 

Secondly – (Mr Nsubuga rose_) – can I first make my point and then you come in? The second point I wanted to raise is on the issue raised by hon. Byamukama and hon. Kasigwa, that when you elect according to regions you will not get capable people. Does it mean that these regions did not bring capable people in this Parliament? Now I can accept the information.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I thank you my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my friend is that we are setting a precedent in this august House, because in 2001 when we were being elected we never followed regions. 

In Mukono where I come from, which is in the central region, we have people who do not belong there. I do not see a reason why when we reach this august House we emphasise regions. 

The issue should be on the profile of the members. Even if we get members from the same region, there is no problem. We should not emphasise the issue of regions. Let us vote for the capability of members, apart from the women who were catered for. 

On the issue of people with disabilities, if you are capable you will be elected. We should not create options for such areas. I thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Hon. Tibarimbasa alleged that I said that if we go regional we would not get competent people. I want to set the record clear and straight. I said that we should focus on competence and respect for affirmative action. 

I said that this is the only Parliament in the whole of Africa, which has people with disability. We should go ahead and also send someone in this category to the Pan-African Parliament. Finally, I also said that when MPs are voting they should take into account the different categories. Thank you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much members who have given me information. But you must agree with me that even when the President appoints his Cabinet, there are murmurs that there should be regional balancing. This has been coming up and members have been going to face the President to explain to them how he arrived at the Cabinet he chose. 

So, why do you want to deny that you are not thinking regionally? Here when it comes to electing members to the Pan-African Assembly, you want to leave the idea of regionalism when I know you are thinking like that.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to agree again with the committee for having implemented the Protocol on the issue of choosing one woman out of five to represent Uganda in this Assembly. But I totally disagree with the proposal that any disadvantaged group should be represented because now I think we are implementing the Protocol.  Thank you.

3.26
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a job well done. I want to talk about campaigns. The committee suggested that the Speaker may appoint a day or days before polling day during which candidates may address and campaign before Parliament. 

I want us to save time and taxpayers’ money. We have been here for two and half years, we know each other. What do I need from hon. Matembe on this very day –(Laughter)- for these five minutes only? Madam Speaker, we know each other, I want us to remove this clause.  

Madam Speaker, on the issues of narrow interest groups - I call them narrow interest groups - for the position of women, no debate. It is in the Protocol but if it was not there, I would also debate it.  

Madam Speaker, for the issue of regions, in fact I am saddened for Africa. Some of us are looking for these representatives who are going to represent broader interests of Africa. I am not looking at a region in Uganda; we should be talking of regions in Africa. 

Let me tell you a huge interest I look at; how is Africa, for instance, going to position itself in the globalisation within the world. This is a broader agenda I am giving to those who are likely to represent me. But now, here you are saying Kasese is a region. What am I going to talk in the Pan-African Parliament as a member from Busongora South, Kasese?  

Madam Speaker, I urge these members that those candidates who are hinging themselves on narrow interests of their constituencies must be rejected.  Let us look at candidates who are carrying the broader interest of Africa, in order for us to survive in the 21st Century. I thank you very much.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The information I wanted to provide to the honourable member is that a while ago he mentioned that we already know the Members of Parliament. But we may not necessarily know their core competencies. 

How will I know somebody who is well conversant with international issues, which could be presented here on the Floor of the House? That is why I wish to inform the Floor that it would be a good idea for somebody who is going to represent us on the issue of Pan-Africanism to state his qualifications - who he is and what his qualifications are in the areas that he wants to represent us.  

Secondly, he also mentions to us what his historical perspective is in relation to building what we want to achieve. Thirdly, what his contribution in the House has been over the years. I want to thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  My comrade, hon. Dombo, has questioned my submission about the campaigns. 

Madam Speaker, if I had submitted my papers to go for Pan-African Parliament, who does not know that I am a revolutionary leader? Hon. Matembe has submitted her papers for the Pan-African Parliament, who does not know that she is a woman activist, apart from the new members we have not been with her for the last  - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as far as I am concerned there are no candidates. Until you have been nominated, you are not a candidate. So, do not discuss any candidatures, just discuss the rules. There are no candidates as far as I am concerned. I think you have finished.

3.33
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the honourable members who have thanked the committee for the excellent work done. I have only got one contribution to this, and that is on the election on regional basis. 

I know we are claiming we are nationalists.  Members of Parliament here in this august House, if I ask them now in details what is going on in my constituency, they will not be able to tell the nation. That is why I would think that election by region to this Pan-African Parliament is suitable.  This is why I say we should maintain this election as we did for the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Also, I would like to remind you that Members of Parliament here in certain regions are more than others. From the Eastern region, for instance, we cannot compare to the number from the West.  Therefore, for the people in the Eastern region to get access, there are problems that need to be heard in the Pan-African Parliament; we would rather have a candidate from the East. 

As for other interest groups, I would –(Interjection)- why don’t you allow me to finish –(Interruption).

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from my colleague whether he would be willing to do some trade-off as we move to vote. If we are to have regions, then we are to have shades of political opinion. On which one would you like to have a trade-off, because I think we should balance it and then narrow this debate and move forward?

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: I want hon. Etonu to tell us which West he is talking about because there is mid-west and southwest. So, which West is he talking about?

MR ETONU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As for the first question from hon. Ekanya, I would like to say, when you go to the Pan-African Assembly, we are not interested in your local groupings of Uganda. (Laughter). You will be taking to the Pan-African Parliament the stand of Uganda.  

The second question from my colleague, Capt. Guma, I would like to say that I am talking about the Great West as I knew it when I was growing up, because these other divisions now are for certain purposes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Order!

MR ETONU: I think I am not taking any more clarifications now. Let me finish. 

I was saying that for the interest groups, what we are looking for now is a Member of Parliament amongst us to go and represent us in the Pan-African Parliament. But we are not asking for the other interest groups, which we have only in Uganda. 

What will happen if only Uganda sends a disabled person, a military person or an aged person like me and the other countries in Africa do not consider such? So, I would rather we go by the Protocol - one woman among our women in this Parliament and then the other four from the known regions. I beg to support.

3.38
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for their report. 

First and foremost I totally disagree with hon. Etonu who has defeated his argument from the outset by saying that the candidates we are trying to elect are going to represent Uganda and not the regions. 

I think it is high time that we really looked at Africa. Pan-Africanism is beyond the parochialism and the narrow interests of this country. The reason why Uganda has suffered since independence is because we have never looked at ourselves as a nation. We have always looked at each other as tribes and clans. 

Countries like Kenya and Tanzania have advanced because they look at themselves as nations. Tanzanians speak Swahili. When you meet a Tanzanian anywhere in the World, he will be proud to be called a Tanzanian. When you meet a Kenyan, he will be proud to be called a Kenyan. Meet a Ugandan, he will begin saying I am an Acholi, a Mukiga, Munyarwanda, come what may. What is going to be the acid test for Ugandans? What is the acid test of nationalism? (Interruption)

MR BRUNO PAJOBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the member in order to say, “when Ugandans meet outside they say, I am an Acholi, I am a Munyankole”? We regard ourselves as Ugandans, and our communication is through English and our Constitution says so. Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think I have really understood the problem.

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I also did not understand what he was talking about. 

I wish to agree with hon. Mbabazi and actually my dear brother, hon. Kibanzanga. For once I have agreed with him that there is no way you can have regional balancing and a broad representation of our representatives in the Pan-African Parliament when we begin looking at the so-called old four geographical regions. This one will defeat the purpose for which the Pan-African Parliament is supposed to serve. 

I, therefore, wish to agree with the recommendations of the committee that at least one woman member should be among the five members. But let the four people including women be tested on their individual merit. 

They should be men and women of integrity, they should be of high political profile and they should be able to represent the interests of this country in the Pan-African Parliament. 

We should definitely from now onwards, Madam Speaker, begin planning to create political and economic growth in order to participate in a global market, in order to compete with other countries of the world. When somebody begins addressing himself in a Pan-African Parliament and thinks about a simple constituency of a district, then he ceases to be representing the country.  

I, therefore, wish to conclude by saying that we should not change the Protocol’s rules as enshrined in Article 4. We should only look at each member state sending in five representatives at least one of whom must be a woman. But even if we send three women, or all of them women, I would not mind as long as they are capable. I thank you.

3.42
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to add my voice to what the hon. Minister of Defence has said, that let us maintain the Protocol.  

Secondly, I would at the same time, in the interest of unity of this country, buy the idea expressed by hon. Etonu. But regardless of other issues, what I am asking this House to do is, after we have maintained the Protocol - one lady and four other people - let us go to the ballot box. We shall sort out those issues by ourselves with the ballot box. 

I have already seen people lobbying in the corridors of Parliament. Let us say one lady, and then we choose the other four. We shall sort out those issues of the disadvantaged, regional, and other things at the ballot box. I think it will shorten our work.

3.44
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by thanking the committee -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are giving information?

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: No, clarifying. I think we have a problem. I have heard honourable members speak and I am concerned. 

It is very explicit in the Protocol that we should have at least one woman. It is not the same as having just one woman. So, I think we should bear it in mind that it should be the least. The voters should also take into account women for the other four slots. I thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: Following that clarification, maybe I should also point out that on Page 3 of the report, the third paragraph says, “one candidate would be elected to represent the women.” I do not think that person will be representing the women, it should just be a woman representative on affirmative action. 

The report says, “elected to represent the women”, which I think –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page is that?

MR MUGAMBE: Page 3, the third paragraph says, “… while one candidate would be elected to represent the women”. I think this is a bit faulty. It should be using the affirmative action. Otherwise, we will approve the report and that will remain. 

Also on the same page they say, “taking into account different categories of representation in the House -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not using a microphone; I cannot follow what you are saying. Adjust the microphone.

MR MUGAMBE: Sorry for my height. I hope you heard the first point. Madam Speaker, my point was that we change the statement in the last line in paragraph 3 on Page 3, which says that the candidate would be elected to represent the women. This is not true; that candidate will represent all of us. 

Then the committee advises us to take into account the different categories of representation in the House. I think another issue we must put into account is competence. I have a problem with the regional representation also. 

With regional representation, we can end up having, for example, four statisticians or four lawyers or four economists representing us in the African Union. Whereas if we had real analysis, we would have people from all areas, putting into account the problems of Africa.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you my colleague for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from you is; are you telling us that the statisticians do not articulate issues of law very well, or we do not debate very well, so that when you select them to go to African Union they would be a problem?

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my honourable colleague. If we are going to conduct elections here and all of us are going to vote individually, how is he going to ensure that he knows who is going to vote who, and whether we are not even going to vote people of the same profession?

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you. Maybe I was not clear. I said we might end up electing maybe one group of persons, for example, statisticians. Actually they would be elected because they are very competent, not because they are incompetent. 

I also gave another example of lawyers. You remember when we elected people into the East African Legislative Assembly; we had very few professionals. You might find about three of them are lawyers and other areas may not be well represented. 

Do not forget the problems of Africa. One of these problems is failing to come up with our own solutions, failing to come up with our own proposals on how to overcome our problems. 

For others, the economic programmes are drawn by outsiders. We are not sending people who will just be accepting programmes from outside. There is lack of confidence in ourselves, in our culture, and so on. We have dimensional problems like our social problems, political dynamics, colonial past and pressure from outside. So, I think we need to put all these into consideration as we elect members.  

Madam Speaker, I also need clarification from the committee. I know ministers are Members of Parliament. Can a minister stand to go into the African Parliament? Are they not Members of Parliament? Is it provided for under the Protocol that a minister cannot be voted for? I would advocate that we choose on individual merit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the debate is moving in many directions and I would like to bring you back to the Protocol. So, I am going to read the objectives of this Protocol so that we understand why we are electing members.  This is Article 3:

“The objective of the Pan-African Parliament shall be to –

    (1) Facilitate the effective implementation of the policies and objectives of the OAU/African Economic Community and ultimately of the African Union.

    (2) To promote the principles of human rights and democracy in Africa.

    (3) To encourage good governance, transparency and accountability in member states.

    (4) Familiarise the peoples of Africa with the objectives and policies aimed at integrating the African continent within the framework of the establishment of the African Union.

    (5) Promote peace, security and stability.”

So, there is a common agenda. Those are the objectives of the Pan-African Parliament. Let me continue:

“(6) Contribute to a more prosperous future for the people of Africa by promoting collective self-reliance and economic recovery.

    (7) Facilitate co-operation and development in Africa.

    (8) Strengthen continental solidarity and build a sense of common destiny among the people of Africa.

    (9) Facilitate co-operation among regional economic communities and their parliamentary forum.”

I now, come to Article 4 on composition:

    (1) Member states shall be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by an equal number of parliamentarians.

    (2) Each member state shall be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by five members at least one of whom must be a woman.

    (3) The representation of each member state must reflect the diversity of political opinion in each national Parliament or other deliberative organ.”

So, if you are contributing, focus on the objectives and the composition as I have read it.  That is the text of Protocol. Let him finish.  

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. On page 1, the last paragraph, the committee tells us, “On 9th September 1999, African Heads of State and Government held a meeting in Sirte in the Great Socialist People’s Lybian Arab Jamahiriya and established the African Union and called for the speedy establishment of the African Economic Community and the Pan-African Parliament.” 

So, the direction has to go into the African Economic Community and I was emphasising the problems of Africa so that we have that in mind. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. Looking at the time and the business we have, with the well-elaborated advice you have given us, don’t you think it is prudent enough that we vote on some of the changes that we would like to make, so that we put in the necessary arrangements such that we can conclude other business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I was also going to propose that maybe we stop debate and go into the rules. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is really a procedural issue. At the end of the day we are talking about transparency, accountability according to that Protocol you have just read to us. I am wondering whether there is an arrangement to help us go through the paper. 

Yesterday the question of qualification came in; we would not like to send people to the African Union who do not have qualifications (Applause). Is your office going to make arrangements so that probably UNEB verifies these papers and we also have an opportunity to look at the papers of those who are contesting, so that we do not get our country embarrassed? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that is an important suggestion. Let me reflect on it. I will advise before we finish.

3.56
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. We are discussing electing only five persons to represent us in the African Parliament. This means that we must select people who are competent and whom we shall be very proud of. 

The issue on the Floor is that we should remain with what is written in the Protocol - five people, at least one of whom should be a woman. I think the Protocol has not stated how we should elect our people. It is us here to find the best method of selecting them. 

The Protocol realised the importance of women being included, and I would like to inform you that it has taken a very long time before the whole world thinks that women have a contribution to the development of our country and even Africa at large. Women have been lobbying for very a long time before they are now realised by the Pan Africa Parliament. 

Today we are asking that we need to send a person with disability. A person with disability has a peculiar need. When we elect one to represent us in Africa, we are going to act as a torch, we are going to open the minds of the people of Africa and the whole world that people with disability can contribute to the development of Africa and the whole world. 

Therefore, we shall not send there somebody who will keep quiet, but we shall select on individual merit, on what the person can deliver. We shall not select for the sake of disability (Applause)

I would like to inform you that disability is a global issue. Today we are talking of wars everywhere in Africa, how many people are becoming disabled? How many are being disabled in road accidents? How many people are going to talk for them, if we Ugandans do not sent a person to show the world that issues of disability are development issues and are global issues?

Therefore, I support the idea of sending a person with disability as a representative so that we can bring disability issues into the African continent and also in the whole world. This is because of their peculiar problems, like women. Thank you very much. Please, support that one. Thank you.

3.59
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want, first of all, to commend the committee for a very good report. I thank them most especially for receiving me very courteously and listening very patiently to my presentation when I went to meet them. 

I want to thank my colleagues who have been debating this subject. I particularly want to thank the colleagues who have pointed out the constitutional element of this particular subject.  

Madam Speaker, our Constitution is very clear. It has a very strong emphasis on affirmative action. As a matter of fact, if we take for instance the issue of representation of the disabled among the marginalised groups, a number of countries are now beginning to learn from Uganda. South Africa was the first one and they have 11 Members of Parliament representing the disabled. 

Recently, Rwanda enacted a new Constitution and they included one person to represent the disabled. Kenya - the people have been talking to us as they make up their Constitution and they are seriously considering the inclusion of representation of disabled persons. 

But our Constitution has much more than the representation of disabled persons. It talks about people that have been marginalised by history. I do not want to repeat the constitutional provision. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is important that our representation in the African Parliament must have representation of the special interest groups. And at an appropriate time, I will introduce an amendment. 

People everywhere today are talking about an inclusive society, a society where everybody has a role, where everybody has a place. Whether you are disabled, a worker, elderly or what, you must be part and parcel of society. We are talking about an inclusive society, a society for all. Nobody should be treated as if he is a second-class citizen. 

So, Madam Speaker, it is important that we seriously consider the representation of people – (Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. I wonder whether hon. Mwandha thinks or believes that this House considers the disabled persons as secondary citizens, because really the invitation was open to everybody. There was no mention that a disabled person should not apply or present one’s candidature. 

Why is he attracting attention that actually the House does not equally consider disabled persons as much as everybody else. Is he in order to do that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, as far as I can see, the honourable member is trying to remind the House to abide by the provisions of the Constitution. That is what he is really insisting on.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want also to remind my colleague hon. Mugerwa that I am a spokesman of the people with disabilities in this Parliament among the marginalised groups. 

However, Madam Speaker, I must commend the committee because it was very clear in their report and I want to read this. They say, “Due to practical difficulties, it is not possible to provide for all such groups in the House”; and that is why I am introducing a formula to cater for that. As far as the committee is concerned, it is important that all interest groups are catered for. The problem is how to accommodate them. 

The committee further recommends that, “Interest groups should interest among their number, persons with good profiles coupled with ability and good personality to persuade Parliament to elect them”. I think that is okay, but the important thing is affirmative action. The principle of affirmative action must always be taken into account and I am glad that we have a Constitution that emphasizes affirmative action.  

Therefore, I would like to agree with colleagues who are saying that we must have a formula for inclusion of people of special interests. The justifications are many and we do not have to go through them today. As a matter of fact, in the element of regionalization, even if this House decided that we go regional, which is already controversial, there is no need for not including affirmative action. I will move an appropriate amendment when the time comes to amend the rules. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the chairperson to respond to the proposals and then we can move on.

4.06
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Capt. Twarebireho Tungwako): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I thank all the Members that have ably contributed to this debate. I can see that the Members are really enlightened on what the protocol and the rules are all about. 

The issues or the concerns of the Members seem to be concentrated on persons with disabilities, regional representation, representation of political shades, qualifications and whether members of the Executive can be sent to the Pan African Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I will begin with the last one. In Article 7 of the protocol, the Executive is specifically excluded from being elected to the Parliament. So, that one is taken care of.  

In as far as the persons with disabilities are concerned, it is noted that the committee did not consider the provisions of the Constitution. In fact we considered it at length, but as members have correctly observed, there was difficulty on how the representation could be made since we had very many groups in our Parliament, well specified in the Constitution. So, if it is the considered opinion of this House that we get all the categories represented, that will be welcome - if it is the decision of us all.

On regional balance, Madam Speaker, the committee had in mind what transpired in this House when we were electing the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. There was a hot debate and we felt we should avoid it and, moreover, it was the considered view of the committee that competence cannot be undermined by regionalism. We believed that in every region there are competent people to represent us in the Parliament.

On qualifications, it could not be raised before the committee simply because the requirement was already fulfilled by the Parliamentary Elections Act. The committee assumes and still believes that at this point in time, all Members of Parliament qualify to contest for these seats.

Last but not least, in as far as the political shades were concerned, the committee had in mind the fact that at present Uganda does not have parties as such. We were all elected under the umbrella of the Movement and, therefore, that could not come into our minds. I believe that when the Members who wrote the protocol were writing it, they were dong so with the mind that each country had its own way of doing things. Ours was the Movement and I believe we should abide by what is governing us now.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to move, again, that the House adopts the report with the rules annexed thereto. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, there was a small matter on page 3 of your report, which the hon. Member for Nakifuma raised: why is it that one candidate will be elected to represent the women? You could say, “at least one woman candidate would be elected”, to conform to the protocol. Would that not be better formulation?

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, that was an issue of drafting, otherwise that one is clear from the protocol. 

MR MWANDHA: As reported by the chairman now, I think that even before we look at the rules, we need to clear the principle of whether we want regional representatives or we take people on the basis of the highest number of votes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you bring that up when we are doing the actual rules? What I want to do is to put the question to the report and then we move on to the rules. If you have amendments to those rules, then you propose them during that stage.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: There are certain aspects of the report, which we are not in agreement with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are those?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: The ones, for example on representation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, say what you want. I do not know what is on your mind. If you are sitting there, I do not know what to do.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: But, Madam Speaker, we have been speaking all along. I thought we would move on to the Committee Stage and then make amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The operative parts of this process are going to be the rules. That is what is going to govern the elections. So, as far as I am concerned, we would finish with the report and deal with the actual rules, which are going to become part of our text. Then you can move the amendments to the rules, because the report is not going to be part of our rules anyway. If you have a proposal, make it.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I have a problem of a procedure because members have expressed concern about some areas of the report, which were not agreeable. At the end of the day, if we adopt the report as it is, what are the implications? Do we have any ground now to raise objections when we come to the particular clauses?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, what is going to be reflected in this book will be the rules, which we are going to pass independently of the report. But if you feel so badly, let us start with the rules. Then I do not know whether you will deal with the report later.

MR KASIGWA: I think hon. Byamukama made a very important issue. On page 3 of the report, paragraph 3 is one of the contentious issues that we have been talking about. So, if we adopt this report as it is, then it will have implications on the rules finally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But this report is not going to be part of our rules. It is not. It has been brought here for discussion. What will be reflected in our rules is the text of the rules, which we are going to discuss and agree on.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, what will now be the essence of adopting the report if it has no impact on the next stage, which is going to be the rules? We might as well move on to the next stage and we do not do anything about the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And we leave the report?

LT COL. KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, we have procedure guided by our rules on how we determine questions that arise on the Floor of this House. The question we have to determine now is whether we should adopt the report or not and those who object to the adoption of the report know the procedure. They can stand up in opposition of another position, which maybe adopted by others. 

Could you help to guide the House on how to do that, because we may not get 100 percent consensus? We may not even agree 100 percent on some of the positions and we have got to vote on them. That is why the question is put. Madam Speaker, I hope you will guide us.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have precedence in this House. Normally when the report comes here with a Bill, by us adopting the report and the Bill, that is a sign that we have received it and accepted it. The report is part of the working tool on the Bill. Therefore, in this case we are adopting the report to guide us when we are working on the rules. The rules are the final food that we shall take into our mouths after cooking it. 

The report is a guiding tool and that has been the precedent. So, if we change now by going to the rules first then we come to the report, it will be a new precedent that we are setting in this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, how many times have we amended reports in this House? Have we ever actually sat here and amended a report? We have spoken against it and then gone to the nitty-gritty, so let us adopt the report, then we go to the active part of this report, which is the rules. 

The report will not appear in the text of these rules. I now put the question that the Report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the Rules of Procedure to govern the elections of Members to the Pan African Parliament be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you move now on to the motion on the rules, page 1 of your motion?

4.19
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Capt. Twarebireho Tungwako): Motion to amend the rules of procedure moved under rule 50. 

“Whereas the African Economic Community established a Pan African Parliament the objectives of which include among others:

    • To facilitate the effective implementation of the policies and objectives of the OAU/AEC and, ultimately, of the African Union;
    • To promote the principles of human rights and democracy in Africa;
    • To encourage good governance, transparency and accountability in member states;
    • To promote peace, security and stability; and
    • To facilitate cooperation and development in Africa;

And whereas the Pan African Parliamentarians shall represent all people of Africa and ultimately the Pan African Parliament shall evolve into an institution with full legislative powers, whose members are elected by universal adult suffrage;

Noting that until such time as the member states amend the Protocol, the Pan African Parliament shall have consultative and advisory powers only;

Noting further that the Pan African Parliamentarians be elected by their respective national Parliaments from among their members and that the seat of a member shall become vacant if he/she ceases to be a member of the national Parliament or if recalled by the national Parliament among other factors;

And whereas the Parliament is set to apply the provisions of the Protocol;

Now therefore the rules of procedure are amended as follows:

1. By inserting a new rule 8A immediately after rule 8 to read as follows:

‘8A: The Pan African Parliament
    (i) Members of the Pan African Parliament representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix G.
    (ii) Members of the Pan African Parliament shall report to Parliament in accordance with the rules in appendix G’.” 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded? Is anybody seconding it? Okay. Proceed now to the amendments. Proceed to appendix G.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Appendix G, rule 8A, Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda – Elections of Members of the Pan African Parliament. Nomination day and nomination of candidates; rules 1(1) to 1(4).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any proposals to rule 1?

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, since everybody had a copy, I thought it was not very necessary –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the clerk read it out for the Members.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Most obliged.

Rule 1: Nomination day and nomination of candidates, sub-rule (1)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the text, honourable members, everybody has got a copy. If you have something to say, just stand up.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Rule 1, sub-rule (4) should be, “A member may nominate or support not more than five candidates at least one of whom shall be a woman.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the justification?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, this is what is indicated in the Protocol.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: State it again.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: “A member may nominate or support not more than five candidates at least one of whom shall be a woman.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he is right because the text here says, “… at least one of whom shall be nominated for the woman slot.” I think his formulation is better.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, here the honourable member is bringing in semantics. I do not see much difference because here a member is nominating five and it is mandatory that one of them is a woman. That is exactly what he is saying.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, when you say, “at least one of whom shall be nominated for the woman slot,” what do you mean by “the woman slot?” I think there is a problem with that. If you talk about “slots,” then we might have problems about women slots or whatever slots. I would like to support Capt. Byaruhanga so that we reflect what is in the Protocol and say, “At least one of whom shall be a woman”. 

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The proposal by Capt. Byaruhanga is better formulation in terms of drafting.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 1 sub-rule (4) be amended as proposed by hon. Byaruhanga.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: As I already stated, I have an amendment, which will affect rule 1 sub-rule (4). I do not know whether I should introduce that one now before I introduce my substantive –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I saw your proposal. I thought it was better to move it and that is where –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: It will of course affect that one because you nominate people, one of whom shall be a woman. We should also include special interests in accordance with the recommendation, which –(Interjection)- I am advised that it will be a consequential amendment. I will bring my substantive amendment first.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the other one is well formulated under sub-rule (3).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 1 as amended do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 1, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 2. Campaigns:

Rule 2, sub-rule (1), agreed to.

Rule 2 sub-rule (2):

MR KIBANZANGA: Sub-rules (1) and (2) I beg that they be deleted because we have known each other for two and a half years. Sitting here for two days listening to our comrades, whom we have listened to for all that period, is a waste of time and the taxpayers’ money. I beg that sub-rules (1) and (2) be deleted. I beg to move.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: The committee considered this issue at length, that is why we came up with the word “may”, leaving the discretion to the Speaker. I believe, Madam Speaker, that with the contributions that have been before the Floor today, I imagine the Office of the Speaker will be in position to decide on whichever best suits us.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also think that the rules we are making may not just be for this particular elections. We are amending our Rules of Procedure and these rules may also be used in future. So, why should we legislate for just these particular elections?

It is also important because these candidates will have to come and campaign, and we must select people according to so many things. First of all, we will need their curriculum vitae and make sure that they do not go and embarrass us in the African Parliament. We must also make sure that their qualifications are really up-to-date and that they are confident. People may be confident because they are used to talking to us here, but when they come to campaign, we should assume that they are campaigning before a different group of people so that we can also know that when they go to represent us in front of members from other countries in Africa, they are surely going to represent us fully. So, I support that this remains in the rules. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to convince the revolutionary leader about this matter because you see, the tenure of a Member of Parliament in this Pan African Parliament runs with the tenure of the Parliament here. Supposing in the Eighth Parliament two of our members do not come back, that will mean that there are two vacancies. 

I am sure that when the Eighth Parliament comes, we shall need to elect quickly two others to enable them to go and join the other three who would have survived the Seventh Parliament. If we do that in the first month, really one will not have known who is who. So, this is more enduring, that is what I think. Are you convinced, revolutionary leader?

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I am somehow convinced. But for the purposes of qualifications, I beg that we add that academic papers should be attached to the nomination papers. I beg to move.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, since there has been a lot of talk about qualifications in this House, I think the committee and I would have no objection to having them attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there anything else on number 22?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I think the one requesting for qualifications might be redundant, with due respect to hon. Kibazanga. All people who are here are presumed to be eligible. Madam Speaker, my other point is, if they are submitted, do we have vetting mechanisms? If we don’t have them should they be certified? I think we are getting into very tricky situations.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with my colleague who has just been holding the Floor, because when you deposit in your certificates here or other relevant documents, who is there to verify that they are authentic? There is nobody! That is why we have in our law a provision for UNEB to do the verification in case of doubt, then you proceed with the elections.  Since the nominations or elections to the African Parliament are open to parliamentarians, I think it is assumed that we are here properly as parliamentarians unless the contrary is proved, which you do not have the means to do so.

MR IMUMET: I was actually going to concur with the Attorney General but I would advise that if I have to confirm the existence of that certificate, the person who is campaigning must take responsibility to show me his/her papers. So, let us leave the issue of qualifications being presented here, but let that person show us as he is campaigning that he has the papers, as simple as that.

MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you Madam Speaker. Although yesterday we doubted that some of the Members do not have qualifications, the fact is that we are here, we were vetted and we went through UNEB, now what is the problem? Why should we go back to present our papers when we are contesting for Pan African Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Imumet suggested is that if you are the one interested in the seat, it is up to you to convince your colleagues that you have everything. So, you can show your papers to your colleagues but not necessarily tabling them to the whole House.

CAPT STEVEN BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to disagree with my colleague, hon. Basaliza, because you may well recall that there are Members of Parliament who came in this House but were later disqualified because they did not have papers.  Therefore, papers must be produced. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basaliza, are you saying that Members must bring them here in advance or show to their colleagues?

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is, these Members going to the Pan African Parliament are not going on behalf of themselves but for all of us here. So, we take collective responsibility on the kind of Members we send there. So for the purposes of record, for us to be sure of the team we are sending, what is the problem? Let us make all effort. Parliament has the mandate and has the mechanism to order for these papers to be vetted. It will save us a lot of embarrassment, as you will be seeing in due course.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I had occasion to read the Constitutive Act, which of course sets up the African Union and also the Pan African Parliament.  The requirement is that each parliament of a member state is required to send five representatives. So, the qualification is that you must be a seating Member of Parliament, and if in the records of the Clerk evidence is to the effect that you are a seating Member of Parliament, that is the only qualification required for one to contest for this post. Really, we cannot go beyond what is provided in the Constitutive Act, now to go further and demand for further qualifications.  

Madam Speaker, the period of vetting Members’ qualifications is over; nobody can go to court now and petition against a seating Member of Parliament because that period was available and it was closed. You cannot open a petition in court now against a seating Member of Parliament. So, what purpose would asking of papers serve at this moment?

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this issue is becoming contentious.  But I believe if for one reason or the other some Members here are contesting some qualifications of our colleagues who are standing to represent us, it is my humble request that they pass their grievances to you. So, all those Members who have contested, let their names be forwarded to you and you do the needful instead of vetting everybody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should move.

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I can see, honourable members, we are pushing ourselves into a scenario over which we have no jurisdiction. Parliament has not put a standard on which they want a Member of Parliament to represent them in the Pan African Parliament. We have not said that we need somebody with either a diploma or a degree or a master’s; we have not set those standards here. The standards for being a Member of Parliament here are A-level or its equivalent. But – (Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information to hon. Muzoora. Sub Article 9 on petitions - this is on Page 6 of the report. I am just referring to it such that it can guide us here as we move there. That, “The procedure, jurisdiction and ground for declaring void the election under Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 shall with necessary modification apply to the procedures, jurisdiction and grounds for declaring void the election of the Member of the Pan African Parliament.” On those premises, Madam Speaker, qualifications are still pertinent, embedded in the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001. Unless we just ignore it but to our peril –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Sekikubo, do we really want to assume from the beginning that Members do not have qualifications? Why do we not just query those we are worried about? Let people get nominated, then you say this person here has no papers, then you petition? But we cannot presume from the beginning that Members here do not have qualifications.  

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, although this matter engendered a lot of interest in this House yesterday, the point is that, for them, the only qualification needed to go to Pan African Parliament is that you are a seating Member of Parliament. The fact is that even if now you were to prove, for that purpose alone, that a person cannot go to the Pan African Parliament, would that automatically also mean that that Member of Parliament will exit this Parliament when we do not have any other method of vetting him? So, I believe that that part should be left simply as it is. The failure of the previous vetting, which allowed flukers to come in, you cannot now tie the hands of this House about taking somebody to Addis Ababa.  Thank you, Madam speaker.

MR MBALIBULHA: Madam Speaker, I have information on the Internet that after five years of this Pan African Parliament, we are going to elect. It is going to revamp back to the universal adult suffrage, which means that the one contesting to Pan African Parliament will not be necessarily a Member of the Parliament of Uganda, he will come from outside. Therefore, to do this law for the next generation, we need a qualification here.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, really some of us who think that the curriculum vitae should be appended really are not requesting too much that Parliament invest money to verify some of these things. The reason why we need some of these things is that time has come globally when you must send competent people. Our ability to challenge the world in WTO was as a result that African third world countries had competent people.  Therefore, in this regard when we talk of African Parliament, we are going to represent Africa globally and to lobby. We need to know people’s CVs in terms of comparative advantage in language. Some people here might be having CVs, they know Arabic, they know French, they know Spanish but we have not had that opportunity to know them.  

Secondly, some people may have comparative advantage that they have travelled globally, they know global policies, they know global treaties and that gives us comparative advantage to identify the right candidate. When he stands up and says, “I am from Uganda” he knows about NEPAD, he knows about WTO, he knows about UN, he knows about the Arab world, he knows about East Asia. That is why we need the CV, just for our own consumption. We can verify these CVs by visiting some of these offices, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not worried about the CVs. The CV is a simple thing.  What I want us to agree - there are Members who are saying that Members should actually table their degrees, their diplomas here. That is the issue.  

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is worth spending so much time on this particular issue, because I thought I heard you read from the protocol and you made reference to people who are Members of Parliament. And I think the idea of using Parliament as electoral college was advisedly arrived at because if you launched a kind of continental-wide campaign for each person who wishes to go to that Parliament, it would be really a very astronomical exercise and probably an uphill task. That is why, if I heard you right, the basic qualification is for the person to be a Member of Parliament. Now, we are here, Members of Parliament. Our responsibility here is to choose which one of us is suitable for that Parliament. I think that is all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me put the question. I put the question that Rule 1 and 2 do form part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 3. Ballot paper.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I want to amend Rule 3(2) so that it reads as follows: “The ballot paper shall contain all the names of the candidates arranged in alphabetical order in each of the groups A, B and C, with an empty box besides each name.” At the bottom of B, introduce group C, “Candidates for representatives of special interest groups.” The justification, the first one is constitutional. This will be in line with the provisions of Article 32(1) of our Constitution, which provides: “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the state shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalized on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances, which exist against them.” 

The other one is to conform with the Treaty establishing the African Union Parliament, more particularly Article 4(1), which requires the members elected to represent the diversity of their Parliaments and, Madam Speaker, the idea I have is that all Members of Parliament in this Parliament representing special interest groups, namely, the youths, the workers and us the disabled, including the Army; this provision will enable them to compete so that they can be elected under the principle of affirmative action and once one of them is elected, that person will represent those special interests in this Parliament. 

This particular recommendation will also portray the unique nature of our Constitution, because not all constitutions have actually made a provision for affirmative action and I think in terms of development, we have embraced the principle of inclusion so that nobody is left out in the process of development simply because he happens to be young or too old or disabled or worker or whatever.  That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was going to seek clarification from him but nevertheless I will put this question in relation to what he has raised. He has proposed that group C should be people with special interest groups. Now, I am wondering because, from his earlier submission and the submission of hon. Baba Diri, I got the impression that they were focusing, especially on people with disabilities. But now when you introduce group C as a special interest group, from my knowledge - correct me if I am wrong - but women are also constitutionally under the special interest group then you have the Army and then you have the youths. So, if you say this is a special interest category; suppose an Army representative or youth or somebody not a person with disabilities is elected, will that person be representing the interest you are talking about? That is what I am seeking to know. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to oppose the amendment as moved by hon. Mwandha, one, on the grounds that the requirement of the Pan African Parliament membership is just talking about five persons one of whom shall be a woman and all the five persons must be seating Members of Parliament. There is nothing mentioned to do with affirmative action. I also want to observe that all the special interest groups in this House are either men or women. In fact, we have all the genders represented here. If a Member who represents a special interest group wishes to stand, let us stand based on these two groups -  Group A and B. In fact, if we had the authority to expand the membership of Uganda in PAP, we would listen to that kind of proposal, but for now really, I think we are so limited that I beg to oppose the amendment as moved by hon. Mwandha.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I also have a problem because the list is too long, particularly when you include the other marginalized, by any other reason created by history. We have hon. Kibanzanga who represents the monarchists - they are marginalized; he will want to be represented. We have the elders who have not elected their representatives, but hon. Ben Etonu serves better as an elder. They all want to be represented. We have the veterans; I do not know the criteria we shall use to select this group. And if someone says he will stand as an interest group, as a soldier and he is elected and hon. Mwandha who is representing people with disabilities is not, I don’t know whether it will take cognizant care of their interest because this one is opening –if the group was too big, I would allow that we open up. But if we say special interest group and we start categorising, definitely hon. Sebaggala will say the multipartists are also an interest group which is marginalized in this Parliament. So, we shall get problems, I want hon. Mwandha to cater for our worries.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I stand up to oppose the amendment by hon. James Mwandha. Much as I think that his proposal has a standing, but it puts us in jeopardy in that suppose after we have adopted his proposal, we end up with three people say for the regions, and some people in the North do not get. Whereas right now the North requires affirmative action, we are not yet at per, that the North is moving with the rest of the country. At per in view of the fact of the problems, which are happening in the North. The best way at the moment is to adopt the rules, which have been proposed by the committee. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to respond, hon. Mwandha?

MR MWANDHA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I will respond. Hon. Kiyingi if she has read the report of committee, the problem of the committee was to find a formula of actually getting the element of representation of interest groups, and this particular proposal is to answer that particular problem. That as far as this Parliament is concerned, and as far as the Parliamentary Elections Act is concerned, the special interest groups are known and since not all of them can be included in the five Members that are going to the Pan African Parliament, let us charge at least one of them with the responsibility to speak for the rest and even spread the gospel of the need for affirmative action even in other African parliaments.  Then -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Mwandha, just a question. Supposing one of the workers is elected, in what way will that promote the cause for instance of disability in that Parliament? The Members are worried that you might be actually marginalized out of the situation completely and disappear. That is the worry of the Members.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I was a supporter right from the beginning of this particular amendment and I would like to move a friendly amendment, if hon. Mwandha will allow me. When we stood up to speak, we were very specific on the issue of people with disabilities.  We even cited the fact that we are the only Parliament in Africa, which has people with disabilities. It is our national policy that we have affirmative action. But in a more specific sense and by way of promoting basic practices, that is how we came up to propose that we should have a person with disabilities even at the African Union level. So, I would like to propose that hon. Mwandha categories the third group, which is group C under “persons with disabilities” rather than making it broad as “special interest groups.”  I beg to move.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I agree with hon. Byamukama and hon. Mwandha, I would like to think that we should leave that as part of the details of our own selection of the candidates who are going to this Parliament. We will continue lobbying for these interests groups through those whom we would have elected to go to that Parliament, to go and talk about these special interest groups at that level because it will complicate matters if we really want to break down the categories further. I think the two categories are okay and for the special interest groups, it is up to them to identify who is their candidate and who is able to speak for them when that person is elected.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Jessica Eriyo, that hon. Mwandha is a Member of the Budget Committee and he is actually the Chairperson. He campaigned on his individual merit and went through though he is disabled. Therefore, even if hon. Mwandha contested with all these people, I am sure he will even beat them. So, the question of disabled should not arise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, for that information. I really think that this is how we should move because we cannot provide for all the special interest groups here. But if any person, who belongs to any of these interest groups, comes up and we are sure that person is also able to talk for the other special interest groups, it is up to us as voters to elect that person to go to that Parliament.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I propose you put the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to Rule 3(2) to be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and negatived.)

Rule 3:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Rule (3) do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 4(1):

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rule (4)(1) says that Members of Pan-African Parliament will be elected taking into consideration the “representation in the House.” I suggest you delete “representation in the House” and leave it as, “Members of Parliament shall elect five members to the Pan-African Parliament.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the chairperson have a problem with that?  He wants the sentence to stop at “Parliament” so that these other words that follow are deleted.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, why we had to have that sentence was to actually make it categorically clear to the Members that they should have those other interest groups in mind.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Twarebireho, supposing none of those groups contests? Can you guarantee that all the interests groups are going to contest?

MR TWAREBIREHO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, this House is very much aware that hon. Lukyamuzi has professed as an environmentalist. There are also friends and allies of special interest groups. Even if the special interest groups may not stand, they are likely to say, “Mr Y or honourable X is likely to champion the cause of the youths, to champion the cause of people with disability, to champion the cause of workers” and in that consideration, you vote accordingly. So, the recommendation of the committee should not be ignored. We have already adopted the report and we should take into account that these special interest groups, we cannot provide for them because of the limitations. It should be in our rules so that it guides us when we cast our vote as recommended by the committee.

MR MWANDHA: I want to support the committee in that particular provision and as my colleague, hon. Katirima has stated, I think even when people are not going specifically to stand for these special interest groups, Members who will be voting are taking into account those who are sensitive to the needs of the special interest groups. Removing this provision would disfranchise the special interest groups in this Parliament, and we are talking about different categories of representation in the House.  So, I think that provision is in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still insisting, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  The reason why I am suggesting we delete it is that, one, if you are talking of representation, you heard what hon. Sebaggala said, he could really come up and say the Democratic Party ticket should be here. So, putting that in mind –(Interjection. There are there -(Interruption).

MR PAJOBO: I think in this House, Democratic Party is not represented here by the Constitution. In the Constitution, Democratic Party is not represented here; Democratic Party is outside. Once you are here, you are representing either constituents, you are representing workers, you are representing people with disabilities, you are representing the Army, this is the constitution of this House.  Therefore, I do not think that that issue of political parties will come in this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I think what the committee is saying is that when you are faced with that ballot paper, you look at the candidate and say this one might speak for the young people, this one might do this and that might help to tilt your mind. That is what the committee is saying.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to agree with hon. Nandala because this statement, “Taking into account different categories of representation in the House,” is really redundant. If hon. Mwandha’s amendment was adopted, this one would really stand. But as we talk now, unless we are going to amend the rules, I think we should delete it.

MR MUZOORA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I suggest that we should make an amendment, which does not make it a guarantee that we must bear this in mind. For example, when you say “Taking into account different…” that means that is an obligation. But why do we not say, “Bearing in mind” so that it remains on the onus of the voter.  I beg to move. Thank you very much.

MR LUBOWA: Madam Speaker, I also would like to support hon. Nandala because talking about categories, there are so many categories represented here. You may talk of the short people represented by some short people here, you may talk of the ugly ones represented here, you may talk of all sorts of things. So, I think is it important we just get out this whole thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, this is a constitutional matter. I do no think you should trivialise this proposal –(Interjection)- No, I am on the Floor. The Constitution does not say “short people and “medium people” and “tall people” and “brown people”. It talks about women, it talks about youth, it talks about disabled, it talks about workers, it talks about Army. Those are known; so do not talk about small things like colour and height and so on.

MR KATURAMU: Madam speaker, I am rising to inform my colleagues who are opposing this provision that this one is a very important provision in respect of our Constitution in Uganda. The fact that this House has not approved for a representation of special interest groups, in particular a person with disability, should not set a bad precedent that some of the provisions that are empowering the marginalized groups or the special interest groups in our Constitution, can be done away with. We have had, for example, passing of laws in this Parliament, but operationalising them is another matter, but we have not said that since this law has not been implemented for a year or two, therefore, it should be removed from our Constitution.

I therefore, beg Members in this House that this provision is very important and in future it will be implemented where need may arise. Therefore, I propose to our colleagues that it should not be consequential, because the efforts to bring representation has been slated because of the problems of the numbers but, otherwise, constitutionally and the rules of this Parliament are providing for it. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to understand - probably you will guide me at the end of the day if we maintain this provision, how we are going to monitor it so that we are satisfied that the Members took into account this kind of thing after the voting. If we are going to have it, then we probably have to go a little bit further and define what these are, put them here then we would be able to monitor.  Otherwise, I see it as a thing that is just a bit of glossing over things when we cannot commit ourselves practically to doing it. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members - (Interruption)

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: I was suggesting an amendment, Madam Speaker. I was suggesting that we could substitute it with “Members of Parliament shall elect five members to the Pan African Parliament from amongst themselves.” (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Clause 4 (1) be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4(4)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, you would recall in our earlier debate that the question of region was very contentious. In this regard, I would propose that we amend and delete the word “regions” and leave it open.

CAPT TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I think I said earlier that regionalism is rather competence, and cannot be marginalized because in every region we have competent Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are standing by your proposal?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, we have debated this issue extensively. I propose that we delete regions on two major grounds. Unless the voting pattern is going to change, that is, Members from the western region will sit in their caucus and elect one Member and present him/her to this august House as their Member. If that is not going to be done and it is going to be the whole august House to elect, then there is no reason for electing Members on regional grounds. (Applause) Let us elect our representatives to Pan African Parliament on the basis of merit, not on regional grounds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think there should be a certain level of consistency. We have rejected the interest groups, we have rejected general categories, so I think it should be consistent.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The moment we leave the question of regions then we shall have sorted out the question of disability and any other interest groups; because I would not see any reason why I would not vote hon. Mwandha, he is very capable basically on individual merit. So, I would suggest we delete regions and elect on individual merit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was saying be consistent we have already removed everything everywhere, you have said “from amongst us”. So – (Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: The procedure I want to be guided upon, Madam Speaker, is with regard to the constitutional provisions regarding the directive principles and objectives of state policy, which guide that in whatever we are doing we should always look at the regional balance to ensure that the regional talent is tapped. Whatever decision we shall reach we should still have taken this one into consideration.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, that is why I said you should be consistent. You are now moving to the directive principles but you have rejected the Constitution itself, now how can you move back to directive principles; no, we must be consistent in these laws.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Madam Speaker, the election we are about to embark on is for selection of Members of this Parliament to represent us in the African Assembly. We have had occasions where committees of the House have been selected, I have never heard any single occasion where Members have raised the issue of regionalism on committees of the House. (Applause) In the wisdom of the Speaker and Parliament, we have operated, of course, bearing those in mind but they have never been a subject of discussion on the Floor of the House. Surely, every Member of this House is a national parliamentarian – (Applause)- every Member of this House is a national legislator. 

I do not see a situation where a Member can be disqualified on grounds that his presentation in the African Parliament will be regional. I would be very hesitant to go along with such an argument. I, therefore, agree and indeed support that we should scrape the idea of representation by region. Every Member of Parliament is a Ugandan legislator, and we all know and debate national issues as well as external issues affecting Uganda as Members of the Ugandan Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
DR KASIRIVU: Finally, in support of scrapping the issue of regions, do Members know that when we talk of regions we eventually also go into sub-regions? Are you aware, Madam Speaker, when they talk of the west, for us who come from mid-west, we are quick to ask which west because we have always been lumped together with the southern west and yet byoya byanswa. So, the issue of regions should be scrapped.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, as I had indicated when the mover was making his point, I have full sympathy for his presentation and the logic behind it. My problem is how we treat this in relation to the rules generally. One, for instance, they are making close reference to Rule 129, which is talking about composition of Committee on Appointments. It clearly talks about regions and even lists districts.
 
Madam Speaker, the rules regarding the election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly have assumed and applied this principle. So, my problem is, shall we depart only in this instance from this principle or should we amend all of them?  I will support amending all of them myself. But if we are not to amend all of them, then we better maintain some level of consistency. That is the problem I see.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, that Appointments Committee is only one committee of all our committees. We have the Business Committee, it is not regional; we have the standing committees; they are not regional, sessional committees, and they are not regional.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we can afford to dispense with representation of special interest groups. But we cannot afford to dispense with the national character of our representation in an international Parliament like the Pan African Parliament. We must ensure, as the Parliament of Uganda, that our representation at this continental Parliament reflects the regional diversity of this country. National character in my view is a very fundamental issue -(Interruption).

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable Minister, for allowing me to give information. But I am just thinking, surely how can you say that we can afford to dispense with the interest groups when interest groups are also part of our national character. People with disabilities and youths are part of our national character. So, if we are saying that we dispense with them, we can dispense with the regions because when they go up there they are not going to ask them which region they come from. So, really I do not agree.

MR PAJOBO: I would like to inform the honourable Minister that even in Uganda’s administrative structures, regions have been left out. I do not know which regions he is driving at. The Constitution does not talk about it and the structure of local administration does not have it.  I do not know why they are reviving something, which is really dormant.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I think I have listened to my honourable colleagues and I beg to concede to the amendment of hon. Kasigwa. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!  You must vote before you celebrate. Honourable members, I put the question that Rule 4(4) be amended as proposed by hon. Kasigwa.

(Question on put and agreed to.)

Clause 4(4) as amended, agreed to.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, to take you back, but I would like us to recommit 4(1) because when we said, “Members of Parliament shall elect five members to the Pan African Parliament from amongst themselves,” we should have also included that, “At least one of whom shall be a woman.” This is consistent with what is in the protocol and we should be –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, this is not necessary. In the preceding provision, we have already passed the ballot paper and it has those two categories –(Interjection)- yes, we have passed the ballot paper.  

Rule 4(5):

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that Rule 4(5) be deleted. This is a consequential amendment as a result of what we have just pronounced ourselves upon. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 4(5) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)




Rule 5:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 5 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 6. Declaration of results:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 6 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 7. Publication of results in Gazette:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 7 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 8. Transmission of elected members to the Secretary General:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 8 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 9. Petitions:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 9 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 10. Filling of a vacancy:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 10 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 11. Nomination form:

MRS ZZIWA: I just want clarification. I have learnt that the provision that this Parliament elects Members to the Pan African Parliament would be temporary. After the Eighth or the next Parliament, the various members seeking to go to the African Parliament would have to seek votes throughout the country. Considering that – okay, I am being reminded that we can amend. 

But I think it is very important to note that we do not have two different vacancies. Already a candidate would have gone to the level of looking for votes at the adult suffrage. I think it may be double standards. That is the clarification I wanted to get.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you proposing an amendment? Are you proposing that we provide for the other situation where we have universal suffrage?
 
MRS ZZIWA:  Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is a long way also. Honourable member, I do not think you should really worry. There is a protocol, which was signed and we said we should elect from ourselves first. A protocol will be signed when the time comes to elect by universal suffrage. So, we do not need to battle that now.  

MR MBABAZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give information as someone who participated in this. The idea of universal adult suffrage for electing members to the Pan African Parliament was muted because Col. Gadaffi the leader of the revolution has been pushing for an African Government now, this was not accepted by his colleagues and hence This arrangement. 

When time comes for an African Government, then Members of that Parliament - because it will have legislative authority all over Africa - will be elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage. Until that is done, this is not going to be the case.

Secondly, the tenure of office of a Member of the Pan African Parliament under these arrangements is the tenure of office of that Member in the home Parliament, because that is the basic qualification. Once you lose it, then you no longer qualify to be in the Pan African Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 11 do stand part of the rules. Honourable members, that is the nomination form.

MR MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, I wish to propose that we provide a rule for recall as provided for in the Constitution and in our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is proposing that we have a rule to recall the members for non-performance or whatever. Why do we not finish rule 11, because I want us to deal with the nomination form first. Let us deal with the nomination form first.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, on rule 11 there is a provision for the candidate to sign that he accepts the nomination, but it is not reflected in this form. 

Secondly, now that region is not a factor, is it still necessary to have it? I propose that we delete region from the nomination form. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The region will be Parliament. Okay, it will be amended consequentially. I now put the question that rule 11 do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 12. Reports to Parliament:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Mawiya’s proposal comes under rule 12: Reports to Parliament. Chairperson, he was wondering why there are no rules for recall.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, if it is the general consensus that we put there a provision, I would suggest the member proposes the rule that we should adopt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You could be thinking about it while we go through this. It will come at the end, as (f). You could think about it while we deal with the rest.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was still seeking clarification on rule 11 where the section of region is still appearing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no we have deleted it. It will be deleted consequentially.

MRS BWAMBALE: Okay, fine.

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under rule 12, I am seeking clarification. These members are supposed to make a report of the activities of the Pan African Parliament. I am not clear as to whether they will be presenting an official report prepared by the Speaker of the Pan African Parliament or they will be preparing their own report and presenting it to the committee? I want this clarification.

Unless we give the five members the leadership of a secretary, we are likely to end up with several reports prepared by individual members - where they do not agree they could be disorganized. Unless we have the leadership, and we ask them to form their own leadership, appoint a secretary who will organize the reporting, I want clarification from the chairman of the committee. Thank you.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I do not quite get what the honourable member is suggesting. I thought that when we send the members they are like we are here in Parliament. When they make a report, it is a report of all the members and they are collectively responsible. I do not envisage a situation where each member will be making a report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he was wondering whether it will be the report released by the Speaker of the Pan-African Parliament to all Parliaments, or it will be written by the members. That is what he is worried about. Is it the official report from the Speaker of the Pan-African Parliament to all Parliaments?

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I think the official report will be the Hansard of the Pan African Parliament. But our members are obliged to report to us and, therefore, they must make their own report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwagama, are you satisfied?

MR KIWAGAMA: I am not satisfied because we have got five members but we do not have their chairman and secretary. How will they organize to report back to us?

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, let us leave that duty to the members that we shall have elected. They will work on that.

MR KATURAMU: I am very sorry, Madam Speaker, for taking you back. I believe that the duration given to the candidates here on the Floor of the House for their presentation during campaigns has a direct bearing either on their success or failure. 

While I concur with the provision on page 3, I propose that since these campaigns are here soon, the aspiring candidates could go knowing how much time has been offered to each to campaign on the Floor of the House, to enable them have proper preparations to come and campaign here. The provision is silent on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuramu, that is the work of the Speaker. Why don’t you leave it to us to work out the time frame? Whatever we work out will be uniform for everybody. Why don’t you leave that to us?

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, it would give an opportunity to the aspiring candidates not to come here with long speeches and yet they have little time. That is what I had thought about. Maybe if they could know the time limit of their presentations, it would help.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Katuramu, leave it to us. We shall give guidance on how they are going to operate. We shall be fair.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Rule 12, since these people are Members of Parliament, saying that they will report through the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs should be deleted. 

Because they are Members of Parliament, they will elect a chairman among themselves and they will present the report directly to Parliament. There is no reason why they should go through a committee again, to bring a report to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that at some stage we should make that a committee of the House, because that is what it means?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, what the honourable member is saying is that the members should table their report in the House and the Speaker may decide whether the report should be discussed by the House in plenary or be referred to a committee, which can then report back to the plenary. 

I think it will be neater to table the report to Parliament rather than going to the committee. At least for purposes of record, Parliament will record that the report, as provided for in the rules, has actually been tabled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we can send it to any committee.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. I have not read the report. However, I would like to know how often this Parliament is going to report to us. Is it quarterly or once a year? Is it written there? We need to have it so that we can follow it up. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, please repeat what you said, I did not hear you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Okay, somebody has given me the information; I understand it is bi-annually. I wanted to know whether the reporting would be annual or bi-annual.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twice a year, every six months.

MRS BABA DIRI: Okay, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you contributing to his proposal? He has proposed that we delete the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs as a reporting channel to this House.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: I do not feel uncomfortable if the report is brought before the whole House. I think we can adopt that. Since they are members, they can bring it before the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we should delete Presidential and Foreign Affairs.

MR WAMBUZI: I would like to be clarified, Madam Speaker, whether the procedure we are now putting in place is consistent with the procedure we have for the East African Legislative Assembly. If it is different, I would like to be clarified why.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Wambuzi, the other Assembly reports to the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee because they have no audience here, they are not members to this House. That is why they go to the other committee. But these are members of this House. So, shall we delete it?

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, we are electing these members to represent this Parliament, but we are now making them pass through a committee to report to us. It loses meaning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson has already said that we should delete this, so I want to just put the question to it.

MR MUZOORA: I second that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that the words “through the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs” be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I wish to propose that we give specific time, for example, after the end of each session they should report to Parliament. That is (b). 

Then (d) says, “Members of the Pan-African Parliament may be present at the time…” I want “may” to turn into “must” so that they are all here, because who will be presenting the report if they may or may not be here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which clause are you dealing with?

MR MUTULUUZA: Clause (b). I propose that they give us a report after every session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying such report shall be presented at the end of each session of the Pan-African Parliament?

MR MUTULUUZA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you say it. I cannot amend it.

MR MUTULUUZA: I move that it read, “Such a report shall be presented at the end of each session of that Pan-African Parliament”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What he wants is that whenever they return from a session, they should report to this House. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, this report will be presented to the Speaker after every session.

MR SEBAGGALA: I am not in conformity with what my colleague has talked about because we do not know how long the Pan-African Parliamentary session is going to take. It may take a year. So, it is better they report to us from time to time, as the need will arise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me give advice. The Protocol in Article 13 says, “The Pan-African Parliament shall meet in ordinary session at least twice a year within a period to be determined in the rules of procedure. Each ordinary Session may last up to one month”. So they shall meet at least twice a year.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker I wish then to support hon. Mutuluuza. I take it that he has drafted the proposal to read, “Such a report shall be presented at the end of an ordinary session of the Pan-African Parliament and any other time – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At the end of each ordinary session?

MRS ZZIWA: Yes, at the end of each ordinary session of the Pan-African Parliament. I want to add as a rider, “and any other time when” – Let me first bring my point out that there can be other urgent situations when as a House we would need to be briefed or when they would wish to brief us. I do not want this aspect to be left out, so I wanted to –(Interruption) 

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: But that is in (c).

MR MUTULUUZA: “Such a report shall be presented to Parliament at the end of each Pan-African Parliamentary session.” I beg to move.

MRS ZZIWA: Then I will support (b) as moved by hon. Mutuluuza.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: I agree, Madam Speaker, with the proposal of hon. Mutuluuza but would add that in (b) we would have to delete the word “committee” and replace it with “Parliament”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the chairman adopt the proposal and state it for us so that we can take a vote?

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: “Such report shall be presented to Parliament at the end of each Pan-African Parliamentary session”. I beg to move.

MR MWANDHA: I think what my colleagues want to say is that such a report shall be presented at a regular meeting of Parliament at the end of each of the sessions of the Pan-African Parliament.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At a regular meeting?

MR MWANDHA: We are getting rid of the question of the committee. Unless we come with a different formulation, we are replacing “committee” with “Parliament” so that the report is tabled in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you need to keep the phrase, “regular session of Parliament” there. Do you really need it?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, we can then say that, “such a report shall be presented at a meeting of Parliament at the end of each of the meetings of the Pan-African Parliament”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MS NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I do not see the significance of (b). In (a) we have already said that the members of the Pan African Parliament shall present a report of the activities of the Pan African Parliament for the relevant year, to Parliament. 

I think (b) was relevant when we were talking of committees and when the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs was going to determine a time when this report would be presented. But now that we are talking about a Parliament, everything we want to say is already in (a).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not. The year of the Pan African Parliament has two sessions, so he is saying that at the end of each session they must come here.
 
MS NAMUSOKE: So, why don’t we amend (a) to say that they present it every –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, please propose.

MS NAMUSOKE: Let me try. “The Members of the Pan African Parliament shall present a report of the activities of Parliament every end of the Pan African Parliament” or something like that. But we do not need (b) and (a) because they seem to be saying the same thing. The lawyers, could you please help?

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, we are running into the problem, which always besets this House when we constitute ourselves into a draft committee. What we should be doing, as we always do, is to agree on the principle. 

Later on, the Attorney General in his Chambers - Parliament has got 18 more competent lawyers who can put what we really approve in principle into the rule. Otherwise, we shall spend such a long time that we will not be able to finish this. 

I suggest that we approve the principle of what we really want then the drafting can be left to the lawyers.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is okay. It is an innocent subject but I recall that in the Sixth Parliament certain things got lost because we never concluded them on the Floor of this House. I have not forgotten that. This may be innocent but there are others, which could disappear.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Section (b) was existing because of the committee but now it has changed. What we are talking about now is the reporting of the Pan African Parliamentarians to Parliament, which is twice a year. This is completely different from (b). I would like, therefore, to amend (b) and also bring in another (c) so that this (c) will change. Can I propose it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, one at a time.

MR KABAREEBE: Clause (b) should read that, “such a report shall be presented –(Mr Wagonda Muguli rose_)- I am moving an amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says he has no problem with (a) but he wants to talk about (b). Do you want to amend (a)?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Yes, please, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish first.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think (b) should read, “such a report shall be presented to a regular plenary at the time to be determined by the Speaker”. 

Then (c) should be, “notwithstanding section (b) above, the Pan-African Parliamentarians shall report twice as every session of the Pan-African Parliament concludes”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you need to use the word “regular”. Supposing the Speaker decides to constitute a special meeting of Parliament? Could you remove that word “regular” so that you report to Parliament then the Speaker will decide whether it is special or regular?

MR KABAREEBE: That comes in (b), “Such a report shall be presented at the regular plenary at the time determined by the Speaker.” That is right. 

Then (c) states that, “Notwithstanding the above, Pan African Parliamentarians shall report twice…” because we know we have two sessions there. So, at the end of every session they should report as requested by the Speaker. I beg to move.

MS NAMUSOKE: I brought a proposal for an amendment; I do not know what happened to it. Did we dispose of it or was it rejected? Because that was marrying (a) and (b).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, maybe members did not support it.  

MS NAMUSOKE: Yes, they did.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: No, Madam Speaker, I already have the text taking care of hon. Kiyingi’s concern then we shall look at hon. Muzoora’s proposal after that. 

What we need to do is delete the relevant year and replace it with each session. So, it will read, “The members of the Pan-African Parliament shall present a report of the activities of the Pan- African Parliament for each session to Parliament.”

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: In support of that, I would like to amend it a little more to say, “The Members of the Pan African Parliament shall present to Parliament a report of the activities of the Pan African Parliament at the end of each ordinary session of the Pan African Parliament.” I am simply making it clearer, but making the same point.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, the issue is to take care of even the special sessions. I think the members should be accountable to this Parliament for even each session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, now we are on 12(a). I put the question that Clause 12(a) be amended as proposed by hon. Wagonda Muguli.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12(b): 

MR MWANDHA: I move that clause 12(b) be deleted.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, in clause 12(b) we are considering a report per session. In clause 12(c) we are considering special reports. So, why do we delete it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have provided for it in (a). I put the question that clause 12(b) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12(c):

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: I propose, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that it should read as follows, “The Members of the Pan African Parliament may, if they consider it desirable to do so, present any special report or make any appropriate consultations with Parliament on any matter, which is relevant to the work of the Pan African Parliament at any other scheduled meeting of the Parliament.”  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I move that we delete, “if they consider it desirable to do so”. That is clumsy draftsmanship. We should just delete it. “The Members of the Pan African Parliament may present any special report…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Chair have any problem? Ok. I put the question that clause 12(c) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12(d):

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is the word “may” here. I do not know whether one member can represent the whole committee.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I feel we should substitute “may” with “shall”.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Madam Speaker, I am sorry I have not understood that. If any of them is not there, what happens then?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there has been a contention in this House for instance when committees are presenting their reports. The other day members took issue with the absence of the majority of members of a committee because only the chairman and the vice-chairman were here. 

It became an issue in this House. Members asked, “Where are the other members?” So, take that into account. Do you want one member to report or should they all be here to give us a report?

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, it is better to retain “may” because when we send our delegation of Members of Parliament to the Pan African Parliament, you can have all sorts of international scenarios, which cannot be predictable. It may be necessary for some ambassador somewhere to come and actually present this sort of thing to us.  

I think in all fairness, it will be reasonable to leave “may” because if we say “shall” it means the report will not be tenable.

MR KATUNTU: If the sentence remains as it is, then the whole clause is idle and unnecessary. If you say, “Members of the Pan African Parliament may be present at the time of presentation of any report”, then they may be here or they may not. So, why do we need to have it here anyway?   

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support hon. Katuntu that in view of the fact that this report must be presented by one of the members of the Pan African Parliament, it follows that one of them will definitely be here. They will not hire anyone else to come and present it for them. So, I see no reason why we should have (d). I beg to move that we delete it.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, maybe we can put a proviso to it after we have made it mandatory that, “Any member who is absent for any reason, should seek the permission of the Speaker,” something like that, if we have made it mandatory.  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very important that when they are reporting to us, at least a certain number of them should be present to defend their report and also give clarification. Definitely, they may not all be there, but we should give a minimum of people who can come and present the report, and I am suggesting at least three, Madam Speaker.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Considering what my colleague has just said, I would like to amend it by saying, “At least two Members of the Pan African Parliament shall be present at the time of presentation of any report”.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I really do not know or understand the requirement of the presence of the other members. I take it that if it is a report of the members of the Pan African Parliament, like us here our committees sign a report, which is then presented. In which case, my view is that the signature alone of the members would dispense with their members provided one of them can present a report.

MR MWANDHA: There are five members and when they go to the Pan African Parliament, there may be committees, missions, or anything else. If you restrict it to any given number of people to be present in this House when the report is being presented, it may be difficult for a member who is available with the report, which is properly signed by his colleagues, to present it. He will not have anybody in the House to provide the necessary number. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I propose that we dispense with the physical presence of any number of members, as simple as that. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am worried. It is as if Members of Parliament after being elected to the Pan African Parliament are going to abdicate from their duties in this House! 

I think the most important thing about this particular clause is that there will be ownership, and there will be people who will be clarifying on different issues. You could go there and you belong to a committee on security and peace, which is one of themes. Members here may ask about insecurity in a certain region, although the report may be explicit there may be some things, which may be known to you as a person. 

So, I presume these members will be here and, therefore, if we talk about a maximum of at least three, it will not be far-fetched.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, suppose we say they shall be present, and then those who will be away, will be away with the leave of the Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, it is not true that Members of Parliament, even without being members of the Pan African Parliament, require leave of the Speaker to be absent. It does not make them operate above the rules that govern the rest of the Members of Parliament. So, I do not think that is necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you proposing? Do we delete it or what do we do?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  We delete it, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I propose that we delete it because I am aware that we are going to elect members who are very responsible. The mere fact that they are supposed to present a report as a requirement, I think for responsible people, they must be there. So, there is no need to say that they must be three. Let us delete it.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I imagine that one of the measures of capability is regular attendance of this Parliament. If we are going to elect a Member of Parliament who is regularly absent, then it will be our fault. If we get somebody who is regular here, he will certainly be regular here when their report is being presented.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what do you propose?

DR KASIRIVU: I propose the requirement be deleted.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, although we are making rules, I think there is need for consistency. The reason why this provision appears here is because in (a) we had thought that it was the Foreign Affairs Committee, which was going to come here and bring their report. So in such a case, they were saying the members may be there to defend this report. 

But now that the report will be presented by the members themselves, we should go along with the usual rules of our committees. The report is signed, a member presents, and there may be about one or two or three others, but there is no mandatory law to say please, do this.  

We must also bear in mind that surely there is responsibility on members of that nature. It would even be in the interest of those people to be here and show you how well they are doing their job. Therefore, I think we should delete this provision because we have amended (a). I thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the members proposing that this should be deleted, I am of a contrary view. In (a), we have already made it mandatory for them to present their report anyway. That is some form of accountability to this House and the nation they represent. 

It is only fair that it be made mandatory for them to be present. Should they be absent, we shall expect them to show cause to the Speaker by writing that they are not able to come. Otherwise, we are going to be in a situation where only two or three sign the report, one comes and presents the report while the other one is not present and then we go into controversies. 

Secondly, where there are queries raised, they should be able to explain and expound and carry the message. 

The construction of the sentence is not saying all of them should be here. It just says, “Members of the Pan African Parliament shall be there”. So when they are two or three, they are there. The one or two who are not there will have showed cause, which you will communicate to us through the Chair as the report is being presented. But the five people are too few for us just to leave them.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. This has been regular with our committees, for example, hon. Twarebireho is presenting a report for so many people but he is handling it alone. 

I was proposing that we make it mandatory that the report is presented by at least one Member of the Parliament so that he will answer for all, not necessarily having all of them. It should just be presented by a member of the Pan African Parliament.

DR BULAMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let us just get an example from here. There are so many Members of Parliament who do not come to the plenary here because they are attending urgent committee meetings. But they do not necessarily give reports of their cause to the Speaker to be announced here.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I am wondering about these urgent committee meetings, which take you from the business of the House. We must be here to have a quorum. Can I have some clarification on this?

DR BULAMU: Madam Speaker, what I was trying to say is that when you elect these people to the Pan African Parliament, they are equally likely to be elected to attend some committees. So, their return may not be on the same day. 

Therefore, when the report is likely to be presented here, there is no automatism that they will all be here yet they will be on official duty where they will have been elected to man or to attend certain committees on behalf the Parliament that we shall be representing, assuming I am going there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I will suggest this and then you will say it for yourselves – “Members of the Pan African Parliament shall elect from amongst themselves one of them who shall present the report.” Is that okay?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully to this subject, but this may not be the only area where the elected Members of Parliament to the Pan African Parliament may want to regulate their procedure for the better handling or for the better bringing into force the provisions of the Act and the Protocol. 

Therefore, I am proposing that there should be a general clause, which says that, “Subject to the provisions of these regulations, the Constitutive Act and the Protocol, elected Members of the Pan African Parliament may regulate their procedure for the better bringing into force the provisions of these regulations.” In other words -(Interjection)- No, I am not deleting. I am saying that there may be others. 

For instance, you have mentioned one of them, Madam Speaker, by asking who is going to present in the first place. They themselves may wish to sit together and elect amongst themselves a person to lead them or otherwise. We should put it in these regulations specifically that the members shall elect from amongst themselves a person to lead them. It is silent. 

They should be in position to evolve their own procedures, which are not in conflict with these regulations, the constitutive Act and the Protocol, for the better bringing into effect the provisions of these regulations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are suggesting that we ask them to report but they should work out their own methods of achieving that and bringing it here in this House. Have members internalised it?

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, if you read part (a), the first sentence says, “The members of the Pan African Parliament shall present a report.” So, I think how they are going to do it, we leave that to them. 

I propose that (d) is really redundant and we should delete it, but (a) catches them because they have to present a report. I really do not see the need for us to say that they shall elect from amongst themselves, because (a) is already commanding them to present the report.  

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I have carefully listened to members and with the last contribution of hon. Epetait, I feel that 12(a) caters for (d) and we can as well do away with (d).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that Clause 12(d) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 12(e):

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I would like to amend (e) as follows: “All such reports as presented in 12 (a) shall be debated by the House.” 

You see, the original is says, “The House may, whenever it deems fit, debate …” Now, this was when it was to go before the committee, but now it is before the House. So, there is the necessity for the House to debate such a report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But isn’t it entirely redundant. When you present a report here, isn’t it automatic that we debate it?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I am saying this because I am a member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee and I know that the members of the East African Legislative Assembly are frustrated. Their reports are made but they do not see anything, even members of this House do not know what is happening. 

For instance, they cannot tell you why the Customs Union was not signed and it was postponed. We need to educate ourselves, and we shall do that through such debates, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Kazoora, why is it that we do not debate the East African Community reports? They should be part of your legal reports, isn’t it? Why don’t we debate the East African Community reports? Is there any law against it?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I do not know. Probably because there is no mandatory provision that we debate them. I do not see a danger in debating these reports. After all, why are they presented?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I have no problem with you putting that clause there. But when you say, “we do not debate those reports”, I do not understand why. Nobody has ever brought them to my attention. Nobody has ever asked me for time to debate the East African Community work. So, it is a problem with the committee. 

But I think there is no harm in saying such reports shall be debated. Is that okay, chairperson? 

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: I do not have any problem with that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that Clause (e) be amended as proposed by hon. Kazoora.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was an amendment by hon. Mawiya.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  This is the rule on recall. I beg to move that this rule be part of the rules under which these Pan African Parliament members are going to be elected. Article (5)(iv)(f) of the Protocol to the Treaty establishing the African Economic Community, relating to the Pan African Parliament. 
(a) A member elected under these rules may be recalled.  
(b) The procedure for recall as provided for in our Rules of Procedure, Rule 87, with necessary modification, shall apply.  

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are existing rules for recalling in our rules. He is saying that they should apply with necessary modifications. I put the question that a new Clause 12(f) be introduced as proposed by hon. Mawiya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 12, as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 8(a) of Appendix G of the Rules of Pan African Parliament, I hereby appoint Monday, 15 December and 16 December as nomination days. The forms will be available starting tomorrow at the office of the Clerk (Interjections). I think the fee will be organised in the canteen – (Laughter).

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 38/03 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

6.23
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Question 38/03.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My answer to this question is as follows: The Military Spokesman, Maj. Shaban Bantariza, did speak to the press and in doing so made specific mention of hon. Jack Sabiiti. He only advised hon. Sabiiti to criticise but constructively. He offered information to hon. Sabiiti and the public at large that UPDF must be loyal to the Commander-in-Chief.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear that for a question for oral answer, the Minister answering the question must supply a written answer at least 15 minutes before he answers the question to the hon. Member who asked the question. I just want to find out whether my colleague has got a copy of the written text from the Minister so that if I had the opportunity to refer to that written text I can consult my colleague and see exactly what the Minister answered. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Yes, the hon. Minister has compiled with the rule except the answer given is not typed –(Laughter)- as required by our rules.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it legible?

MR SABIITI: His handwriting is good and therefore, I have no problem.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maj. Bantariza offered information to hon. Sabiiti and the public at large that UPDF must be loyal to the Commander-In-Chief, but that this does not make UPDF a personal army of the President as hon. Sabiiti was reported to have alleged.  

On the question of immunity available to Members of Parliament, I wish to make it clear that this is only enjoyable in the House. Thank you. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the statements made by the Army Spokesman are very strong, although the Minister seems to have simplified them. I would like you, for the benefit of Members of Parliament, to listen to this statement. He warned people who are trying to undermine the institution of the Army. This is a state institution; when the government goes, the Army will stay. “Tell Dr. Rwanyarare and MP Jack Sabiiti to stop abusing us, Bantariza said that is one of the statements.” 

The second one is very dangerous for an Army Spokesman to threaten a Member of Parliament. He stated, “Army Spokesman, Maj. Bantariza, has warned Dr James Rwanyarare and Rukiga County Member of Parliament Sabiiti against pedalling such rumours.  Rwanyarare is the Chairman of UPC Presidential Policy Commission; it is Rwanyarare and his group who have been spreading and hawking news of the said coup plot, he said recently. Rwanyarare and Sabiiti are bent on dividing the Army but we (the Army) know that we are their target, especially during this period of transition.” 

Madam Speaker, these are very serious statements and as I reported to this House recently, when His Excellency, the President was in my constituency, he made it clear that he purportedly came to my constituency to warn those people talking about the Army and the issue of Banyoro/Bakiga. To my constituents, this was a threat to their Member of Parliament. He actually further stated that he will arrest such people for talking about the Army and about Bakiga and Banyoro issue.

So, Madam Speaker, in my view, the answer given by the hon. Member, seems to have not touched on these important issues. One, as a Member of Parliament, surely, I have the mandate, outside this Parliament, to talk about any institution of Government. 

For example, we have been talking about issues of embezzlement in the Army and it has helped a lot. The Commander-in-Chief has come out clearly to tell us there was a problem and hon. Amama Mbabazi who was appointed to head that committee revealed a lot of rot in that ministry.  I, for example, should have wanted someone outside the Army to do that investigation because there could be a cover up. 

Therefore, I would like hon. Mbabazi to further throw more light on these statements because my people are worried that I may be arrested or killed given these threats that have been stated by the Army spokesman and given statement of the Commander-in-Chief. So, I would request hon. Mbabazi to seriously throw more light on this so that my people are comforted that I am not going to be arrested or possibly killed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This question came up yesterday or the other day and the Minister said that he is going to consult the officer who made that allegation. But the answer given by the Minister is so short and he seems to be brushing off the facts of the matter.  I would have expected the Minister to come here and say, yes, the officer said it and what he alleges is true. If it is false, he would say further investigation should be made such that false allegations are not made on Members of Parliament. Because, the issue pertaining to what hon. Sabiiti is talking about is so serious that recently I consulted with people from Kabale and they are worried that their area Member of Parliament may be arrested any time. 

So, really, the Minister, after having consulted with the officer who made the allegation, should state whether the facts are true or false. And if they are false, that officer should be investigated and punished accordingly. I want to get clarification from the Minister whether the statement was true or false, and if it is true, then it should be substantiated. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sabiiti is raising a very important question because on a number of occasions I have heard His Excellency, the President, warning that, “Do not talk about my army. Leave the matters of the Army to me.”  Now, I would like the hon. Minister for Defence to clarify to this House whether Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has an army or whether we are talking of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda and Commander-in-Chief of UPDF as per Constitution where this House appropriates money for the Forces and Ministry of Defence. 

Now, in the circumstances, therefore, as a representative of the people, there is no way I can be stopped to comment on the Forces or even Defence as long as I still have that position.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you heard the hon. Minister talk about the privileges of Members of Parliament constrained to the precincts of Parliament. I wish you could be the one to assure Members of the privileges, especially under the Powers and Privileges Act of 1963 or 1964 because I remember this is not the first time we are getting this. There is a time when hon. Wapakhabulo was a Speaker of this House and this question came up and he told us that, for instance, I cannot be arrested when I am moving from my residence to come and do parliamentary work here, and when I am going back.  So, I thought probably the Clerk could assist us, and you, as a Speaker, to tell us the privileges of Members of Parliament. Thank you.

MR APOLINARIS KITHENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I do also share the sentiments of my big brother to the effect that he would feel threatened for his life and I request the hon. Minister of Defence to help us and clarify a little bit more. Because, Madam Speaker, some few years back, on the Floor of this House, one of our senior colleagues, a member of the cabinet, made serious allegations to the effect that hon. Kibanzanga and I, hailing from Kasese District, were involved in the burning of Kasese town. 

Following these serious allegations, the President himself made some serious pronouncements to the effect that we almost went into exile. I, therefore, feel with my big brother there, and that is why I thought it would be terribly important that the Minister of Defence - and at that time he was actually a Minister of State for Defence and he knew somehow the anguish we went through. So, Madam Speaker, I thought it was terribly important that such clarification be given to the effect that the life of my brother, hon. Sabiiti, and probably any other Member of Parliament here could certainly be assured. Thank you so much.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to add my voice to others who have thanked the Minister for the response, and I will start off by thanking him for tabling the UPDF Bill. But in light of this, I still continue to be perturbed especially when you consider the role of Members of Parliament, one of which is that of oversight. Therefore, although it may not be me today, it could be me tomorrow, and I think it would be to our advantage for us to have clearly laid out powers and privileges of Members of Parliament to enable us to perform our roles, especially the oversight role, without fear or favour, just like we swear when we are being sworn in as Members of Parliament.

I would like to refer to Article 209, which states the functions of the UPDF Forces and 209(b) says; “To co-operate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters.”  
(c) To foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians” and 
(d) “To engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.” 

Now my question is, how can we foster harmony, how can we cooperate, how can we engage in productive activities because we are civilian authorities with the UPDF where such utterances are being made?  

Madam Speaker, I think this is very serious and I would like to plead that the minister writes out a response very clearly which is elaborate, and that even Parliament as an institution comes out with very clear powers and privileges laid out so that we can perform our role as Members of Parliament.  I thank you.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, we are privileged as members when we are here and obviously we must be all the time mindful of the fact that we should not abuse our privilege.  I think, Madam Speaker, if a Member of Parliament abuses his privilege, I am sure there are procedures for moving against that particular Member of Parliament. Because if this is not done within the law and within the Rules of Procedure, any utterances made against a Member of Parliament – because somebody believes that, that member is abusing his privilege- could tantamount to intimidating that member. And if you consider the role of Members of Parliament which includes oversight and covers the whole spectrum of governance, then members will feel intimidated because somebody very powerful is going to say this person is abusing the Army, or is abusing the Police or is abusing ministers or is abusing this- and if somebody is really abusing anybody, this is tantamount to abuse of one’s privileges. For heavens sake let us have the proper procedures followed so that the person concerned is dealt with.  This is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Members for their contribution.  I thought that hon. Jack Sabiiti maybe could have come up to say that the things he is alleged to have said are not true and put the record right.  Since he did not and I am ready to receive information on that even now, I will proceed on the basis that he made such utterances and make my response.

MR BANYEZAKI:  Thank you honourable minister for giving way and thank you Madam Speaker.  I recall very well that when hon. Jack Sabiiti presented this problem in this House for the first time; he mentioned that he had never instigated a coup within the Army. He said this on the Floor of the House.  So, which other kind of denial do you want, honourable minister, because it is in the Hansard. Jack said he never said it.  He is not instigating the Army; he does not belong to the Ministry of Defence.  He said is not instigating a coup in the Army; he is not involved in dividing the Army.   

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable Minister. Because yesterday when he came here he said he was going to investigate, and I thought that, that was one of the things he was going to investigate to find out whether hon. Jack Sabiiti actually said the things he is alleged to have said.  Now, he is saying that the onus is on hon. Jack Sabiiti to again restate what he has already stated on this Floor that he did not make the statements. And of course from the two line statements he has presented, obviously the minister has not done the investigation.  Now I am seeking clarification, what are we now up to?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Well, I think I will answer that one first.  I said yesterday that I was not ready, because this question was given to me – at the time it was given to me I did not have time to ask the officer who was named in the question to tell me his side of the story.  I have now done so, and I have told you in my statement what I got.  

Secondly, I do not think anyone has said- I do not know where hon. Banyezaki gets it from- I do not think anyone has said that the hon. Jack Sabiiti had instigated a coup, because the statement – (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: If the hon. Mbabazi read the question properly, it is there; I stated it and in The Monitor of the 4th of December, on page 2. These are words of the Army Spokesman, Maj. Bantariza.  He said,” Opposition politicians are peddling rumours of planned coup in the Army.  The Army Spokesman Maj. Bantariza has warned Dr James Rwanyarare and the Rukiga Member of Parliament, hon. Jack Sabiiti, against peddling such rumours.  Rwanyarare is the chairman of UPC Presidential Policy Commission. It is Rwanyarare and his group who have been spreading and hawking news of the said coup.  Rwanyarare and Sabiiti are bent on dividing the Army.”   

Now, I want to know whether Jack Sabiiti has ever been in UPDF?  He has never.  I am not in touch with your UPDF and therefore, I want some of these issues to be answered properly, Madam Speaker.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you for giving way.  That is a story in the Monitor, which is saying that hon. Jack Sabiiti and the other one who is not here are warned.  So, I wanted clarification whether you have received the warning actually?  Thank you.

MR SABIITI:  Madam Speaker, I think this is an issue, which we think the minister should answer or respond to. With due respect to my colleague, do not divert us from the issue that we are discussing.

MR SEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, it appears that the expectations of the honourable Member who put the question are not being satisfied, and the Minister rightly so is here seeking how to proceed on certain critical matters in the question.  Would it not be pertinent, Madam Speaker, in circumstances that possibly we allow the minister to synchronize his statement and response and then come up at an appropriate time when we can debate it on this Floor?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Madam Speaker, I have actually inquired.  I do not have any more inquiry to make and I beg you to listen to me.  I have made a clear statement that nobody has said that hon. Jack Sabiiti has been involved in that coup business.  This is a result of my investigation. If you have information to the contrary, then please put it on the Table.  I am telling you what I have found out as a result of my investigation following the raising of the question and that is the position.  

Hon. Namusoke, if they have different information, by all means you are free to bring it.  I will give you the information that I have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why don’t you allow the minister to answer?

MR MWANDHA: On that particular statement that he has just made-  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us hear the answer.  If you are not satisfied, you will come up again.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Madam Speaker, I was told that the statement attributed to hon. Sabiiti, which Maj. Bantariza responded to, was a statement to the effect that the Officers of UPDF had been engaging in massive fraud of soldiers’ money.  Now, that is what I understand was attributable to hon. Sabiiti and that is what I was responding to.  

Hon. Sabiiti made a statement that the President went to his constituency purposely to warn him not to talk about the Army and the Bakiga–Banyoro issue.  I indeed spoke to the President and he told me that he made a public statement while on a visit to Rukiga Constituency to open a hospital.  The President, some time ago, did pledge to the people of Rukiga that Government would provide a Health Centre IV dispensary in that constituency -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members are heckling, just say it is a health facility.  I think it is safer.

MR SABIITI: Well, I would be happy if the President has promised my people a hospital, if hon. Mbabazi wants to put it that way.  I will go back and tell the people that actually we are supposed to have a hospital.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is why I said let us talk about a health facility.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Well, to the best of my knowledge, what was put in hon. Sabiiti’s constituency is in the current classification of medical institutions, Health Centre IV, which means, it is entitled to have a resident Medical Doctor, a theatre and a few other things.  Now, whether you call it a dispensary or not, I do not intend to engage in that debate.  

When the President goes to open a Health Centre IV in a constituency, surely it cannot be that he arranged it in order to purposely go and warn the Member of Parliament of the area because this talk about the Army is a recent development and the plan for the construction of this Health Centre IV has been on for a long time.  So, the two cannot be connected.  I was told by the President that indeed he has had the talk in the media by some leaders making very disparaging statements about the Army and that he in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief will not let this pass.  It is his duty as Commander-in-Chief to stop anyone who is trying in any way to lower the morale of the force, to do anything that would discourage them.  

Now, I made a clear statement - hon. John Kazoora is saying that this statement should come from the Speaker about the privileges and merits of Members of Parliament.  But I suppose I am entitled to give an opinion especially when the question of immunity is raised on the question that I am asked, and I have very clear knowledge of the privileges and immunities of Members of Parliament in Uganda.  I know what the Constitution says; I know what the Act of Parliament says and I have no doubt in mind that you as a Member of Parliament enjoy these immunities and privileges in the precincts of the House, and that if you as a Member of Parliament, for example, outside this House acts in breach of any law, for instance, commit an offence, the full force of the law will apply against you like it applies against any other citizen.  

Now, hon. Banyenzaki said my answer was short and he was disappointed because he wanted a longer one.  I do not have a longer one. I am sorry.  

Hon. Kazoora talked again about the President warning you about the Army and that the President has been making reference to “my army”.  I suppose hon. Kazoora was doing it in quotes to mean “Museveni’s army”, and he was asking me to clarify whether Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has an army as an individual, or as President and Commander-in-Chief –(Interruption). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you know we are still in Session and the Rules of this House do not permit us to come with telephones in the House.  If I catch you, I will take that telephone.  It is in that area, but if I catch the owner, I will take the telephone.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Madam Speaker, hon. Kazoora is still a serving Officer of UPDF and, therefore, he knows as much as I do the answer to the question he is raising. It is not true that President Museveni has been claiming that this Army is his personal Army, certainly not.  It is not true that, for instance, hon. Kazoora has been claimed by Mr President Museveni to be his personal officer. It is not true both in facts and in the actions of what the President has actually said and done.

The question of not commenting on the Army, the point which hon. Kazoora makes is - I repeat what Maj. Bantaliza said in reference to hon. Sabiiti.  Please you are welcome to criticize but do so constructively in order to build, not to destroy.  

Hon. Sabiiti raised the question about what the President said in relation to an honourable Member who also happens to be an officer of UPDF, and who is alleged to have been talking about the UPDF. I have not looked into that because that was not the question, but I can make a brief statement on it now. Officers of the Army who are Members of this Parliament enjoy the privileges and immunities of ordinary Members of Parliament like the rest of us. I agree that the point made by hon. Mwandha - he said that MPs should be mindful of the fact that they should not abuse their privilege.  

Parliamentary privilege cannot be used to aggressively stomp over the rights of other people or other institutions. Therefore, as ordinary Members of Parliament enjoying all these benefits please be mindful of other people’s rights, especially when they are not able to come back, even if you are actually fully utilising your privileges and immunities when you are in the precincts of Parliament.

In the case of military officers who also happen to be Members of Parliament, I would like to use this opportunity to humbly remind them that they are still military officers and that they are officers subject to military law. When a serving officer of UPDF makes a public statement in a public place that they are going to fight this Government, that they are going to act in contravention of the Constitution, well there is nothing that can protect you against the law if indeed the law wants to be fully applied against you – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable Minister, I am seeking a clarification, fighting in which form? I can say I am going to fight you using words, I can say fighting you using writing, what fighting do you mean? Do you mean even words people can be taken to answer for them or what?  

Secondly, you would have to tell us which words we should use when we are talking about the Army and the way we should talk about it constructively.  Because if we know that in the Army people have stolen and it is true they have stolen - even recently you are taking some for disciplining – and I say, “The Army is full of thieves” and of course one big thief swallows the small ones. Should we not talk about that, honourable Minister?

MR MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted clarification from the honourable Minister when he talks about the Army officers who are here in this House. The one category represents UPDF and then there is another category, which came by the mandate of the population. So, when he is talking about their speeches in the public, are we talking about UPDF representatives or we are talking about Army officers in general? I beg that clarification.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will recall at the beginning of this Parliament when we were considering our rules, luckily you were in the Chair, and one Member honourable Lt Gen. Tumwine struggled to put in the rules that we should never say matters concerning the Army and you ruled him out of order. You said as representatives of the people who appropriate this money, who are concerned with the security of this country, there is no way and indeed it was not put in our rules. I hope hon. Mbabazi gets that very clearly.

Secondly, I am sure hon. Amama Mbabazi has heard the President himself and has read a number of documents by the President in which one of them referred to the Members representing UPDF in Parliament as listening posts. They should never be involved in controversial issues as compared to the popularly elected officers like myself. 

I have a constituency to talk for and therefore, this issue of insinuating “they are serving officers” even when some people had been out of service for 20 years, and as a honourable Minister of Defence cannot even tell the last units these officers served in, it is taking a different line. That is why I also would like to add my voice to hon. Byamukama’s and congratulate you for bringing the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Bill at long last, which we told you long ago so that that nonsense is cleared once and for all. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: I think the honourable Minister quoted me correctly, but he did not go far enough because for me I was saying, some of the Members may abuse their privilege and immunity. But, Madam Speaker, I think it would help the House if maybe you can refresh our minds about the procedure that should be followed if anyone of us abused the privilege of this House. I think that is the key thing. 

Whether a person is representing the Army or not, I think in the first instance if we are to protect that privilege, we must use the rules and actually discipline the member within the rules. Because doing it outside the rules, as I said, is tantamount to intimidation, which is unfortunate if it happens to a Member of Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already undertaken that after the Minister has finished answering this question, I would give you the position of your immunities and privileges. I did that last week.
MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just looking at the overall picture. We seem to be having –(Interjections)- No, I am seeking clarification, but I am building it up. 
I am looking at a scenario where a section of Members of this Parliament are open to double jeopardy. They are subject to our rules here in Parliament as well as other rules governing their institutions, which I do not have a quarrel about. 
The clarification I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is, isn’t it time that we moved to avoid these pretensions? Why do we bring them in here? Why do we allow them to come in when they are not allowed to proceed as they think it is deemed to their constituents? 
So, I feel strongly that we should use the bill that we have before us and say “UPDF, do not come in”. That will solve these problems that we have, Madam Speaker.
MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information for the benefit of the honourable members, especially my good friend, the hon. Nandala. Utterances by word of mouth can constitute a criminal offence, particularly one called inciting violence. Words of mouth can constitute a criminal offence. (Interruption)
MR SABIITI: There is something I wanted him to explain as he answers.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the clarification, hon. Sabiiti.
MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, in his reply he stated that we should criticise objectively. I wanted him to throw more light and add more flesh to that so that he advises us. Because I do not think, as Jack Sabiiti, I have undermined or not worked within the rules of Parliament and the immunity you are talking about. If I have flouted that, I want him to come up clearly and tell this House that I have.  
But if I am quoted in the press when I am reporting what is factual, for example, when I am in my Public Accounts Committee and I am talking about how much money has been stolen, how much money has not been accounted for, how much money has been lost, or how much money the Ministry of Defence, the Minister and the Accounting Officer cannot account for, surely am I inciting? It is part of my duty as a Member of Parliament and particularly a member of the Public Accounts Committee to make these statements.
Two, if I am in my constituency and I find we do not have enough drugs and billions of money is injected in that ministry, and the Auditor General reports to Parliament that this money has never been accounted for, am I not entitled to make such statements? Is this inciting? I want the hon. Minister to throw more light on this.
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I will first answer hon. Mwandha. I agree with you in the context of the universal definition of privileges and immunities. There is a way Parliament handles its own indiscipline, for example. There is a procedure, which we all know, and that is why we have a disciplinary committee. 
You cannot be taken even to court for abusing your privileges in Parliament, for instance, for abusing people and things like that. But there must be a procedure within the system itself to address such problems. So, I was not in any way questioning that. 
I was only saying that the privileges and immunities are only available to me as a Member of Parliament within limits. Once I am outside those limits, then the law applies to me like it applies to anyone else. The agencies of state whose job it is to enforce the law obviously are under duty to enforce it against you as well, even if you are a Member of Parliament, if you have acted in breach or in violation of the law.
Hon. Muzoora said there are two categories of military officers in this Parliament, the ones who represent the people and the ones who represent the Army. He was asking, which ones. 
I think I came with a copy of the NRA Statute, which now is the UPDF Act. This is also for the information of hon. Sabiiti. I saw him making a statement on this about a month ago. He wrote an article in the Monitor in which he was saying this NRA is still called NRA in the law. It is not so; you should look at the revised laws of Uganda, it is called UPDF. This is the UPDF Act.  
In Section 14 - I will read the relevant bits - sub-section (1) reads as follows: “The following persons shall be subject to military law -
    (a) every officer and militant of a regular force.”  
As long as you are an officer or militant of a regular force, then you are a person subject to military law. It goes on to say a lot of things. There is the code and things like that; maybe I should not read for you. Obviously, officers know it. 

So, there is no differentiation in the officers. If the officer in his statements enjoys the privileges and immunities of Parliament, of course, that is full protection. But if he does not, if he goes to Kanungu and makes a public statement, which is in breach of the law, then of course the military law applies to him or her.  

I have already answered the other point. Hon. Kazoora was saying that the rules of this House do not bar officers from talking about the UPDF. Of course, the rules of this House do not bar you from talking about the UPDF. There are no rules barring anyone from talking about the UPDF anywhere. 

We are talking about making discouraging statements about the UPDF. We are talking about making statements, which are calculated to diminish the reputation of the Army in the eyes of the public. We are talking about statements, which in themselves are offences against the law, not statements generally.

I will also answer hon. Sabiiti. Of course in his duty as a member of PAC he is entitled to question the accountability of the Ministry of Defence. Indeed when he demands that we send the particular officers that have queries to answer, we always send them with no problem at all. This is not what we are talking about.  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Defence to clarify to us this issue. If an hon. Member of Parliament serving on the Defence Committee notices serious irregularities, is it within the laws of Uganda for him to actually go and publish it? Or is he expected to come and say this in camera, because I think this is the gist of the matter? 

If he found serious irregularities in the course of his work as a Member of Parliament on a certain committee and he actually talked about it clearly, would he be breaking the law? Would he be inciting the public if he actually pronounced it in public? We would like that clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Gagawala, I think I have already answered you. I was looking at the statement made by hon. Sabiiti in his article that appeared in the Monitor of Thursday, 13 November this year entitled “UPDF is not a national army”. 

He made a big statement that, “Those who lived under Amin and Obote remember that the gun was a major variable in his leadership (Obote’s), that Idi Amin’s rule is well known for its brutality and that Yoweri Museveni’s rule is not different. Nearly everyday we read about death in the North and Northeast parts of the country. 

The Army and all other instruments of coercion have continued to operate at the whims of the President. In 1992 a law was enacted for the National Resistance Army, Statute No.3 of 1992 to regulate and or govern the Army. However, at the time of writing a new Constitution it was clear that it could not qualify to be called a national army. 

Today, one is safe in contending that the UPDF is just a code name, legally it is not in existence. The Army’s partisan nature is exemplified by the President’s conduct. The poor management of the Army is a major factor underlying continued insecurity and poverty. 

One day he - meaning Museveni I think - will have to explain what happened to billions of shillings sunk into the Defence Ministry, which he has dominated for nearly 20 years. I know that hon. Kazoora will have many questions to answer too.”

Look at a statement like that! This is a statement, whether true or not, that someone is actually examining and will come out in response to. 

What I am saying, hon. Gagawala and others, is that, please talk about the UPDF. I bring you bills here to talk about the UPDF and its management. It is within your power as Parliament to legislate to determine how we do all these things. All these laws, which I am talking about, which would apply to you and to me and to anyone else, are the laws that this Parliament has passed. 

The NRA Statute as it was then, was a law that was passed by Parliament. All I am saying is that talk about the UPDF constructively in order to build. If you talk about it in order to destroy it and that intention is clearly discernable, and if you happen to do it where the law can catch you, I am afraid the law will catch you.  

Madam Speaker, in conclusion I would like to say that -(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering if I will be given chance, when he has sat down, or if I should bring my concerns now.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry the rules - as far as I know them - are clear. Hon. Kazoora has been standing up. Each time he stands up, I sit down. When he says “information”, I always receive information. But for someone to just switch on the microphone and speak out is some new practice that I am not aware of. 

If you have a point of order, you raise it. If you have a point of procedure, you raise it. What is this where someone simply stands up, switches on the microphone and speaks out?  

I was saying in conclusion that I would like to say that we are extremely happy with Parliament as an institution. The UPDF and the Ministry of Defence have enjoyed maximum support of the Internal Affairs and Defence Committee of Parliament. 

We have enjoyed the support of this Parliament generally, and we have absolutely no reason to see ourselves as being in conflict with Parliament as an institution, actually we are not. We see ourselves as allies in the effort we are engaged in, to try and pacify the country in order to move forward. 

Therefore, I would like to call on my colleagues Members of Parliament, especially when I know that this is not a generalized practice, to be positive. Most Members of Parliament who speak, even when they criticize the Army, do so positively and we are very happy with that. We do receive that information with maximum appreciation. 

We know we have some weaknesses in the UPDF, as hon. Sabiiti said and as I said here not long ago. We have been carrying out investigations and we have found some grave happenings, and we are moving against them. That is alright; there is no problem. 

If anyone came to me or even said here on the Floor of the House or gave me information, which we can follow about what he or she thinks is going wrong, we welcome that. But to engage in a campaign, to state, for example, that the officers of the UPDF have been engaged in massive stealing of resources of the soldiers, how do you interpret that. Because it is not true that every officer is a thief! It is not true that every officer has an opportunity to steal, even if they were thieves. And it is not true that all non-officers are not thieves. 

So, I beg my colleagues in Parliament to understand the enormity of the problem we are going through in building institutions, in restoring order in this country. And I beg them to play whatever role they can, even critically - we welcome that - so that we can move together at all times. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10 o’clock. I had already given you notice about this. We shall address the matter concerning our privileges and immunities next week as I had already undertaken. Thank you very much for the work you have done.

(The House rose at 7.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 December 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)














  




