Tuesday, 12th December, 2000.

(Parliament met at 11.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we adjourned last time, I made it absolutely clear that today we will start by taking a vote. But as I see things now, we cannot proceed to take a vote. I will, therefore, suspend the proceedings until 2.00 O'clock this afternoon at which time I will be able to tell you exactly what is going to happen after that.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence. This afternoon there is a funeral service for the late Dr. Mathew Lukwiya. I wonder whether our being absent here might not interfere with the proceedings of the House.

THE SPEAKER: That is precisely why we should have quorum in order to proceed this morning. So, the proceedings are suspended until 2.00 O'clock this afternoon.

(Proceedings were suspended at 11.33 a.m)

(On resumption at 2.48 p. m, the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: I notice the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs standing up, I suppose you are standing in for the Minister of Justice.

THE MINISTER OF PARALIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Miss. Kadaga Rebecca): I am, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2000” be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am still not happy with what is happening. In spite of the fact that 104 Members signed the book as being present, we have not even been able to get the necessary quorum of 93 Members. This means that there are some Members who signed the book and walked away. If this continues, especially tomorrow, we shall have a head count of the Members who will have come in into the Chamber to attend proceedings. 

Effective from tomorrow, we shall have a head count and we shall be able to leave out those who have sought leave of the Speaker to be absent from Parliament. Then we shall be able to see the Members who are really riding on the back of other Parliamentarians, and we know them. We should be able to determine that. 

I think it is not fair for people to claim to be attending Parliament when they are not here, and they are doing so because you are here. I think we should be able now to determine exactly who is who, and who is where and for what reason. Otherwise, at this rate, we shall not be able to transact the business that brought us to Parliament. I would rather spend half an hour doing the head count than doing nothing. For today we shall be able to proceed with some other business, which does not require the technicality we have been suffering.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I do share your concern of lack of the required number to transact business, but I have two issues I would like you to guide me on. The first one is for the benefit of Members of Parliament so that they plan for themselves. I wish the Speaker or the Business Committee could kindly indicate when we are likely to break off for Christmas and New Year. This would help us, because the Members are possibly in the wilderness trying to look forward to many other issues. They may be involved with children coming back from school, or starting to plan on how to go for Christmas. But if you can indicate roughly what the last day could be, then possibly people may be able to plan.  

Secondly, this is not the first time we have had this problem. Sometime back, on your intervention and request, we managed to realise the number. There are other places where we have been realising quorum outside Parliament.  It is very interesting that when it is real business here, we do not realise a quorum, but when we are outside, we are able to realise quorum. If the Business Committee could address the cause of this, it may help.  Of course in Jinja you know how we realised the quorum for the Movement caucus.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, do you want us to have a full debate on the causes of lack of quorum? Is that what you are suggesting? You leave it to the Business Committee. The Business Committee has been at it as recently as last week. One of the options the Business Committee has considered is what I have been saying.  From tomorrow I will take a roll call, and I do not mind spending half an hour doing that business, if that is going to ensure that we are going to realise quorum in the process of transacting parliamentary business. But we will not do that today. We will proceed with some other business, which does not require definite quorum.

DR. NYEKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought I should mention this. Quite a number of our colleagues have also gone to the Church for the service of the late Dr. Lukwiya. I do not want to defend anybody, but I thought it should be mentioned that such a function could also affect the quorum this afternoon. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyeko, that is why I have said for today we shall proceed with some other business. I do not want to go into details. You do not read between the lines?  

DR. NYEKO: I just wanted to mention it for the records. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. OTOA: Mr. Speaker, it is likely that many of the Members are in their constituencies and this type of message may not reach them. Wouldn’t it be prudent for Parliament to send a radio message that tomorrow there will be a head count?

THE SPEAKER: Parliament is in Session. It does so continuously. I do not see why someone should spend a whole week in his constituency knowing very well that Parliament is in session. Shall we proceed please!

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Babu): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Condominium Property Bill, 2000” be read the Second Time. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I wish to present the Condominium Property Bill, 2000. In presenting the Bill, it is desirable to bring out some features. 

The background and the objective of the Condominium Bill  
The Condominium Property Bill 2000 is intended to serve the community and be used for development purposes. The proposed condominium law is to facilitate the implementation of Government’s development objective of housing. It is aimed at provision of adequate and decent housing, and in particular to increase the housing stock in the country. 

The concept underlying the property ownership in Uganda to-date is the traditional one in which the owner of land is presumed to be the only owner of the property thereon. The system precludes a possibility for an individual to own anything not directly attached to the ground. The implication of this system is that, the individual cannot own a unit in a block of flats in isolation of the other units. This further implies that an individual cannot obtain a certificate of title for ownership of a unit.  The traditional concept of property ownership denies potential investors from developing high-rise buildings, as they cannot sell them off or raise capital for further development.

In view of the above, the Condominium Property Bill has therefore, been formulated to reverse the existing traditional concept, which is rigid and not conducive to property development and ownership. The Bill, among others things, is to provide for division of buildings into units and issuance of an individual certificate of title in respect of the unit. The Condominium Property Bill is therefore a revolutionary piece of legislation. It is expected to greatly encourage investment in high-rise buildings to enable more people to own property, especially young couples and young people who have just left school.  

Consultations
The Sessional Committee on Works, Housing and Communications has been scrutinising the Bill and the Committee has agreed on amendments to be moved to the Bill. In scrutinising the Bill, the Committee moved paragraph by paragraph, and we went through the Bill and they will present their report. During the entire exercise, the Committee kept consulting the technical officers of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment, and the officers of the First Parliamentary Counsel, who have been part of this meeting.

The objective of this Bill, as I have already mentioned, is really to help the Government to make sure that they divest some of the buildings that they have. Government has been involved in renting houses, but when the law comes out, it will give effect to the divestiture policy on housing, thereby leading to the sale of about 20 per cent of its remaining housing stock, comprising of flats.  It will also enable potential developers to construct several housing units on a given plot of land. This will not only make the cost per unit cheaper, but also serve in curtailing the problem of land scarcity, especially in urban areas.   

The condominium concept is new in Uganda, hence in the process of formulation of this Bill, wide consultation and research was undertaken, basing on experiences of other countries within Africa and beyond. This Bill has ultimately been formulated in light of the social economic realities of Uganda. Upon research and consultation undertaken among Government line Ministries, financial institutions, utility companies, academicians, and estate developers  -(Interruption)

MAJ. OTOA: Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether the Minister is doing the work of the Committee, presenting the Committee’s report, or he is moving the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: I take it that he is speaking to his motion.  The procedure, hon. Minister, is, when presenting the Bill for a Second Reading, you talk about the principles in generality. You talk about the principles, the objectives of the Bill, and what it is intended to achieve. You do not go into a detailed clause by clause analysis, although occasionally you can highlight a particular clause to drive your point home. I think this is what is bothering our colleague. So, please, do take that into account, but one thing I know is that you are speaking to the motion, which you have introduced.   

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for that wise guidance. I thought that by giving the conceptual framework of what the Condominium Bill is, the hon. Member would have a bigger picture of what the Condominium law is all about. I have not gone to the sections. Those will be talked about later. I thought that by giving the background of what we have done and how many people we have consulted, this would give him the picture that a lot of work has been put in place. And the Committee would also come and emphasise what I have said. But even as the Minister who went to that Committee, I think when they come to give their report, you will see that we have worked together. We are in harmony. And I thought that by being in harmony, we would be able to present this Bill better.  

I would like to thank the hon. Member for his observance. It is quite good. I just want to give you the concept of a condominium, whereby a unit in a building is divided among different owners of a property on which it stands. Services therein are being divided by the same people after forming organisations of the owners of those properties. This was the concept of condominium, and I was giving the reasons as to why Government was doing it.   One of the reasons is for development, the other one is for making sure they divest some of the properties they have in the Government, and lastly the outcome would be to increase the stock of housing in this country. That is the main aim (Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from you. At the Second Reading of a Bill, when does the Minister in charge of that Bill take an opportunity to explain to the House about his Bill?  When does he throw some light to the Members of Parliament, convince them, talk to them and explain the genesis of the Bill so that the Members of Parliament understand and internalise that Bill?  When do they get that opportunity if it cannot be done by the Minister at the Second Reading? After this, the Chairman of the Committee will come up and discuss what the Committee decided clause by clause. But the Members will have not have had the opportunity to know about the Bill, other than those who attended the Committee meetings when the Bill was being discussed. I would like some clarification on that. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is doing just that! Hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, is there a problem? I would like to understand it.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, according to our procedure, at First Reading the Minister just mentions the Bill and tables it. After that, you call upon the relevant Sessional Committee to consider it, and the deliberations within the Committee are privy to the Committee. Therefore, when does the Minister, in the Plenary, have an opportunity to speak about it?

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, are we in order to behave as if we are trying to re-discover electricity? At the end of our term of Parliament, are we in order to begin to learn how to present a Bill? We have been presenting Bills ever since we came to this House in 1996 and even before, are we in order to begin now to re-learn how to present a Bill?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, we take it that Ministers, particularly those who have been here for quite some time now, do know how to proceed when it comes to presenting Bills at various stages, namely the First Reading, the Second Reading and the Third Reading. But in case you are not so sure, I have already guided the House that when a Minister is presenting a motion for the Second Reading of the Bill, he talks about the principle of the Bill, he does not go clause by clause. That is in our Rules of Procedure. You can open the Rules and read them. 

When it comes to Committee Stage, that is when the Minister will be given an opportunity to defend each and every clause if it is being challenged. That is his opportunity. But at the moment, the Minister is really explaining the principles behind the Bill, the objectives to be achieved, and how he thinks they can be achieved, and he can make reference to a particular clause to drive a point home. That is what I have said.  I certainly do not wish to hear that the Minister presenting the Bill is trying to re-discover the Bill. I take it that he knows.  But if he does not know exactly what is to be done, then maybe he is going to have a serious problem. Otherwise, I do not see any problem with the way he is proceeding.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. According to the way our Order paper is made, it appears to me that at the Second Reading is a motion, and the Minister is moving a motion for a Second Reading of a Bill. If it is a motion, it is my view that the mover of a motion has a right, according to our rules, to talk at length about what he or she wishes in order for the motion to be made clear to the House. I seem not to recall any particular provision in our procedure, which says that cannot be done. So, in my view, if a Minister chose to speak about provision by provision on his motion, it would be in order. That is my own understanding.  So I wanted this clarification so that it is clear.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister was doing just that!

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That has been quite an enriching debate on how we should present these Bills. I would like to thank everybody who has contributed. 

Like I said, I was not going to go clause by clause. I was giving you the conceptual framework and who we consulted. There are reasons why I did that. Normally when we are debating these Bills, there are questions which are put up, like ‘who did you consult?’ I thought that by giving you the people we have consulted in making this Bill, one would get satisfaction.  

I would like to very quickly talk about the main provisions and implication of the Bill and then I will sit down. The Bill provides for registration of condominium plans, their units and condominium properties. It introduces a concept of ownership of units or sections of the building. In fact, it revolutionises the traditional principle that the owner of the land owns every piece of the property to the sky and down to the centre of the earth. It clarifies on the rights of the owners of the units, including the services that are provided for. He or she is entitled to provide transfer, renting and other dealings in the unit. It introduces the concept of common property, its administration and use.  This will ease the housing problem in this country. 

The Bill has been laid out very nicely, and in the beginning of this Bill, we do talk about the different sections and we do point out some salient clauses. This gives you the main concept of the Bill.
I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HOUSING, WORKS AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Katwiremu Yorokamu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Condominium Property Bill, 2000 was read for the First Time, as Members may recall, on the 15th of February 2000. The Bill was then referred to the Committee in accordance with Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to scrutinise and report to Parliament. The Committee was directed to report within 30 days from the date of the First Reading. I wish to add that this report was prepared at that time, under chairmanship of hon. Absolom Ongom. And I wish to appreciate his input right from the beginning. As Members do appreciate, there is a lot of work that goes into a report and the chairperson normally makes a lot input. I thought I would voice my appreciation right from the beginning.

I regret to report that the Committee took much longer than directed for a number of reasons. One reason was lack of accommodation for the Committee at the time, as was also experienced by other Committees. We had no room to transact business, but we welcome the allocation of new facilities in the North Wing, which has given us a permanent home in which to do business.

Secondly, this Bill had been appearing on the Order Paper for quite sometime but for one reason or another, we had not been able to present it. But as you can see, two months after we had been mandated to present a report, we produced the report, but we did not have an opportunity to present it to the House.

This Bill is in line with the Government housing policy, which the Minister mentioned, of providing an enabling environment as a major strategy towards the overall improvement and development of decent and affordable shelter for all. This Bill provides one such environment. If passed, this Bill will untie blocks of flats, still in the hands of Government, for sale, and the famous ones are those that are owned by the National Housing and Construction Corporation. I know there some owned by Uganda Consolidated Properties, and others which have been developed by private developers, but because there has been no appropriate law, there was no way the private property developers could offer the individual units for sale. They have actually been offering a complete block for sale because there was no law that would enable people to have individual ownership of the individual flats. 

It should also encourage the private sector to inject more funds into the housing sector, because they will be able to dispose of their property in a much easier manner. Developers and investors can invest in blocks of flats and be able to dispose of one by one.

For a long time, the need for a condominium law has been expressed by the public. I can assure you that the Committee, and indeed Parliament, has been under pressure from many corners to enact this law. Members of Parliament have equally been concerned about the delay in bringing this Bill to the House. The Committee is therefore, pleased that at last the Ministry of Works Housing and Communications did come up with the Bill and that finally we are now debating it in the House.

The Committee did scrutinise the Bill clause by clause. We invited memoranda from the public and met and discussed with interested stakeholders. The Committee also studied various documents, including the consultancy reports. These consultancy reports considered various experiences, especially from other countries within Africa and from elsewhere. I wish to add that this Bill is very close to the Kenyan model because of the very similar conditions under which we operate.

I will not go into the concept of the Bill, the Minister has already explained that. But briefly, a condominium is simply a block of flats or shared property. It can either go vertically or sometimes it can be shared property horizontally. The only difference in this Bill is that we are providing for a unit, which has not been able to have a separate title before. For example, if you take a block of flats that goes vertically, you have only one plot of land, but on that plot of land you could have ten, twenty or more units. How do you get a title for each of those units? How do you provide for ownership for each of those units, and how do you provide for ownership of the common property like the grounds, the access roads, and the sewerage system? This is basically the issue we were dealing with, and this is what the Bill is about.

The Committee went through the Bill clause by clause and suggested amendments where Members thought they were necessary in order to make the law clearer, easier to implement and stakeholder friendly. The suggested amendments were discussed, as the Minister has already indicated, with the Ministry officials and they were largely agreed on. The list of amendments is appended to this report. Members can have a look at them so that by the time we come to the Committee Stage, you are fairly aware of the amendments the Committee has come up with.

We did receive memoranda from the organisations indicated on page 3 of the report. I will not go through them one by one, but we invited a total of 15 stakeholders to give their opinion. Six answered in writing, four came and appeared before the Committee, and five did not respond.  So, ten out of fifteen responded. So, we think we got a fair representation of the public opinion on the provisions in the Bill.

Arising from the interaction the Committee had with the stakeholders, the Committee came up with the following comments: 
    1. The Condominium Property Bill is a new concept, as has already been pointed out, and it will be necessary to carry out a lot of sensitisation amongst the interest groups, in order to create full awareness of the concept and what is expected of the condominium members. The Ministry has already done some of this to some extent during their research, but more will be needed at implementation stage. Utilities’ providers, like electricity and water providers, will in particular need to be reoriented to learn to deal with many unit owners instead of the current practice of dealing with the large property owners only. 

Let me take give you an example of the water supply. In some of the blocks of flats, there has been bulk supply of water to the block of flats. But when you enable somebody to own a unit and he has a title for it, he would want to have specific supply for his water. He will want water metered separately, electricity metered separately so that he is self-contained in as far these utilities are concerned. I should report that we did have an interaction with some of these utility providers. We were assured that there were some on-going negotiations with the National Housing Corporation and National Water and Sewerage Corporation on this issue. We were specifically assured on water that individual meters would be provided for each individual unit so that it is easy when it comes to having separate ownership. 

    2. The tenants associations thought that the condominium law would force landlords to convert all their flats to condominium properties. Whereas the Committee sympathises with this desire, it is obliged with the advice that the condominium law will only facilitate or empower the landlords and tenants to enter into a new mutually agreed relationship. To do otherwise would be counter productive.

    3. Condominium properties will of necessity, in some cases, create a number of common properties e.g. access roads, children’s playing grounds and so on.  The Committee has proposed amendments to make local authorities retain responsibilities for maintenance of some of these common properties. But this is a subject for debate, and we can come out with a mutual and agreed position from the House.  

The Committee was, however, informed that some urban authorities, for example Kampala City Council, have, instead of maintaining children’s play grounds in the vicinity of housing estates, parcelled out these empty spaces and allocated them out for building on. 

The Committee was not happy with this position, and I want to appeal to the authorities to retain some of the green in the city as much as possible. This aversion of the City Council to empty spaces in the city must be vigorously discouraged. Playgrounds for children, open parks and open places for leisure are essential parts of planning for production of a healthy society. City Council Planners should be the promoters rather than destroyers of such facilities.  

I need to comment on some of the concerns which Members of the House and members of the public have been raising. These concerns were not a direct subject of this Bill, but we thought they were quite relevant, for example, how the prices of these properties be determined. It was not a subject of this Bill, but the Committee felt that it would be advisable for the implementers, especially the Ministry, to bring out some of these issues in the regulations, so that they are catered for. 

On the determination of the values of these properties, the practice, which was used in the pool houses, involving the valuation by Government valuers, could be adopted. Because this is a new concept, we advise that the regulations should be detailed enough, to make sure that they take care of all the details that are necessary.

The Committee wishes to extend their appreciation to the following organisations and people who assisted them:

    1. The Minister of Works, Housing and Communications, the Ministers of State and the staff of the Ministry who worked together with the Committee harmoniously for very many hours. This made the work of the Committee much easier. The Committee is particularly appreciative of the unusual details provided in the memorandum to the Bill.  Members can see that the memorandum provides more than enough details for you to appreciate the Bill. This will enable you debate the Bill from a properly informed point of view. This also helped our Committee and simplified our work.

    2. The Committee wishes to thank all those associations and organisations who responded either in person or in writing to the Committee’s invitation. The views expressed by these people were very useful to the Committee and helped us in arriving at our decisions.  

    3. The Committee also wishes to thank staff members of Parliament including the clerk assistant, typist, and the legal counsel. We also thank Sergeant-at-arms and his staff for all the necessary assistance they offered to the Committee, especially at the time when we encountered problems of accommodation.   

I beg to move that the report of the Committee be adopted and that the Bill entitled “The Condominium Properties Bill, 2000” be read a Second Time. 

MS. ZZIWA NANTONGO (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the Committee especially for the fact that this Bill has been presented during this time when the 6th Parliament is just about to conclude. I wish to say that my constituents have been very expectant. They were greatly awaiting this Bill to become a Statute and to become operational.  

I would like to support the motion, and I want to thank the Committee. This Bill has come at the right time because among other new concepts have come up in the housing development programmes. Today there are many concepts like the famous BOT (Build, Operate and Transfer). This concept is now worldwide, and I think it is soon catching up here in Uganda. At times the estates or buildings, which have been constructed, are very big, and at times there is no opportunity to have a single investor to take them up. This Bill will actually be very appropriate to handle such situations.

Kampala is a small city, just about 194 sq.km, and we do not have much hope for it to expand. Of course you know that the Constitution gave it those specific boundaries. I do not know how easy it would be to negotiate with Mpigi to have it expanded. Land in Kampala is becoming very scarce. This Bill now looks at the option of going up rather than sideways. This Bill, coupled with the important aspect of ownership, will console many people who would like to own property in Kampala. They will have an opportunity to own property in Kampala.

So, I would like to support this Bill basically because, among other things, it is going to open up opportunities for many investors to build going upwards and later have the opportunity to sell off. Many more people will get the opportunity to own property.

I would like to comment on the issues, which have been mentioned by the Committee. I should single out National Housing and Construction Company, which is one of the few firms that has owned block of flats. The only option they had was to sell a block of flats other than individual units. This issue of selling blocks of flats has not been very popular, because it is not very easy to raise the amount of capital involved. I remember one block of flats at the Bukoto flats, which I think had six units, was sold at a cost of 200 million shillings. I may not have got the exact figure, but it was about that. It is not very easy for many Ugandans to acquire 200 million shillings. And as you know, the cost of capital in Uganda is very high due to the interest rate and other things. So, this method has been limiting many potential Ugandans, who would have wanted to have the opportunity to acquire these flats. So, when this law comes into place, National Housing and Construction Company will be able to sell off these individual units and we shall have the opportunity to have many more people enjoy the benefits.

Since many tenants have been waiting for this law, I would like to make some observations. On page 4 of the report, we read in part (b) that some people were saying that it looks like National Housing and Construction Company may not be able to give them the opportunity to acquire or to buy for themselves on all its properties. 

I appreciate the observation of the Committee, but I want to request the Committee to work in conjunction with Ministry of Works and Housing and with National Housing and Construction Company. You should implore them to consider almost all these blocks of flats, because these are not being treated in isolation. In conjunction with this condominium law, there has been a Government policy to dispose of all housing properties. It is with this very policy that many of the houses have been sold off. Some of these tenants, particularly those of the Buganda Road flats, are asking why we are giving the opportunity to others and not to them. So, though it has not been considered in this particular Bill, it should be addressed. The tenants of Buganda Road flats, for example, should be considered.

I would also like to comment on the utilities. It seems that National Water has been dragging their feet, and I am sorry to use the word. But it seems that they are not very ready to move and provide these meters to every unit. This will jeopardise the implementation of this Bill. I want to implore the Ministry and the Committee to help facilitate the implementation of this Bill so that by the time this law is operational, all the encumbrances are reduced and most of the tenants can benefit from this law.

Finally, I also wish to raise concerns on how the price will be determined. That should be looked at! Some of these properties are very old, and I think it would not be very fair to price them as if they are newly constructed. Some are 20 or 30 years old, and it is the people who have been in these flats who have been rehabilitating them or maintaining them. I think that issue should also be considered. I support the motion.  Thank you very much.

MR. TOSKIN BARTILE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I support the motion, and I would like to say that the Committee took an unnecessarily long time to bring it. It is good that it has now come.  

The Committee has tried to give us the reasons as to why they delayed, but I am not very satisfied with the reasons.  We have been having reports read to us, I know there has been scarcity of room, but at least things have been moving. The Committee should have given us other reasons as to why they delayed.  

I say all this because people have been anxious to have this law come out. People would like to own property in Kampala City. There is a lot of scarcity of property, especially when the programmes which have been developed for low cost housing have just been low cost in name, but they are not at a low cost. The basic example is the Naalya Housing Estate. It was supposed to be a low cost housing programme, but it is not low cost. Average people who would like to have housing cannot buy the houses in Naalya. We only hope that with the passing this law, people will get what would be nearer to low cost housing.  I still call upon people who are dealing with housing estates to come up with a real low-cost housing programme to allow people own property and have houses. 

In other countries, even neighbouring Kenya, there have been arrangements for people to own houses. If you look round Uganda, even Members of this Parliament may not own houses here. If we took the percentage of people who have houses here, it is miserably small, and yet these are the people who are in a class where they should have personal housing units in Kampala here.  

The Committee also mentioned the importance of sensitising the people who are supposed to have these units or the stakeholders as a whole. They do not say when this will start. They are actually pleading that as soon as the law is passed, it should be implemented immediately. But at what stage should sensitisation take place? I think this is the most important issue. The moment people begin to have shared property, there is need for a lot of sensitisation, because there are facilities that will be shared. 

Recreation facilities are very important, but as the reports already states, some of the open spaces are being given away. These are some of the things which must be handled as much as possible, because you need recreation facilities or open space for people to rest. In an area like Bugolobi, you need a lot of space. The population in Bugolobi is so large. The young people are so many and they need enough space for recreation.  So, there is need for a lot of sensitisation.

Maintaining the cleanliness of these shared properties is another issue. I have the experience where, at one time, I was an L.C.1 chairman in Bugolobi Housing Estates in one of the blocks. The most serious problem was how to maintain cleanliness, how to marshal up members to take responsibility for even the flats where they lived. I can see this becoming even more serious, especially when people now have the property as their own property. So, this sensitisation, to me, is very important indeed.  

Lastly, I also want to state that as we move towards this new arrangement, of course there will be a need for people to build more stairs and more storeys, but we should take cognisance of the fact that Uganda is an earthquake prone country. The experiences we had recently in western Uganda and many other parts of the country were not few. I call upon our engineers to now come up and really protect the people. Houses may begin collapsing because people are now going to rush into going higher and higher. If the engineering, which will protect and make these houses firm is not taken care of, then we may be entering into a bigger problem. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I support the motion.

MR. WAMBEDE SETH (Bungokho North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for doing this commendable job. Let me not speak for the chairman of the Committee, but let me just exonerate the Committee. I have had an interest in this Bill and I have been following it. It was ready one year ago. So, it is not the Committee that was delaying it, but probably the problem was with the Clerk's office. I have already declared my interest in this Bill. I have been following it, so I support - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I want to put the record straight on behalf of the Clerk's office. This Bill was not ready two years ago as you say. If it were ready two years ago, then it would be a Bill of 1998. 

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I had not read the title. I am sorry for that. That aside, this Bill has come at a time when there is immense pressure from the tenants. First, the pool houses were sold, and these people were asking what was happening. They felt they were being sidelined, and therefore, there was immense pressure from those tenants.  

Everybody knows that shelter is one of the basic needs for humanity. This law has come to provide for that basic need, particularly in Kampala where land is very expensive. Tenants see this Bill as a saviour, particularly the civil servants who at the end of the month walk away with a miserable salary, which cannot even help them meet basic requirements. With such a Bill, the civil servants are going to breathe a sigh of relief. 

I would like to urge us to make the law explicitly clear. It should not carry any stringent conditions that will not befit what it is intended for. I am happy that it recognises individual units. At one point National Housing was saying they must be divided into blocks. We saw that as a clear indication to defeat the intentions of the law and deny the people an opportunity to achieve what they want.  

Let me also voice this issue of valuation. I know it may not be provided for in this Bill, but the valuation of these flats should take into account the period they have been in existence and also the kind of people they are going to benefit. I suggest that the tenant should really be involved in this. I know that being a Member of Parliament for Kampala, the Minister concerned knows the interest and pulse of the people living here. If the flats were overvalued, it would be tremendously unfortunate for the intended beneficiaries.  

I have been warned about time, but let me say that I think the implementation should not wait for guidelines on how this should be governed. I think the implementation should be immediate. We are already paying high rates, so instead of continuing to spend that money on rent, it would be better if that money went into acquiring these units. So, I urge you to make it immediate. It should not take an unnecessarily long time. 

Lastly, this is a process, which is not provided in the Bill, but I just want to request that the sitting tenants be given first priority. We may pass the law to allow the purchases, but behind the curtains, somebody comes up with an idea of advertising them and the highest bidder takes it all. It would be unfortunate if such a method came up. I support the motion wholeheartedly. I thank you.

DR. KAKUNGULU SHANNON (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to support the motion and to congratulate the Committee for having at last brought this Bill for discussion. It was long overdue, and I must think it is nearly four years late, because I remember right from the first year of this Parliament, it has been on the agenda of discussion. Mr. Speaker, even when you were still a Minister in Housing, you were at one time contemplating introducing it in the House. Unfortunately, I do not know where it ended, but alas, it has come. 

This Bill is going to be a solution to the problem we have been having with estates of the deceased. This reminds me that when an heir to a person with property succeeds property when the person dies, he usually inherits the residence of the deceased. In most cases, he actually monopolises that particular estate at the expense of the other siblings and spouses of the deceased. If we get this kind of law in operation, it will help someone to make a will that would even apportion his own house or estate. He could say that this particular room belongs to a particular son or daughter and he is entitled to actually acquire a title for that room and the heir would not be permitted to sell the entire estate. I think it would do great justice to the people who have been suffering in these estate disputes.  

How many of us actually have wills now in this House? I can assure you that very few people have actually made wills about what should happen to their properties when they go. That property will end up with the Administrator General’s office, which office, I am sorry to say, is one of the most corrupt offices this country has. But with a will, you will have protected the people who stay behind.  

I know of an hon. Member who died some time ago and he left no will. He had a family with more than one spouse and they ended up tearing each up even before the body was lowered into the grave, because they were fighting over property. If he had made his will in advance, such a thing would not have arisen. So, I beg you, Members, it is not doom’s day, but I urge you to make wills. They are necessary to protect your interests, especially for the polygamous African man. This Bill is for the less privileged members of society-(Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that man is by nature polygamous.

DR. KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, I will not go into the philosophy of marriage. As I said, this law is for the less privileged members of the society, especially the civil servants and the middle class who may not be able to afford the price of big houses in this city. There is a shift, there is rural-urban migration, and with this migration in mind, the cities are going to be congested with the current style of developing houses. Naalya estate is a waste because of the land that has been used. It is taking up so much land, which would have housed many more families than those that currently occupy those houses. So, this is a good Bill, it will help us think upwards instead of thinking horizontally. 

As a Member of Parliament representing an urban constituency, I have very particular interests in this law. Land in an urban setting is extremely expensive and it is not expansible, especially, given the conditions in our Constitution. So, the people I represent are wholeheartedly behind this Bill. And I beg to support the motion on behalf of the people of Masaka Municipality. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MULASSANYI DAVID (Rubanda West, Kabale): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, and I wish to thank the Committee for this report. This Bill gives people an opportunity to enjoy ownership of their property. It gives us a chance to get titles where it has not been very easy. It has been common to write agreements stating that we have got the surface of the land, but you do not own what lies above the land. That has been a limitation, but this Bill has come to cure that disadvantage.  

The National Housing Corporation is supposed to give the people of Uganda low cost housing. In fact, they say they are to give it to everybody. So, if it is to benefit everybody, then the houses should be very cheap. There has been a problem and I do not know whether the Committee discussed it, but I have not seen it in the report. 

I understand the National Housing Corporation units were supposed to be 18 million shillings. I am pleased that National Water and Sewerage Corporation was one of the organisations which was summoned to appear before the Committee. National Housing constructed those units for 18 million shillings, but they also included the water system and the lighting system, hopping that National Water and Uganda Electricity Board would compensate them. This is because they are the ones going to benefit from those systems. But eventually, National Water did not pay and Uganda Electricity Board did not pay. So, the houses were finally raised to 28 million shillings. I do not know whether the Committee has solved that problem between those corporations and National Housing, but that is something that is going to keep the houses more expensive than they were supposed to be (Interruption)

MR. KATWIREMU: Thank you, hon. Mulassanyi, for giving way. Could you clarify which units you are referring to?  Are you referring to the Naalya housing units or the flats owned by National Housing Corporation?

MR. MULASSANYI: Mr. Chairman, I am referring to the Naalya National Housing estate not the flats –(Interruption)

MR. KATWIREMU: In that case, that does not concern this Bill.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, if I could give information to the hon. Members so that they can contribute even better.  Naalya housing scheme is a wide scheme and has got grades of houses. They have got the Naalya affordable housing scheme, they have got Naalya exclusive and they have got Naalya pride. Each of these has got a different price because of the size of the house. 

Naalya affordable is between 25 million and 29.5 million shillings. Naalya exclusive is between 42 and 49 million shillings. Naalya pride, which is under construction now, will go between 43 and 70 million shillings. Later on, the middle to high income groups will also get a different type in another place. I just want to confirm that it is true that the services, which go with these houses, do bring the prices a little bit higher. Thank you.

MR. MULASSANYI: That is what I was saying. When these corporations do not compensate National Housing then houses become more expensive than they were originally supposed to be.  

I want to end by saying I wish National Housing Corporation also went to other towns outside Kampala. We also need these cheap houses. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MOHAMMED MAYANJA (Pallisa county, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in welcoming this Bill, which is going to save a resource, which is running out very fast, and that is land. I am told that Naalya housing estate is built on about 120 acres of land and we have about 700 small housing units on that. If we had stayed with the earlier plan of building low cost units upwards, maybe we would have saved almost 50 percent of that precious land. 

I will give an example of other small countries, for instance Malta. Malta is a very small island, maybe that is why they developed the vision very early. There is a law in place that does not allow you to build sideways, that is bungalows. One must build upwards, so that you do not only utilise small land, but you also utilise the space above. You have a sitting room down, the kitchen and dinning room on the first floor, the bedroom up, and maybe on the top you have a small playground for the children. But because we are oblivious of the fact that land is increasingly disappearing as the population grows, our urban planners have tended to relax over this issue. The towns are not well planned and there is a lot of luxury in building town plots. So, when a law like this comes, we have got to welcome it and give it all the support.  

In the same spirit, I would like to thank National Housing Corporation because this is the biggest player in the housing sector. We would like to thank them and to appeal to Government not to sell National Housing Corporation. We have heard rumours in the backyard that there are intentions of selling National Housing Corporation. This is a strategic Corporation, which is very essential to –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member, and I thank him for giving way. First of all, we must appreciate the words ‘selling’ and ‘privatisation’. When you privatise an enterprise, it actually remains in the nation and it keeps doing the same work as it is doing. If we were to sell National Housing as assets, that would be different, because we would be destroying it. But if we sell it as a going concern or privatise it as a going concern, it would keep doing the same work as it was meant to do.  

Secondly, I want to inform the hon. Member that in the last Act amending the PERD Statute, Act No. 1 of 2000, National Housing was re-classified in class two, where Government will keep 51 percent shares. That means we shall be looking for a strategic investor to help Government actually revitalise National Housing rather than sell it. In any case, it will be divestiture and privatisation and not selling.  Thank you.

MR. MOHAMMED MAYANJA: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the nice words that the hon. Minister has used and which have been used for a very long time in the process of privatisation. We are not against privatisation per se,  but we are against a situation where our assets are sold and when we ask for the proceeds from the assets, the proceeds are not there. It really challenges our conscience and the future will blame us.  

I also want to appeal to Government to settle her indebtedness to National Housing Corporation. If we are to expect National Housing Corporation to fulfil its mandate, Government, which is the biggest debtor of the Corporation, should have the audacity to pay back so that these people are able to increase the housing stock.  

The other point I would like to comment on is the cost of construction materials in Uganda. I understand Uganda has got the highest price for cement in the whole of Africa. As a country which is developing, and which cherishes good housing, which by the way is a fundamental human right and has got a lot of linkages to living as a healthy community, I think there is need for us to revisit our taxation on construction materials. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there seems to be a tendency to swing the debate to discussing the desirability or otherwise of selling or retaining National Housing Corporation. I think you should direct your discussions to this particular law. Is it a good law? Once you have it in place, anybody else, including National Housing or any other developer, will benefit from there. It is not confined to National Housing. I know National Housing is currently the biggest owner of what are to be condominiums, but once this law is in place, many of you here will become like National Housing. So, let us direct our minds to whether this is a good law or not.

MS. KABASHARIRA NAOME (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. Yes, this is a very good law for our country. I want to thank the Committee, the Minister and you, Mr. Speaker, for at least allowing this Bill to come. My contribution will be in form of clarification, and I hope the Minister and the chairman will note down and clarify some of these issues.

On page four, the Committee says that it was informed that some urban authorities, for example Kampala City Council, instead of maintaining children’s playgrounds in the vicinity of housing estates, have parcelled out these empty spaces and allocated them out for building on. Now I want to be clarified. In areas where there are spaces that have been taken away by urban authorities, how are those people, who will buy the properties along with those areas, going to be served? These play grounds, other access roads and other things that will be necessary.  How is this law going to help those people?  

Two, I know that National Housing is the biggest landlord as far as this law is concerned. And I know that they mortgaged some flats and there are tenants who have been waiting for those flats so that they also own property.  How is this law going to help those people when their property has been mortgaged?  

Three, there are tenants who have been writing to us, as MPs from Buganda Road, saying that they have learnt that they are not among those people who will benefit from this Condominium Law. At one time they were being threatened with eviction by State House, which wanted to put their staff there. These people resisted and came to Parliament. I think it did not happen, but recently they wrote a letter to us that it is not among those properties that are supposed to be sold. What are the criteria or what will the criteria be for those who will get the property and those who will not? How are they going to benefit using this law?  

Four, the policy of National Housing is only to care for the outside part of their property. They do not work on the inside of the houses, but tenants have put too much money into those properties. How is this going to be determined, especially in the valuation or the selling?  You have put in your money and when they come, they only see the outside. I want clarification on how this is going to be worked out, because we want our people to be sure.  

Five, the chairman talked about determination of prices.  How sure are we that the landlords will not take advantage of this law to fix high prices and exploit the tenants? We know that these are civil servants who might not manage high prices and yet they have been maintaining those houses for so many years. How is this law going to protect them?  

Six, when do we expect this law to be operational, because the properties are being handled by so many landlords? When is it going to become operational?  

Lastly, I just have one comment and not clarification. The Minister for Works, Housing and Communications one time told us that he would be the one to present this Bill.  So, it was put on the Order Paper but cancelled because he was not in the country, although we knew that there were three other Ministers. In fact, that is why it has delayed. The Minister was not in the country and he wanted to be the one to present it. What has happened today? (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (COMMUNICATIONS) (Mr. Werikhe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I do know where that information came from, but it is not true that the Minister insisted he wanted to present the Bill himself.  As a Ministry we work as a team and any of the Ministers is capable of presenting any Bill within the Ministry.  So, that is why we are all here. Hon. Babu is the one now responsible for the Bill, but any Minister is capable of handling it. So, it is not true that hon. Nasasira insisted that he should present the Bill himself. I would like to clarify on that. Thank you.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister for giving me the answer. But not only once did hon. Nasasira mention that he would be the one to present it, even in the caucus, outside this Parliament, he told us so in your absence. He told us that it could not be presented when he was not there, and yet hon. Werikhe, whom I knew could present it, was there. So, if you are working as a team, why didn’t you present it then?  

DR. MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion but with some reservations. I am particularly impressed by this Bill because the quality of condominiums or public housing in this country has gone down, especially the maintenance outside, maintenance of sewage and of water.  The flats along Buganda Road were very strongly built, but I do not how long ago they were painted. Since 1971, Government has not really been very active in maintaining those houses. I hope that with privatisation, the owners or the groups will take trouble to maintain, repaint and maybe furnish these houses.  

I get discouraged when I go through Mbale, for example, where there is public housing. There are very good condominiums, but you find water pipes leaking for weeks before somebody gets sufficiently concerned to stop the water from running. I think this Bill addresses the problem of maintenance of these houses. 

I am concerned about special groups, especially doctors and nurses. Since the privatisation of housing or giving money instead of housing, a problem has risen among doctors and nurses. Nurses nowadays have to live a long distance from hospitals and they travel at night. There have been reports where nurses have been attacked. I hope that the Ministry will keep that in mind. If there is Government land around hospitals, it should not automatically be given to developers, but the situation of nurses and doctors should be taken into consideration. When they develop those areas, housing should be directed towards nurses and doctors. 

As far as the provision of low-income housing is concerned, we know it is a problem in this country. I hope Government will be able to address this problem. If we are to develop in future or if somebody is given an area to develop middle-class housing, they should be able to provide low-cost housing by law. It discourages isolation of poor people and provision of services and security. If we isolate poor people to areas like Kisenyi, it means there will be no policing and crime will go up. There will be no provision of water in those areas. There will be no good schools, but if we develop low-income housing side by side with middle-income housing then the poor people will also have access to services. So, I hope that when we make laws and grant licences for development, provision of low-income housing will be particularly considered. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWABITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this motion.  

On page 4 of the report of the Committee, they rightly say that condominium property is a new concept in Uganda and the people need a lot of sensitisation. I do agree with them because in Uganda people are used to personal property, buying a piece of land or a house and getting a title. But now you are going to sell a block of three flats, from flat one to three, to a group of people who are staying there. The issue is, this joint ownership of the same plate, but having three flats, is a new concept and perhaps the new owners may not understand it. I hope the Ministry will come out with proper circulars to make sure that these new owners do not confuse the implementation. Assume that when these people have paid for these flats they should be able to use the title as security for getting loans from the bank. My question is, what happens if the third person has failed to complete his payment, will this title be valid for three of them or the other two will have to wait until this person pays his dues? I would like that clarified –(Interruption)

MR.KATWIREMU: Thank you hon. Rwabita for giving way.  This Bill will enable ownership of each individual unit separately with its own title.

MR. RWABITTA: Thank you very much for that information.  The other concern I would like to raise is about the state of some of these properties, especially flats. If you take Buganda Road flats as an example, for a long time these flats have been in total disrepair, especially the sewerage systems and the water systems, which are not working. They need a lot of plumbing. How will the cost be gauged? Will the cost of repairs be included in the total sale, so that the total price is reduced by the repairs? Or will the Corporation first do the essential repairs so that these people can have something suitable to accommodate them? –(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to give information on Buganda Road generally so that we can also enrich our debate. First and foremost, most of the flats at Buganda Road have now been repaired and they have been brought up to standard. These will be valued by a valuer who is trained. He will a practitioner in that field and he will value them accordingly. He will include all those in his valuation. In fact, we are very lucky to have a valuer in this House, hon. Bageine Shem. When he is here he will tell us how they do value these houses.  

Secondly, the houses on Buganda Road were mortgaged by National Housing. They wanted to raise money to put up the houses in Naalya, and when that money has been reconciled with the banks, the first sitting tenants in Buganda Road will be given the opportunity to buy those flats.  

I want to assure the hon. Member that for those who live in National Housing flats, the agreement is that they must repair inside and National Housing will repair the structure and outside. The House is part of the tenancy agreement.  

Lastly, in recent times, people have been vacating those flats and giving them to others at a price. When they have repaired the house, whoever takes over the house gives them goodwill. Just to give you an example, a place like Bukoto goes for 15 million shillings a flat, Wandegeya is basically the same, but for Nakasero we are talking about 25 million shillings for goodwill for the things that the tenant would have put in the house.  Thank you very much.

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I must thank the Minister because that was my next question. Since you have explained the goodwill, I will not go into that. There is another concern about Government properties. Government has had arrears, especially with utilities like water and electricity. I hope these will be written off against the new price for the new owner. 

Lastly, what happens where a neighbour who now owns the flats becomes a public nuisance? At the moment if somebody becomes a public nuisance, he can be sent out of the flat by the parastatal body. But now this man will have bought his flat and everyday he will be fighting with his wife or pounding millet up there. When you tell him he will not listen. How will the law go about this public nuisance? The owner of the property is now the boss of the house and he may not comply with common sense. 

MR. KATWIREMU: Unfortunately the hon. Member may not have come with his copy of the Bill, but there is something right on the front page, on the second paragraph particularly. You can see that this Bill is intended to regulate and provide certainty in the legal relationship between owners of units and also provide for management of the common properties –(Interruption)

MR. BABU: Mr. Speaker, a committee will be formed by the owners of these flats. There will also be an agent who will run these flats. There will be a code of conduct and there will be penalties for those who do not want to follow this code of conduct. This is all provided for in the Bill.

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, my last concern is about the sitting tenants who will be given an opportunity to buy but are not able to do so because of their financial resources. Is it possible for Government to avail some soft loan to these sitting tenants so that they can also own something? I think this would be a very good area in which middle-income earners can also own property if they get soft loans.  Thank you very much.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the whole House that all the money from the houses that were sold under the civil servant’s scheme was put in Housing Finance Company of Uganda. This was for the benefit of future buyers of other houses who might want to have access to funds. And now there is about 9 billion shillings available for borrowing from Housing Finance, but of course you have got to comply with the conditions before you can access that money.  So, the money is available in the bank.

MR. BAGALANA TOM (Bunya South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to support the motion with a few observations. Today as a nation, we stand on tricky ground. We are like people in a desert longing for rain, but we wonder at what time the rain should come. If it comes at night, we fear the thieves. If it comes during day, we will not work. Possibly it should come in the evening when the cattle are back and the children have come back from school, but it should not inconvenience anybody.

I say this because more hon. Members have contributed and alluded to the fact that in this country housing is a scarce commodity in Government departments. Recently we heard that the policemen are sleeping in toilets, and some of them actually rent with the armed forces. Some officers even rent far from the barracks. So, it is quite defeating to see that Government lacks space to accommodate its own people and yet we are going to lease out these properties to other people. I do not understand this. 

If the medical section does not have housing, the police does not have housing, the army does not have housing, and we are leasing out these properties, what is the principle and objective behind this law? I am not fighting Government, but I would like to know what the objective behind this law is. I think the Minister and the chairman of the Committee will be able to answer that. I also want to comment on succession and ground rent –(Interruption)

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member is making a very important point. Could I just be clarified? Does he think that when this law is in place, Government should be the first to be considered to the purchase the flats? Is that what he means? Otherwise, the law will not solve the problem. It has no problem in as far as housing  Government workers is concerned. I think the concern should be whether Government is thinking about taking advantage of this to purchase facilities to house its staff. Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I just want to inform the House that Government is already in the process of establishing needs to care for housing for those special groups of essential staff. Those are going to be taken as a special category and they will be treated as such. They include doctors, people who work at night, fire brigade staff and police. All these people will be considered in one particular framework and they will be treated as such.  Thank you.

MR. BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members who have given me information. I think what the Minister has said is true and Government will take it into account. Those officers who work on night duty or those who may need to be accessed at night, like doctors and many others, should be provided with accommodation.  

The hon. Member mentioned something, which I also wanted to mention, that this law is not really focused. What does this law aim at? Is it focussed at leasing out Government property or is it extending even to private property? -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think that you should direct your attention to whether the concept of ownership of property as described in this law does appeal to you.  You see there is a new law, which allows you to own property in space, if I may use a crude word. That means, if you have a block of flats, this law is says that whoever is on top of you can go to that flat and get a title. The person can be the Government, it can be an individual, and it can be anybody. This is what the law is trying to do. So, the question is, is it a good proposal or should we live under the old concept that you own what is on the ground level, down to the centre of the earth and up to the sky. This is what this law is trying to distinguish. It is has nothing to do with divestiture or sale of Government property. That is my understanding. 

MR. BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Out of your clarification, I get to understand, but still it will affect Government property. Many of these people who have been writing to us live on Government property. Some of these people in the National Housing flats in Buganda Road and other places have been writing to us asking for our support. This is Government property that is why it is important for us to talk about Government property. We have to safeguard what is ours. I think this law will go a long way, as the Minister said, to safeguard the interests of the working community. We support this law.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ETIANG PAUL (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I represent a rural constituency in which the terms and context of this Bill are not very much one of the top concerns of the rural people. But I have no hesitation at all in supporting this Bill. While I support it, let me offer to the House some information on my own experience as a co-owner of a condominium.  

First of all, I am very delighted to be present and to be party to the enactment of a condominium bill for our country. Before it becomes congested with mortar and brick, as I have seen elsewhere, we can plan ahead.  Ownership rather than tenancy of property enhances the value of property. We can only look back a few years ago when about one third of Kampala or half of Kampala was occupied by either Government or parastatal houses owned by civil servants. And along with that ownership and occupation, there were rats, garbage, and a lot of crime.  These days I believe when you look around, you can see Kampala increasingly becoming neater and cleaner. And that is for one and one reason alone, we now have a higher average of our people owning those properties than before. That is all. You can be rich, you can be clean as a person, but if you know that the house in which you live is not yours, believe me, you are not going to clean that house.  

Secondly, with this Act, our towns will be cleaner in terms of hygiene and crime. I do not need to repeat to the hon. Members about the garbage that we see in the flats and here when we talk about condominiums. Let us not mix up two things. First of all, there is the institutional housing, which the Minister and the chairman have explained, and there is the ownership you have rightly guided the house about. What we are talking about here is the concept of sharing a building. So, in this Bill we are essentially addressing blocks of flats.  How do people living in the same flat, as unit families, own that building? This proposed Act addresses it this way.

Thirdly, we will bring people into town more cheaply than before. In other words, instead of a person coming to own a ground plot with a huge house and all the costs that go with maintaining it, you have people who are professionals, working in town, and who just need maybe a couple of bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen to house their families. You are increasing not only the population of the town, but the ownership of properties in the town and all that which goes with ownership, like responsibility and a sense of judgement. And by having a truly urban society, we are going to increase their affluence. When you live next to a person who is equally affluent, you tend to be even more affluent than the other persons. Therefore, among many other things, I submit that the issue of having reliable taxpayers will also become easy to administer and achieve. 

I submit, with my experience, that property owners generally, not in every case, but generally tend to be more patriotic than those who do not own property. Unless you do not have property to defend, but in the event of kavuyo, in the event of a war breaking out, or in the event of people damaging property, you will stand up in front of the property and defend it. That is why I tend to appropriate to people who own property a little bit more patriotism than those who do not own property. After all, those people who do not have anything do not have any patriotism to display. A sad case of this happened in  Kenya in August 1991.  

May I comment on the point made by hon. Margaret Zziwa when she was talking about Kampala’s expansion being constrained by the Constitution. I entirely support the views she expressed. I will even go ahead to say that we need not expand Kampala even if there is pressure inside, because we have the environment to protect. We have got to rationalise, because we have got an increasing society, a society which we are trying to modernise, a society which we know has got to be fed and taken care of. Rather than go and encroach on the rural land, which will bring bad environmental atmosphere, we should go upwards and force people elsewhere, not really physically, but sort of induce them to co-habit in hygienic conditions, tolerating each other on the basis of rules.  

I think the Minister explained the consequences of the condominium law. I would like to assure my colleague who asked this question that beyond this Act, there will be necessary neighbourhood watch and written laws that go along with property ownership. If you own part of that building, you will be the last person to see anybody approaching to come and damage it and you look away. You will be the last person to look away.  This will jointly go on with the laws, with the common services that you are going to have there, maintenance of the security fence, and also the cleanliness of the compound. 

I would like to help my colleagues. Maybe I was speaking from the point of view of being a co-owner of a condominium. Hon. Zziwa also raised the issue that we should be careful in ensuring that when this law is eventually implemented, the older buildings should necessarily fetch a lower price than the newer ones. I slightly disagree with her on that. The location of property determines the price rather than its newness.   You go to Nakivubo here, a flat, however old it is, because of its location, is likely to fetch a higher figure than a flat elsewhere, say in Wandegeya. So, let us allow the law of demand and supply to dictate, and it will rightly dictate. 

Lastly, in light of the new concept that we are discussing, may I perhaps encourage the press to now take a particular interest in this subject. They should educate the public on exactly what it is. Even if it is necessary, I urge the Minister to assist the press, even in travelling outside to see the condominium life, which we now have as a new concept to bring to our people. Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME TOM (Mwenge North, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I support the motion and I want to say that this is a fundamental law. It is as fundamental as was the Land Act. I agree with the Minister that it is actually revolutionary. I accept that this is a new concept in Uganda, but it is not a new concept in the world. It is just that a more serious Government is in place and we have decided that this concept now comes to Uganda and be understood. This condominium law has now been brought into this country although it existed in other countries, mainly Australia, Kenya and others. 

I thank the Minister for bringing this Bill at last.  Those people who live in flats in Uganda have been waiting for a condominium law for a very long time. They have been waiting for it to be passed so that they can buy and acquire land titles for the flats where they live. I think the happiest people now should be the civil servants. The only civil servants who were allocated houses to buy were those who had bungalows. Those are the ones who had an opportunity to buy the houses, but those who were living in flats did not have that opportunity. They have been waiting, and I think after passing this Bill, they will now have the opportunity to buy the flats where they have been living and waiting for a very long time. They can also be equal to the other members of the civil service who had an opportunity to buy their houses and they are already receiving the proceeds, that is those who rented out those houses. 

What is interesting about this law is that people will have land titles, there will be a tenant of flat one with a land title, flat two, three, four up to six. And all of those will be entitled to have a land title and even go to the bank and mortgage his title. Of course, there will be other matters, as hon. Etiang has said, there will be an arrangement so that the title on floor one is the same and equal to the title on floor number eight of the same building. That is why I am not worried about landlords converting their flats into condominium properties. 

If a landlord owns the whole block, which consists of six flats, he can decide to sell the whole block and get his money. Or if he wants to make that a condominium flat and sell each flat individually and remain in flat number one, where he will live, he can access that. Can’t he do that? The rest can live in flat three, four, five, six up to ten, but with their land titles. He can live with his money from those flats on top of him, I imagine –(Interruption)

MR.ETIANG: Thank you, hon. Butime. I would like to offer information in this particular respect, Mr. Speaker. In the event of a landlord selling those flats, he would essentially be selling leases of say 99 years, 49 years individually, and he will retain the freehold title.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME: I hope that hon. Etiang is right, because you can have different arrangements. You can have the freehold and the others can have leases, but there could be an arrangement in future, where they could also maybe have it. But let me leave that matter, it is quite technical.  

I thought that people who have had blocks and were not able to sell and give leases flat per flat are now going to have money, because people have been only selling bungalows. But if this law comes into place, then you can have a block and still sell your flat. In other words, the landlord will now get more money by selling what he has built. So, while the concept in this law is new, the interest groups have been waiting for a very long time and sensitisation will be very simple. As hon. Etiang has said, there are people who have been waiting for this law, so they are already sensitised, because they were waiting. And since this law is not very attractive in the rural areas, until the condominium law gets there, sensitisation will not be difficult.  I thank you.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE (Kalungu East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Looking at the appearance of things, I may be the last speaker, and therefore, I can use as much time as I may wish to. However, I have very few points to make. 

First of all, I want us to welcome this condominium law.  Th conception of this law is as old as 1989, when I first joined this Government. So, the idea has been there, it has been on the drawing board, it has been on the offing for as long as that. It is therefore good that it has come to pass, and I stand up to support it all wholeheartedly.  

Hon. Etiang said that human beings are essentially selfish, and they only want to act first of all in their immediate interest. In fact, those of us who do political theory know where the communists went wrong. The communists went wrong on two principles, trying to defy or to negate the selfish nature of man and the superstitious nature of man. Man is essentially superstitious and man is essentially selfish. We are so selfish that if a bomb fell from up here, friendly as we are and common as we are, we will all run away in our own directions. We will run without bothering about what has happened to the other until the next day. And we will say, ‘oh, you too survived?’ This is true even between man and wife. If the bomb exploded here, they would run away in different directions until the next day. Human beings are selfish. So, this goes to cure that selfishness. Everybody will be able to own something and therefore look after it well –(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr. Speaker, hon. Kintu Musoke has said that the communists made one mistake when they did not understand that human beings were selfish. That is why they developed dialectic materialism and historical materialism to teach the human being not to be selfish, by teaching him the development of the human person up to the highest stage, and that is communism. I thank you.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: And it was so inconceivable and that is why they fell. The Minister and the chairman have said that some of the public utilities that will go to these condominium-owned properties will be maintained by local authorities. I think I have seen it somewhere in the law. I am afraid that unless we revise the responsibility of the local authorities, we are going to have a similar situation as we are having now. Because properties are being privately owned, Kampala is beginning to look smart because the owners are cleaning up. And also, city council is trying to repair some of the city roads. But in between the building and the road, there is a pavement. This pavement has remained a no man’s land, and any city will only be beautiful if the pavements are maintained. Therefore, it will be necessary for us to stipulate who repairs the pavement. They should either become part of the condominium or people who are using them should be given the authority to look after them. 

Maybe because of lack of money, city council is doing nothing about the pavements, and that is why you can see the Kampala streets looking ugly. The buildings have been painted, the roads have been repaired, but the pavements are very ugly, because that is no man’s land.  Therefore, this law should be specific as to who is going to be responsible for repairing pavements that go together with condominiums.

Since I am going to be the last speaker, something that I think was bothering –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, before you continue, and I will give you time, Mr. chairman, don’t you think that this point he has raised could be addressed in clause 30? It is true he is making a point, namely that a level of discipline will be required to ensure that one lives comfortably within a condominium arrangement. It will require a lot of discipline, and probably that is why you have clause 30, giving the corporation power to make by-laws. And from the by-laws it can make, people who will misbehave and start pounding groundnuts on top of you will be called to order here. I think that is a point he is including. If you come to the gate and you start hooting as if you are hooting at the gate to your residence, you will be called to order under this arrangement. He is making a very important point.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I just want to give very important information. First of all, in the Kampala City Council there is a by-law that all road verges must be maintained by the owners of the building. That is a by-law by Kampala City Council.  

Secondly, we are coming out with regulations. These are draft regulations, and they do provide for most of the things we are talking about now, to give guidelines to the Corporation and even educate them on how to make by-laws. Thank you.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Thank you very much for the information. I accept it and I am satisfied, and I hope this will be enforceable.  

I just want to know whether this condominium ownership will be only for parastatals and private people or shall we be able to own with Government. If I want own this part on top of this building, for example, this Parliament can be here and I can own the top of the building. Since it has not been finished for the last 38 years, I can complete it on behalf of Government so that Government can own with me. I want clarification on that.

Finally, I want to disagree with hon. Butime who said that this is a revolutionary Bill. It is going to frighten away people who would support it. It is going to scare away the would-be supporters. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion that the report of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications on the Condominium Property Bill, 2000 be passed.

I would like to join my colleagues, who supported this motion, in saying that this Bill has come at the right time. At the right time because Government has divested itself of many properties, particularly properties of a structural nature whereby some of the properties cannot be sold to several individuals unless a law of this type is in place.

Again, this law has come at the right time, when individuals have access to buying these properties because a system has been put in place by Housing Finance Company to offer mortgage facilities, which has not been the case for a long time. In fact, the last mortgage scheme, which was apparently in place but later on collapsed, was in the 1960s. So, from 1972 to very recently, maybe three years ago, Housing Finance Company was not in operation. So, this law, working hand in hand with the loan privatisation on the ownership of properties, will go a long way in helping the population.

Hon. Butime stated, and he quoted rightly, something about the directorial materialism and historical materialism, but one thing he did not mention is the basic principle propounded by Adam Smith. This was when Adam Smith was propagating the aspect of the need to liberalise, when he propagated the laissez faire philosophy.  If I may quote, he stated, “it is from the selfish interest of an individual in pursuit of wealth that the society benefits.” That was propounded in the 17th century and it remains valid to-date. He went on by illustrating that a selfish man may buy one car and he would not even want his wife or children to ride in the car, but when that person buys the second car, the third car, the fourth car becomes a taxi for combatants. He can use the principle of marginal utility so that all these can be propounded.  

In short, this is a very good policy, and I would like to support it, but allow me to note some of the provisions in the Bill, particularly areas where the common utility within a structure is in place. Such common utilities should be guided by the by-law, which was well quoted by the Speaker. That is the by-law to be put in place under clause 30. I have noted this because if by-laws are not enforceable, then we can have problems. For example, sub- clause (1) says:
“A Corporation shall make by-laws to provide for the management of the units and the property of the Corporation.”  

In this case, the by-law would stipulate the ‘dos’ and the ‘don’ts’ when one is buying such properties. We have, for example, several flats in Bugologi and of course in the various parts of this town like Bukoto. So, if somebody decides to buy a flat on the first floor or second floor, such a person should not inconvenience the man on the ground floor. And if somebody acquires a flat on the ground floor, such a person should not be a nuisance to the other one on the first floor or on the up floors. So, the by-law would work very well here. In the U.K. and in other developed countries, this has worked very well. So, we can borrow from their experiences.

Lastly, I would like to note, with appreciation, the point where National Housing and Construction Corporation has been working very well with Housing Finance Corporation. But I would like to propose that this scheme does not only remain in Kampala or in the major towns. The programme to increase housing stock should go beyond Kampala, Jinja, and the major towns. I know this is not part of this law, but I am stating it because the Government, through the Ministry responsible for this sector, should increase housing stock. 

One other way of increasing housing stock would be to come back with standard plans, which can be sold to local authorities. These plans should be at a cheap price or even given away, so that this can assist in modernising our small towns. The town I come from, that is Nebbi Town, is a very young town. It did not have the opportunity to develop by historical means with the presence of the Asian shelters or the presence of individuals who have resources. So, the town is empty, but if the National Housing and Construction Corporation could come up with moderate plans and assist the small towns, which are coming up with plans, it can be useful for the development of our towns.  

With these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee chairperson and the Minister for bringing this Bill timely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As there are no other contributors, we shall adjourn and give one or two more speakers the opportunity to contribute tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, December 13, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)

