Thursday, 16 December 2004

(Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to alter the Order Paper by removing item number five. At 1.30 p.m. this afternoon, I was informed that the mover of our motion on Cotton and the Committee on Agriculture, together with the Prime Minister are having a meeting at State House on that particular matter. So, I do not think that there is any way we can handle it today because of that meeting. So, it will go off the Order Paper for now.

The second one is that I wanted us to move very fast today because at 5.00 O’clock we have prayers by the Catholic Chaplaincy, so I do not want to detain those Members who would want to go and attend the prayers. So, my difficulty now is that the people who are supposed to move things are not here. So, maybe we suspend the House for five minutes?


MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I have spotted the hon. D’ujanga, who is responsible for presenting the report on the petition regarding electricity tariffs.  

2.28
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, this is in connection with your Communication from the Chair. I continue as a person and as a Member of Parliament for Rukiga to be concerned about the way we handle the matters of Parliament vis-à-vis the Executive. We seem to merge the two arms of Government and this in my opinion causes confusion. I would have expected that it is the Committee of Parliament that can summon the President. But since he is the President and the head of the Executive, they can seek audience to discuss matters such as cotton and whatever. But where we are still discussing matters that concern Parliament, issues that we should first sort out here in Parliament and then the Executive comes and explains, now we tend to merge the two. 

Sincerely, when I look at the functions of Parliament and the functions of the Executive, I am finding it strange to find that a Committee of Parliament now is summoned to discuss an issue. I would expect the President to summon the ministers, the relevant ministry to discuss these issues and then come and report to Parliament. So, I need your guidance on this matter because I can see us fusing the two functions of the two arms of Government together.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I guess it is something we may have to discuss because as I informed you, I only received a letter informing me that my Members have been invited to go to State House. I was not asked whether I should allow them, I was told that “We have invited them” and they also rung me to say “We will not be able to be in the House this afternoon because we have gone for the meeting.”  But I guess we shall have to discuss it and establish how we distinguish our roles in this regard.

MR SABIITI: You will recall, Madam Speaker, when the Prime Minister was talking the other day, and indeed the Minister responsible for Agriculture, they said we should not continue because the committee is going to meet the President. I really found it strange; it is embarrassing. We are not part of the Executive - yes, policy-wise we sort out policy issues in committees but not through that type of dialogue. We cannot be summoned by the President.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the President is the head of the Executive. The committee is consulting all stakeholders in this matter. What is wrong with the committee consulting the Chief Executive of the country to find a solution to a matter that concerns the people?  Madam Speaker, the Chairman reported in this House that they were consulting.  They had consulted several stakeholders and the chairman was aware that the meeting was being organized between his committee and the Chief Executive of this country. I do not see anything wrong with that. I need your guidance in this matter. What is wrong with the committee consulting the President?

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I would like to state this. Whereas I would agree with what hon. Jack Sabiiti is stating, we should also be aware that while the committee is consulting with all stakeholders, the same committee by consulting with the President does not prohibit the committee reporting back to Parliament. So, I would think this consultation is healthy because at the end of the day, we shall still demand an explanation either from the committee or from the Prime Minister himself as it was stated here on the Floor of the House.

Consultation between the Chief Executive and the committee of Parliament does not mean the powers of the committee have been usurped by the Executive; it merely means they are trying to reach a common position regarding the subject so that with this amicable understanding a common solution is got, which does not in itself jeopardize any side.  After all, Madam Speaker, when we were handling the issue of cotton in the House, a proposal was moved by hon. Kityo that there should be some fund located from some point of Shs 100 per kilo to subsidize the cotton price. How else would this information be discussed in details unless it is discussed in this kind of forum? If this consultation therefore is not good, can the hon. Jack Sabiiti tell me how his plan to raise the price of cotton would be achieved?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, we have relevant committees of Parliament handling issues of finance, budget and whatever. And in any case, if the proposal had come from the Floor of Parliament that Shs 5,000 or Shs 100,000 should be increased, there is a process. The Constitution is very clear on who starts it.  Let them start it in a relevant ministry and after they have started it -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, you remember we had long arguments over whether this Parliament should put a resolution concerning the seed cotton price. So, I ruled that what is coming out of this House are our proposals to solving the problem. We were asking the Government to get money from Stabex, to get money from the intervention fund, to reduce some Shs 50 from somewhere. These are our proposals we sent there so that they could consider them. So, I do not see any problem -(Interjections)- honourable members, let us leave this matter. They have already gone, we cannot call them back.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Honourable members, for some of us who have been here for some time, consulting with the Executive is a normal routine and I want to remind the Members that the three arms of Government cannot work in isolation. We are not at war, we are representing people; we should not look as if we do not know what we are doing. Consulting and at the end of the day we achieve what we want is for the good of Ugandans, I think it is the best method. But this business of saying we legislators are pulling, the Executive should pull, the Judiciary should pull where are we taking this country? We should be seen –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, my honourable friend has told the House that he has been here for a long time, and he knows that when you rule, your ruling is final. Is it in order for hon. Bakkabulindi to continue arguing about a matter over which you have ruled instead of going ahead with the rest of the business? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us move on to other business.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have seen a lot of communication on the board from different bodies, different groups inviting people for various meetings today. Let me use this opportunity to inform all the Movement people that the caucus, which had been scheduled for this afternoon has been postponed to Tuesday, 21 December 2004 after plenary. I thank you very much.

2.38
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week the national –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not carry on small meetings.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, in reference to the Order Paper today, I raise a matter of concern regarding a pledge made by the National Political Commissar, Minister without Portfolio to the effect that today he would make a statement on a matter of Government policy on gender parity. 

Madam Speaker, I am not just being frivolous by raising this matter of gender parity from time to time. I noted with great concern even yesterday when my honourable colleague raised it that, in terms of international treaties where we are supposed to be signatories, the Government has made no effort to bring a bill to this august House for domestication of these treaties, especially pertaining to women. Why is this slowness on the part of the NRM Government on a matter of marginalized groups? (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: I would not like to interrupt my senior colleague moreover a former presidential candidate.  Madam Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to insinuate that the NRM Government does not care, does not take issues of gender seriously when recently when we were commissioning here the Parliamentary Development Plan, even the ambassadors realized that there were no women ambassadors representing ladies here to the extent that in the whole world, the Government of Uganda is now leading in showing that ladies are important and they must be given affirmative action? Is he in order particularly when he was in Government he never even took effort to bring these ladies on board? Is he in order to start insinuating that the NRM Government is the one which is cynical, which does not want anything to do with ladies? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know hon. Awori is a serious campaigner for women. So at every opportunity, he takes occasion to remind those in charge that they should do a bit more. I think that is all he was doing.

MR AWORI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for realizing that fact. My honourable colleague here, since you have cleared the matter, I do not want to address him but he knows it is on record. This is a very serious matter. Next year we are going to be answering to the international community how far we have gone, and I am only doing a favour to the Government to remind them that with a few months left, we should speed up to work. Even the Parliamentary Commission here –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. I want to inform you that Uganda is also a signatory to the African Protocol on Gender Equality, which now dictates 50 per cent representation of women. And yet at the moment, we still have only 24.7 per cent women representation in politics, and less than 10 per cent representation in economic areas. So, although we are a signatory to the 50 per cent representation, we are still lagging behind. So, your concern is well deserved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The National Political Commissar is here. Hon. Awori was complaining he has not yet heard from you on the issues of gender parity.

2.43
THE NATIONAL POLITICAL COMMISSAR/ MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I spent the whole of this morning with the committee discussing the White Paper, and I did have a gentleman’s agreement with hon. Aggrey Awori and I also requested you, Madam Speaker, that I could be allowed Tuesday to give the paper. It is ready but it needs production so that there are enough papers. So, on Tuesday if there is space I will give the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we shall avail the space.  Honourable members, I wanted you to join me in welcoming friends who are in the Public Gallery. Dr Josiah and Dr Cortez, research scientists from South Africa who are engaged on the subject of AIDS. They have been brought here by Rt Rev. Barnabas Haleb’imana, Chairman of the Uganda AIDS Commission. They are here among others to meet our committee on HIV and AIDS. They were received earlier today by hon. Sitenda-Sebalu, and they are a team, which is engaged on research on natural medicines in the treatment of HIV and AIDS.  So, we expect our committee to interact with them and give us some more ideas on how to manage the AIDS pandemic in our constituencies. They are up in the Gallery. You are welcome!  (Applause)

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance in relation to the order of business in this august House. Last week on the Order Paper, there appeared an important item for introduction of a private member’s bill by hon. Wandera Martin.  As of now, the item has mysterious disappeared from the Order Paper. There are some of us who also have intentions of introducing a private member’s bill.  I am now worried, maybe next time I also wish to introduce a private member’s bill it may suffer the same fate.

I am aware, Madam Speaker, that we have a constitutional provision, which gives power to back benchers to move bills and motions. But I am now disappointed, I am disillusioned an important motion is completely lost. May I seek your guidance as regards the whereabouts of this resolution of this motion? 

Madam Speaker, hon. Wandera Martin, who represents Workers, had sought leave of the House to move a private member’s bill. It was put on the Order Paper of last week, but as of this week it is not on the Order Paper. May I know how it disappeared?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we shall find out why it is not on the Order Paper and I will update you in tomorrow morning’s sitting.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FIRE ARMS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2004

2.46
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Fire Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2004” be read a first time and as promised yesterday, it is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bill is committed to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to process and report back to the House next year.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, it is on record, even if we went bac k to the Hansard of yesterday, that after pleading that the petition on electricity tariffs report be appended to the ministerial statement, I am not seeing any signs that that report will be appended.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, yesterday I informed you that I was looking for the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee to find out their state of readiness. By the time we left at 8.00 p.m. last night, I had not located him.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: But, Madam Speaker, the chairperson is in this House right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall give it time next week, if the report is ready. Are you ready, hon. D’ujanga?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, this report has been ready for a very long time, and this is not the only report the committee is ready with. There is also the report on the waters of River Nile. As soon as we can be put on the Order Paper we shall present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe before the minister starts, please join me in welcoming a group of 80 adults from the literacy group of Ojunya Division in Lira Municipality. They are up in the Gallery.  You are welcome!  (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY)(Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for giving my ministry the opportunity to formally bring on board Parliament in regards to what is happening to the electricity supply situation in the country. In the statement, which I am going to make, I will also appraise Parliament of the immediate short, medium and long-term measures, which Government is undertaking to deal with the electricity supply situation in the country.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that before the commissioning of the first generation unit at Kiira Power Station in June 2000, there was rampant load shedding due to the high demand for electricity, which could not be met by the supply. At that time the supply of electricity stood at 180 megawatts from the Nalubaale Power Station, while the demand stood at 250 megawatts. Consequently, 70 megawatts was being load shed on a daily basis. With the commissioning of the three generating units at Kiira Power Station providing an installed capacity of 120 megawatts, the load shedding was eliminated for some time.  

What is the current supply-demand situation presently?

The installed electricity capacity at Nalubaale and Kiira power stations is 300 megawatts. There are small power plants like Mubuku I, Mubuku III and Maziba, which supply intermittently up to 15 megawatts to the grid. Of late the effective electricity supply has reduced from 300 megawatts to 220 megawatts due to the prolonged drought in the region.

I am informed by the experts that while Lake Victoria Basin has for the last 100 years received an average daily inflow of 73 million cubic meters of water, during this year the average daily inflow into the lake has been reduced to 23 million cubic meters of water. The drought has equally affected the two main reservoirs in Tanzania namely Muteera and Kidatu as well as Kyakwel reservoir in Kenya. 

On the other hand, the growth in demand for electricity is increasing at an annual rate of eight per cent due to the increased economic activities. The current situation is such that the demand at peak hours, that is, between 6.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m. is 350 megawatts, yet the effective supply is down to 220 megawatts. During the day demand stands at about 245 megawatts, in the evening a total of 130 megawatts is load shed while 25 megawatts is being load shed during the day.  

The criteria for load shedding is as follows: 

• Institutions providing essential and strategic services are not load shed;

• Domestic consumers are load shed every other day;

• Industries are not load shed during the day, except during peak hours, that is, between 6.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m. at night. 

The reduced power supply had had a negative effect on the economic and social development of the country. The industrial and commercial sectors are currently losing about 25 per cent of production time, which translates into five to seven per cent loss in GDP. The power supply constraint will have a significant negative effect on the on-going rural electrification programme, especially the grid extension component of our programme.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to reiterate that the main causes for the current deficit are: 

One, the high growth in demand of electricity, which stands about eight per cent, which has not been matched with the commensurate increase in supply. The actual domestic energy consumption growth for 2001 to 2002 was negative -0.6 per cent and this was due to the problems we were having with the tariff. For 2002 to 2003 was 6.4 per cent, and 2003 to 2004 is 11.8 per cent, approximately 12 per cent. 

When the initial construction of the Bujagali project commenced in 2001, it had been planned that the power plant would come on line in the last quarter of this year; in other words, by this time Bujagali is meant to have come on line.  Unfortunately, the project was halted. The delay of the project is now a major bottleneck in as far as power supply in the country is concerned. The reasons for the halting of the project have been stated here below by my senior colleague and myself when I have had the opportunity to address the House.  

The prolonged drought is another reason for the deficit. This has resulted into a decrease in the Lake Victoria water level and, therefore, the discharge into River Nile. This aspect has undermined the amount of electricity at Nalubaale and Kiira power plants.  

There is a school of thought however, which has attributed the current shortage to the design and construction of the Owen Falls Extension Power Project, such that the current shortage maybe would not have been registered if it had not been constructed. I wish to assure the House that nine studies were carried out before a decision was taken by both Government and the financiers to build the power plant. These studies are available in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.  

The following were key considerations in developing the Owen Falls Power Extension Plant where it is at the moment:

1. There was need to utilize the excess water, which was being spilled away.

2. There was need to relieve the existing dam structure from stress by constructing a separate channel.

3. This provided an opportunity to construct a new power plant, which is more efficient and would be used as a base load plant.

4. The new power plant would utilize the existing dam structure and, therefore, save on the cost of constructing a new dam altogether.

5. Once the extension would be completed with a third power plant at Bujagali, the old power station Nalubaale would then be used as peaking plant for just a few hours in the day, that is, from 6.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m. at night.  

Presently, Nalubaale has a lifetime not exceeding 25 years while Kiira has lifetime of 70 years. The point to emphasize here is that, the problem we are facing is the lack of a power station downstream, which was meant to be operational by this time.  Coupled with this is the delay in installing unit 14 and 15 of the Kiira power station. These once installed will give an additional 80 megawatts in the system.  

Solutions to the electricity shortage problem in the country at the moment: Government has agreed on the following measures to address the power shortage in the country: One of the immediate measures being pursued by Government is importation of 30 megawatts of power from Kenya. The transaction will be on the same terms and conditions on which Uganda exports electricity to Kenya -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why do you not wait until the minister has finished then you can contribute?

MR MIGEREKO: Hon. Awori is a great East African and Pan-Africanist. Uganda will continue to honour the standing contract to supply power to Kenya outside the peak period. We are currently sorting out technical issues on the transmission line related to the importation of power.  

The other measure, which we are pursuing, is the procurement of a company, independent power producer, to supply 50 megawatts of power from a thermal generation plant. The procurement process is on-going; we expect the project to be in place by March 2005.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in order for the power consumers particularly the industrialists not to be disadvantaged and lose competitiveness, Government will shoulder the fixed costs of the investment and waive the tax on fuel. During this period of scarcity, it is very important for the consumers to exercise efficient utilisation of electricity. 

My ministry and the utility companies will therefore continue with the sensitisation of consumers on methods of minimizing consumption of electricity, through the use of improved efficiency devices like efficient bulbs, use of solar water heaters instead of grid electricity for water heating, as well as improvement in the power distribution network and revenue collection, at least 20 megawatts will be saved. 

In order to give an incentive to the consumers to utilize energy efficient appliances, Government will be waiving taxes from such appliances and increase taxes on non-efficient appliances. 

The other measure on which we are counting is that we expect units 14 and 15 at Kiira Power Station to provide up to 80 megawatts, and these will come on line in April and June next year, 2005. I have been cautioned by the experts that we also need to take into account the weather factor.  

What are our medium, long-term measures?  

We have in mind the development of new and renewable energy resources to supply the grid. A number of renewable energy power projects are in the pipeline, these include the following: 

1. The Kakira-Coal Generation Project expected to inject six megawatts, which is expandable to 12 megawatts in the year 2006.
 
2. We have Buseruka where a small hydropower project, which will be producing up to 10 megawatts, is being packaged by a company called Hydromax. As soon as work has commenced on this, we shall be alerting you.

3. Muzizi Hydropower Project in Kabarole District, Bugoye Mini-Hydropower Project in Kasese District, Nengo Mini-Hydropower Project in Rukungiri District and Waki Mini-Hydropower Project in Masindi District are also being packaged and are going to be developed by SN Power Invest AC for development.

4. We have also been exploring our geo-thermal potential. An exploration to produce electricity from heat at depth in Kibiro in Hoima District, Sempaya in Bundibugyo District, Katwe in Kasese District is ongoing. It is estimated that these geo-thermal deposits can give us up to 450 megawatts of electricity once fully developed and tapped. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I also wish to inform the House that Government is re-packaging Bujagali Hydro Electric Power Project as well as Karuma project for development as medium to long-term solutions to the electricity supply problem of the country. In addition are the important hydropower sites like Kalagala, Ayago North –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you please stop those small meetings.

MR MIGEREKO: Ayago South and Uhuru on Murchison falls are being studied to ensure long-term security of supply. As for the Bujagali Hydro Electric Project, a short-listing of the potential developers has been done. The requests for proposals has been issued, we expect bids to come on the 28 February 2005. Construction is expected to commence in September 2005 and have the project commissioned in the first quarter of 2009.  Discussions regarding speeding up of these projects are currently taking place with the World Bank and ADB in the case of Bujagali and NORPAK for Karuma.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi requested that the ministerial report should not be de-linked from the electricity tariff petition report. You directed us to say something about this.  Madam Speaker, as you rightly pointed out and guided this House at the commencement of this sitting this afternoon, this matter is going to be handled by the Committee of Natural Resources. Nevertheless, a detailed response from our ministry on this subject was submitted earlier and we intend to re-circulate it. However, the following salient points ought to be noted:

1.  The tariff reduction, which was recommended by Parliament in 2001, was effected through a Government subsidy of Shs 20.7 billion in 2001/02. 

2. As recommended by Parliament, tariff adjustment has been handled through a step-wise process.

3. Tariff reviews are conducted by the Electricity Regulatory Authority on an annual basis through public hearings.

4. All stakeholders, consumer groups etcetera, have normally attended these hearings.

I wish, therefore, to make an appeal to colleagues in the House to take keen interest in the tariff review process such that when public hearings are announced, they can also appear and make an input.  

Madam Speaker, I would however like to point out that the subsidy, which was given to consumers in 2001 and 2002, grossly affected our rural electrification programme because it was rural electrification resources, which were diverted to bring down the tariff at that time.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Jack Sabiiti also requested that our report should include the cost of power production for the last five years, and we received a directive from you to the effect that we say something about this. The details of the investment are indicated here below. We received money for power production and the programme called Power III, which was running from 1992 to the year 2001, and these monies were invested as follows:

1.  Kiira Power Station US$225.28 million.
2. Next major site study US$1.2 million.
3. Dam remedial works for Nalubale US$9.8 million.
4. Transmission and distribution US$70.18 million.

Madam Speaker, it is normal practice and it is actually prudent that when you invest in generation capacity, you also invest in transmission and distribution network. The total investment under Power III was US$306.46 million. Monies have also been invested under a programme called Power IV, which has been running from April 2002 to-date, and most of these funds have been utilized for procuring equipment for units 14 and 15 to the tune of US$48 million; the equipment are turbines and so on and so forth.

Madam speaker and honourable members, as you realize the above investment has been very small to sustain a rapidly growing electricity sector and economy. In any case, it would have been appropriate to construct a large hydropower plant every 10 years right from 1971. However, the second power plant was only realized in the year 2000 and the third one has unfortunately been delayed.  

Bujagali:

To conclude this investment issue, I wish to draw the House’s attention to the power sector funding requirement in order to meet the long-term power supply. For the year 2005, we shall require for generation US$80 million; and for transmission and distribution we shall require US$40 million; hence requiring a total of US$120 million.

For the year 2006, our projected requirements are US$170 million for generation. For transmission and distribution, we shall require US$85 million, resulting in a total of US$255 million.  

For 2007, our projections are that we shall require a total of US$100 million for generation, US$ 50 million for transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$150 million.

In 2008, our projections are that we shall require US$150 million for generation, US$75 million for transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$225 million.  

In 2009, the projection stands at US$170 million for generation, US$85 million for transmission and distribution; a total of US$255 million.

In 2010, US$135 million generation, US$67.5 transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$202.5 million.

2012, we shall require US$240 million for generation. For transmission and distribution we shall require US$120 million; hence a total of US$ 360 million.

2015, we shall require US$320 million for generation, US$160 million for transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$480 million.

In 2020, the country will require US$470 million for generation, US$235 million for transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$705 million for the sector.  

In 2025, Uganda will be required to invest US$425 million in generation, US$212.5 in transmission and distribution; hence a total of US$637.5 million.  

Madam Speaker, we need to do that forward planning if the country is not to be faced with one crisis after another in the electricity or energy sector.  I wish to request, therefore, for support of the House such that these investment plans can be concretised.

Concluding remarks:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, to conclude this entire subject, I wish to draw on some of the lessons we have learnt from the delayed implementation of the third power plant. The third power project got entangled with issues of environment, politics and lack of our own resources. One important lesson from the past situation is that there is absolute need to identify and state clearly our national priorities.  We must equally cater for these priorities. We therefore call for your support to the energy sector so that we can be in a position to be on top of the situation. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is a statement, if you want to contribute, you will contribute. Now, honourable members, I know that many people would like to contribute on this matter, but I will only give it one hour and each person will have only three minutes.

MR MWANDHA: I want to make some corrections on –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some what?

MR MWANDHA: Some of the figures do not seem to be correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you will contribute.

3.18
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague in charge of energy for his statement and at the same time, I commensurate with him. This is a very difficult topic and yet the person, who has delivered this bad message, is a good man. So, it makes it difficult for me to analyse and cut it up.  

However, Madam Speaker, when they talk about drought as a source of the problem, we have got Egyptian engineers who monitor the flow of water at Kiira. They have never complained to anybody, to people in charge of the reservoir, that the flow on the Nile to Egypt has decreased. There is no such complaint nor information. So, for anybody to say this problem is due to drought, it is a flawed argument.

Two, Madam Speaker, even for an ordinary person like me who did not do electrical engineering or generation engineering, it is quite obvious that if you puncture two holes in any container of water or liquid, the rate of flow will double. They put the two dams in parallel instead of being in tandem.  If they had been in tandem, the same water that drives the generators is the same water –(Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, perhaps I should say this at this stage so that we direct our debate in a proper direction. The canal on the eastern side of River Nile, what is now called Kiira, has nothing to do with power generation. That Kiira was built as a relief valve in case of a flood. I would like to repeat this, that project was conceived in the 1960s after the 1962 or 1963 flood. I think most of us are old enough to remember that flood - it was in 1961, I think. Soon after that flood, the Government, which was in power then, on advice of dam experts –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this is a very technical debate and we would like to guide the House on this matter.  

The Government then on advice from the team of dam experts got some 30 million pounds from ODA to construct what they call flood spillway or flood canal on the eastern side of River Nile; it had nothing to do with generation of electricity. Now, this project delayed for the reasons we know. In the 1980s, when we resurrected this project we said, “Instead of spending a lot of money to build only a canal for relief during flood, let us put also machines at the end of this flood spillway” and hence that project.  

Now, what we should focus on is that the two power stations were not supposed to be operated at the same time. It was now designed that the new power station would be what we call the base load. I think this is in the minister’s statement. The new power station was to take over as the base load when the old power station would remain shut down for most of the day, only to be brought in, in the evening at the peak time. But, because of lack of generation, these two stations have been run together and that is where the problem is. But the second dam was not meant to produce electricity initially, now it is being used like that –(Interruption)  

MR AWORI: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for having explained technically and come to the same conclusion that I was saying. You are running additional facility or canal for the water flow thereby reducing the amount of water in the reservoir. That was my argument. Thank you! By the way, Madam Speaker, he happens to have been a Managing Director of Uganda Electricity Board during our time, you can see the kind of mind.  (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, especially considering that the matter under debate is a bit technical. I am privy to a report that has been produced by one of our own kind, an eminent Member of this House, and I thought it would help if this Member, Eng. Hilary Onek, was given the opportunity – in fact, he has an elaborate report that I have looked through and I do appreciate. It is full of researched information and I think it will really put us at the same level if the hon. Hillary Onek was given an opportunity not to speak for just three minutes, but for a little more time so that we move in phase, so that none of us lags behind the other. I beg, Madam Speaker, for that kind of consideration.  (Applause)

MR AWORI: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for his timely intervention. As a matter of fact, that was the next point I was coming to, that we have a respected engineer in this august House who was also trained by the UPC Government in the Soviet Union to do the same job and I would like to recommend, Madam Speaker, that at the end when we have vented out our concerns, you also allow him to round it up. But for him to pre-empt, it would be a bit premature. 

Madam Speaker, having said that and having agreed with my honourable colleague, Engineer D’ujanga, it is true that the second one should not be utilized while the first one is on. That was my whole point.  

Now, the question of importing. I have not done sufficient arithmetic to determine whether it is effective for us to sell electricity to Kenya during the night at nine cents per unit and then buy it back during the day at 14 cents per unit. I know in Kenya nobody pays less than 13 American cents per unit. So, I do not know how much we are going to be paying Kenya to sell us the electricity we gave them during the night? I know at night we sell it to them at nine cents and during the day we buy it back at about 14 American cents per unit.  So, I do not know how we are going to work out the arithmetic.

Two, Madam Speaker, again on riparian rights, I do understand that Tanzania and Kenya are now using the lake for irrigation. Maybe that is a point you should have also mentioned to us that it has caused a shortage or fall in the level of water in the lake. I am sure my colleague here can corroborate that Kigali has also a similar design on River Kagera, which is another major water input in the lake. You know, River Kagera is an important river as far as the reservoir of Lake Victoria is concerned. Now Kigali is doing exactly the same, putting another dam. I do not know whether we have been discussing this with them or not.

Last but not least, the tax waiver that you are proposing, it is really an exercise in futility because when you do the arithmetic, where is the tax waiver on the heavy consumers of power? I would have said in your electrification programme, instead of doing the three-phase, continue with a two-phase because most of the rural consumers are actually private and not industrial. That way, we can use sparingly the little power we can generate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity and I would like to commensurate with my honourable colleague, you had to deliver a difficult message, such a good person.

3.29
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for this statement because it is a comprehensive catalogue of all our potentials yet to be developed, except the honourable minister missed out two other important resources. I have not read Nyagak in Nebbi anywhere; there was even money allocated to it. What is its status or has it been dropped?

Two, Kisizi of course is the other. But I do not know whether you visited Kinyara Sugar Works because it also generates power especially for its own factory, and at times in excess. Have you considered them also to generate power for the surrounding because people in Bujenje lack electricity and this would be a very big relief without burdening the country?  

Madam Speaker, my last point is about Karuma Power Station. As the minister was winding up, he said the third project got entangled with issues of environment, politics et cetera. I want to put it to the minister that Karuma project has a very big potential and there are no environment issues, it was cleared, and there is no politics. So, instead of continuing with Bujagali, which is still not so clear, why do you not prioritise Karuma Power Station so that we could get relieved of this load shedding?

Madam Speaker, a word of advice. Hon. Migereko is calling on Parliament to support to concretise the investment in the power sector. This Parliament has always supported government and especially this power sector. Where is the investment? What should we support? You have not concretely told us what we should support because at the end of the day you are going to say, “It is Parliament sabotaging the power sector” like it was, you remember the AES et cetera. Now, we are ready to support you; come up with a concrete development plan of the power sector and you will get our support.

3.34
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I thank the honourable minister for this report.  It is quite elaborate and also sheds light on realities regarding the power crisis in this country. But I am worried about one statement.  When you look at the concluding remarks, the second paragraph, let me read for my sister Mrs Baba Diri: “The third project got entangled with issues of environment, politics and lack of our own funds.”  I wish to focus on the word “Politics.”  There are many inherent dangers here. Whenever there is a crisis in the country like ours, Members of Parliament and politicians are expected to be on the side of the people. Now, there is a statement here implying that some politicians or we politicians sabotaged the third project; and because this was sabotaged, we have the power crisis in this country. This is a sweeping statement. Are we saying that all politicians in this country should take responsibility for the power crisis in this country? I refuse! I am not one of them. 

If I am saying no, honourable minister, can you ashame the devil, can you tell us who those politicians are? Can you blacklist and red list the politicians in this country who are responsible for the power crisis in our country? If you cannot do so, you must save us the disgrace of we, politicians, being accused of sabotaging the development of power in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.35
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement because the people I represent are wondering what is happening in the city. At home, everywhere is dark; you look as if you are living in the village of Koboko without power.  Definitely, it is not only the domestic use where we are getting problems. Recently –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, how can the Member on the Floor say everywhere is dark when she cannot see?  Is she in order?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first I think it is very inappropriate to raise a point of order on somebody’s physical disability. I think it is not right. But secondly, the honourable Member is a very efficient Member of this House; she has got extra senses. So, she feels the light, she knows where there is light and where there is no light.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that power is not only seen visually, you can also “hear” power. (Laughter) For example, my radio, when the power goes off I do not hear anything; my fridge, the industries; so I can also see power as you can see. Thank you very much.

The problem I am raising is that even recently we got a communication from Mbarara that now patients are dying, they cannot operate because of this lack of power. And it is not in Mbarara only, but also in all hospitals where they are benefiting from this power. The minister said power use has increased greatly. I would like to know whether he did not foresee this problem when our country is developing with many industries and many buildings where we are going to use power. What happened? Were you not having vision? Now that power is not there, you have now realized, you are coming up with another vision? 

So, I would like also the minister to clarify, which industry is he talking about? We are still pre-industrial; there are not many industries, which are put newly, where I think power has been consumed. Can you give me a list of industries, which you think have had great impact on our power?

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk again about Kiira and this Nalubaale. The honourable Member of Parliament explained clearly that that extension is meant for flood so that excess water can flow. But apart from 1998 flood, there has not been any heavy rains, which require that. And if at all it was for the flood, now that we have water less than what is required, and it is now imparting on our power, what are you going to do with this extension? You have mentioned very clearly that it is also producing power that is why the volume of water is shared between the two dams. What are you going to do to this existing problem, because as long as the Kiira power remains we shall not have enough power? 

Madam Speaker, the minister has listed a number of hydropower stations to be put to improve the problem of power. I have not heard anything about Nyagak and yet Nyagak is one of those power stations, which are going to be included. Does it mean that you are not catering for it?

Last but not least, the minister has mentioned billions of money for power. Can you tell us the source of money you are going to get so that we are sure by the year 2010 we shall be having the power?  Thank you.

3.40
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. Obviously, he had a very difficult job of presenting such a sad story to which he never contributed, and the people who should be telling this story and face the music from Members are not in the House. 

But, Madam Speaker, when there was an extension, we were told that the old dam called Nalubale, after refurbishment, would produce 180 megawatts and then the new dam called Kiira now would produce an extra 180 megawatts and we were assured at that time that the two dams would be ran concurrently to produce the total of 360 megawatts. It is now surprising that the minister is now telling this House, as if records do not exist in this House, that the intended total production was to be 300 megawatts.

On the Floor of this House in the 6th Parliament, I raised this issue when Capt. Babu Francis was the minister responsible. I said, “Sir, from information given to us, it would not be possible for us to generate 380 megawatts running both dams concurrently; you can only ran either 180 megawatts if you shut the other one of 200 megawatts or 200 megawatts if you shut down the other one of 180 megawatts.” Hon. Babu, I wish I could find the Hansard. In affirmative you said,  “I was not informed, I did not know what was happening” really in very derogatory terms. I gave up; I thought the minister was correct. Now, a few years down the road, we are being told a totally different story that there is no way you can ran both dams concurrently to get the power, which we were promised and the basis on which this Government was going to supply rural electrification. Now, we see that even the programme of electrification is failing just because of that problem.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Mwandha.  Madam Speaker, in the 6th Parliament I was a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources almost throughout. The Committee on Natural Resource objected to building the Kiira dam to the extent that we met the President in State House with officials from the ministry and we told them that it was unattainable. We produced records from the archives, which detailed a plan of the construction of the Owen Falls Dam. But the officials from the ministry disagreed and the President said, “Fine, these are technical people, they have disagreed.”  So, I want to inform hon. James Mwandha that these people even misled our President, so really what more are you going to do?  

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I just wanted to give supplementary information that in the 6th Parliament, the issue about this new power station was raised. I remember at that time, hon. Hilary Onek, who is now a Member of Parliament, actually lobbied me. He actually gave me a research position on that same thing, which I tabled on the Floor of this House in the 6th Parliament, but everybody was not willing to listen to it, nobody looked at it.  I even doubt whether our Committee on Natural Resources looked at that report. Actually that report warned about the consequences of that extension. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, if you read part of paragraph three the minister is saying, “I am informed by experts that the Lake Victoria Basin has for the last 100 years received an average daily flow of 73 million cubic meters of water.  During this year, the average daily flow into the lake has been 23 million cubic meters of water, and this has caused problems to Tanzania, Kenya….” With this kind of picture it shows that we shall never regain the situation, which was obtaining before; and I am not very sure whether the argument, which is being given by the minister here that this has arisen as a result of drought, is correct. 

The reason that we have been given by people who know these things is that it is because of the placing of the dam in the wrong position. That is what has caused the water to go so low. Either we shut that dam down or we shut both of them for some time that is when we shall regain the level of the water. But it is not possible. If we shut down Kiira dam, it will still take us ages to build up the water flow to the level, which is required by the dam to produce the amount of power that we expected. So, it seems to me that we are in a hopeless situation. 

Now, in paragraph nine the minister goes on to say, “I wish to assure the House that nine studies were carried out before the decision was taken” and then he tells you what was decided. This does not show us that the number of studies that were carried out justify the wrong decision that was taken to place the Kiira dam at the wrong position.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to go to the conclusion of the minister. The minister unashamedly says, “The third project got entangled with issues of environment, politics and lack of funds.” He has forgotten that the real reason why this project failed was corruption. We know that the AES project was surrounded by corruption; AES could not move, they had paid so much money in corruption. There were even court cases where one girl even ran out of this country; she was responsible for giving money to people in Government and other places to make sure that this project goes ahead and eventually the project failed. And it is right for the minister to accuse people in politics that they are the people who caused the failure of this project. The project failed because of corruption. He must own up; this is the truth of the matter. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, as a person who fired a shot last week on this issue of power crisis in the country, I would like to thank the minister for attempting to answer. I am saying “attempting to answer” because the statement of the minister has raised a lot of issues, which have not received appropriate answers and I am sure that within a period of one week, definitely he will not have come out with all the necessary answers required. But I do believe that his attempt sets in motion greater effort by the Government, by this House, and by the people to go deeper into this crisis.

For example, Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to go deeper into this issue of Kiira power extension. I think this Parliament and the country deserve an explanation. If it is corruption, if it a technical and scientific way of extension, we need to be told. But the way the minister has summarized this explanation is not satisfactory. This is why I have said, “The minister has attempted” but these are very fundamental issues because the country now is in a power crisis. We had put a lot of hope in the Kiira power extension, but our hope has now been dashed.

The statement of the minister has also put to rest what we had not understood that, there is a power crisis in this country. And I think the sooner we wake up to realize that there is a serious power crisis - electricity power crisis not political power crisis, which is a result of political ineptitude in the country. Madam Speaker, the power crisis is increasing and will gradually overwhelm the electricity demand. I am disappointed that the Government, which believes in itself as being a Government of vision, never foresaw this crisis and only woke up too late to handle it. Hence, the second and third power projects came from the year 2000 after the Movement Government had been in power for 15 years –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I hesitate to interrupt my counsel, but on issue of saying that the Government is ineptitude on an issue of rationing, taking a decision on whether you should leave a dam, which was constructed in 1954 with cement which had a defect and which has been leached since 1954 out the structure of the dam; and if the Government, which observed this and obeyed the consultant’s advice as hon. Onek Hilary has been saying - is it in order for him to suggest that a Government, which has got the sobriety and which has got the foresight and the vision that if they do not immediately construct a standby structure by the way of Kiira dam, eventually this country is going actually to have no dam and maybe even the dam is going to be overrun if the level of water was left at that level, is not visionary enough to have actually put the dam?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the vision to build a new dam is good.  

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member is my consultant engineer on many issues. But I am now constrained to express my fear that if this is the way engineers are going to help this country then we are going to have more problems, not only on Entebbe road but also in Karuma and other places. But the more lawyers you have the better.

Madam Speaker, I have said that the Movement Government prides itself as being a Government of vision, but I am not trying to really undermine their vision. But I want to say that for the Government, which prides itself to be a Government of vision, to move in the year 2000 after being in power for 15 years – the minister has admitted it – after 15 years of dillydallying with political power then they remember in 2000 that, “Oh, we have an electricity problem” and then they start the second project in 2000 then another one in - all these are total failures. The Kiira power extension is a failure; the Bujagali project is a failure and, therefore, the Government must bear the brunt and must be accountable to the people. If it was not because of electricity power only, also they should be deprived of political power. 

Madam Speaker, another explanation I deserve from the minister is the issue of Karuma power. Karuma power is very important, but why I am raising it like other Members have raised, is the way the Government has handled Karuma power. I am aware that the NORPAK, which has got some connection with Scandinavian countries actually wanted to put this power and the cost of it was going to be much cheaper than the Bujagali power.  But the minister talked of politics, the politics again entered here in the sense that within the ministry itself, including the minister, they were more concerned with Bujagali first then Karuma next. What is the contradiction between Bujagali and Karuma? Can the two projects not go together? What is the problem?  

Recently when the President directed that Karuma project must take off - I read in the press subject to correction – the Minister of Energy came up and said, “No, over my dead body; before Bujagali, no Karuma.” This was from the minister, Mrs Syda Bbumba. It was reported in the press. Why this attitude of undermining Karuma project, why is it that certain ministers and certain officials in this country are against the Karuma project?  Some people are saying because it in the North, I hope it is not.  

The other one, which I think the Minister also should explain to the country is the statement that, “The lifespan of Owen Falls Dam, Nalubaale, is only 25 years and that one of Kiira is 70 years.”  But I am also being advised by the engineer that actually the lifespan of Kiira is now zero, but for political reasons the Government wants us to believe that it is 25 years because the lifespan of -(Interruption)

MR SIMON D’UJANGA: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member that dams such as that at Owen Falls last for 100 years. Since 1948, I think we have about 25 years left. Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Now, if the lifespan is only 25 years, we need more construction, more foresight, more planning to do and by now Government should have moved to Karuma, Nyagak, to so many places.  But instead of dealing with the electricity power, we are dealing with political power.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want the Minister to come up with a national power plan. Really this ad hoc statement here is so condensed, the country cannot survive without excess power. We are surviving on deficit power; our children will not be able to be educated, industries will not be able to pick up and so on. So, we really want the Minister now, before we even support him on this statement, to say, “This is our blueprint on the power for the next 50 years.”  We are not only looking at another 25 years or 30 years, but in many years to come; and I think this Parliament has the foresight, the vision to support the Minister when he comes on that. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear the technical people, you said you want technical information so I have looked for the technical people.

4.00
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I raised the matter of this Kiira Extension in September 2002 in the House here, and I predicted that within two years we would have a drop in Lake Victoria level, I had done my calculations. At the time, hon. Ssekandi, the Speaker, ruled that, “This is a matter of technical opinion and as such since the House is not composed of engineers, we may have problems of debating it.” So, we agreed that we would go and look into this with officials from the Ministry of Energy, which up to-date we have not sat down with. When the problem erupted now, they are trying to call me to discuss when the matter is gone.  However, I am ready to continue with that.  

Madam Speaker, I am a Civil Engineer by profession. My specialized Masters degree is in Hydropower Engineering - dams, canals, tunnels and the like. I worked for two years in construction of dams in Inguri Dams in Georgia, where I was a student engineer and we built dams there with 22 kilometres of tunnel. I worked there for some time to develop my career as an engineer in that area. 

I also worked in Urek Hydropower Station, a 305 metre high dam. At that time it was 270-metre high and we were on the construction, that is, in Tajikistan. I have had extensive experience at least before I came to the country and later on I continued with other engineering activities. That is my area of specialization and when I raised this issue in the House, Madam Speaker, I raised it from a position of knowledge.  

In 1996, Madam Speaker, when I learnt that there was an extension being planned at Jinja, I quickly - because when I was lecturing at Makerere University I did an extensive study of the River Nile where we developed different mathematical models of the Nile flow and the rest of it and really I had a lot of doubts about this extension.  I secured hydrological data, the flow of the Nile at Jinja, and did my calculations, and it was very evidently clear that it would not work. The only thing to do would be to force Lake Victoria to discharge twice the amount of water designed for the dam at Nalubale, and therefore erode the reservoir. The effective reservoir of Nalubale is 2.5 metres, that is, above the original Lake Victoria.  The level rose by 2.5 metres during 1954 when the dam was commissioned and 1960, and when that level rose, the surface area of the Lake expanded. It therefore occasioned change in climatic conditions in the lake region causing more rainfall and therefore the flood that came up on 1961.  

In any planning of dams the flow records of the river - like River Nile has flow records from 1899 up to now, and that data is available. Any sensible Engineer would design the dam to meet the requirements of that flow. 

Flows of rivers are seasonal, even the Nile is seasonal. At the Owen Falls Dam, currently the minimum flow ranges between 700 to 800 cubic metres per second, and the maximum flow now goes up to 1400 cubic metres per second. When designing the dams, the British in their wisdom designed the dam to use exactly the average flow of the Nile at Jinja. The average discharge from this one –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, can you let me finish the explanation?  I am trying to slowly get the House -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think Engineer Onek is the only dam construction expert in this House; let us listen to him, please.  

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, what I am trying to labour at is slowly to develop the House to appreciate what a dam is and what it does. Now, these statistics records of flow of the Nile from 1899 up to the present time, when you are going to design a dam you have to take a 95 percent probability flow and use that for the design of the dam. That means the chances of failure of that flow is only five percent. In other words, at Owen Falls Dam, the 95 percent probability is 800 cubic meters per second, and I am glad the designers of Bujagali Dam used exactly that and their designs are up here. I looked through them; they used 800 cubic meters per second. For a level of 34 meters they can generate 250 mega watts.  

The Owen Falls Dam was designed for the heights of the water head of 18.9 meters plus or minus half a metre. That height was the one used for specifying those turbines. Therefore, 10 turbines were designed nine of which would be operational. Those nine turbines would consume 916 cubic metres of water per second above the 85 percent probability. That allowance was given for the purpose of fluctuation. When there is a peak supply you operate all the nine turbines, during low consumption time you operate maybe seven turbines; so on average you still discharge 800 cubic meters per second. 

The extension at Kiira: To produce 200 mega watts - Kiira is slightly lower, the height is 23 metres. To produce 200 mega watts it would take 900 cubic metres of water per second flow. All this water is drawn from upstream of the existing dam of Nalubale, in other words, the water coming from the lake. The average flow of 800 cubic meters will have to be split into 900 to Kiira and another 916 -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we are very keen on following what the hon. colleague is telling us, but could you speak our language, please? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the hon. Member is talking about cubic metres, and you must have done some physics –(Laughter)- Hon. Aggrey Awori, I think you are out of order.

MR ONEK: Maybe, for the sake of hon. Awori, Madam Speaker, if, for example, there are two people each eating 900 kilograms. If the other one eats 916 kilograms, but you who is Lake Victoria, who is delivering that water to them, you deliver only 800. Definitely they will not be satisfied. So, they will consume you as well. (Laughter)

So, Madam Speaker, what is happening is that the 2.5 metre rise of Lake Victoria, which has been occasioned by that dam, is what we call effective reservoir. The other volume of water, which is below that one, we are not using it for power generation; it is that 2.5 metres, which has risen, which is there. 

Now, by design of the turbines, we are only to use one metre of the 2.5 metres, not below that. So, if you go beyond one metre and go below you are now operating at a water height, which is not in agreement with the characteristics of your turbines, because these turbines are chosen according to the height of the fall of water and according to the amount of water you discharge. 

You can choose different types of turbine; each turbine has its own curve. We have chosen a particular turbine, which is here, based on the discharge of 800 to 900 cubic metres per second at a height of 18.9 plus or minus five metres, that is what we designed. When it drops by two metres, as it is at the moment, you are now having different characteristics; even those turbines will no longer operate efficiently.  

First of all, a drop by one metre at the dam we lose 10 mega watts straight away from the production. When we drop by two metres we lose 20 mega watts instantly. That means that if it was to produce 180 mega watts for that full height, now it is supposed to produce only 160 mega watts. But the efficiency has also collapsed; the efficiency of the generating system there, which is normally about 95 percent, will have gone down to about 75 or 80 percent. It means you will not even generate 160 mega watts; you will generate even lower, maybe 140 mega watts. These are the kinds of things going on there, which they are struggling with.  

Now, when we talk about this reservoir, I want to give you some small statistics. Let us assume that there has been no rain for a whole year. If that reservoir was to the maximum of 18.9 metres, if we do not have rain for the whole year, the little rain that comes, much is evaporated and it stops there and we use this 2.5 metre reservoir. To finish that reservoir, if we used the old Nalubale Dam, it will take two and half years to come down to 2.5 metres; I have calculated details here. If you release an amount like what ESKOM is releasing at the moment ESKOM - they are releasing a lot of water because they want to produce more power - then they will take one and half years to come down to 2.5 metres without a single drop of rain. 

This makes me remember now, when I wrote my first article, an Egyptian consultant came up to attack and said, “Let engineers not be restless, there is no problem. When rain comes within three weeks we shall have the level back to normal.” That one angered me to write the second article, which had more details, and I challenged him that if he was really a professional, let him come out and we discuss.  

Madam Speaker, we have a problem here. In this country we have not concentrated on this area of technology. I was a Lecturer at Makerere University and I know the people we have churned out there; there is no Post-graduate research in this area or work in this area. So, we are short of personnel in this area. Even the Ministry of Energy does not have real people who are competent in this area so they rely on consultants. 

That brings me now to these consultants. These consultants, EKAS International, who designed this extension, have to answer.  (Applause) In our days they used to teach us that if you design a bridge as an engineer you must stand under it when it is finished when heavy tanks are passing over. If it collapses you die with it. But today people get away with collapsing houses; there is no problem. 

Now, this design for the extension, which concern I raised in 1996, other consultants like Kennedy and Don ken also raised objections. The British Hydrological Society raised an objection; they know the Nile very well; even the French disagreed with that extension for power generation. However, as usual, as the other time in 2006, I raised the issue here, it became a matter of technical opinion in the ministry because they were not in-depth with the information. Somebody called Mr Cassidy from the world Bank came to arbitrate to see who was right between the two. On technical matters there is no question of arbitration, it has to be absolute correct information. So, the one who argued –(Interruption)

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: It is not technical, but I think I should give it; it is political. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to this House and to hon. Hilary Onek is that on 9th of October this year we received the biggest frustration expressed by the first citizen of this country in Kololo, and it came in a form of a song being sung by the Minister of Energy to him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A lullaby.

MRS ZZIWA: Yes, all of us were there and we heard that lullaby. As he ended his frustration, he asked that he has always been told by our big brothers, and now of course engineer Hilary Onek has mentioned, that this country will be suffering from too much electricity. He went ahead to say that he still insists that this country cannot suffer or cannot get malnutrition from too much electricity.  The information I want to give, and since the Minister has also not answered whether there is a technical mistake - I had wanted to find an acceptance in there - I want to find out who should take constitutional responsibility, whether World Bank or otherwise, because it is very significant. Life is being lost, there is no insurance, a lot of property is being lost. Who should take this responsibility, and we continue to rely on those big brothers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think the hon. Member was beginning to apportion blame, isn’t it? You do that and also give us some final solutions.

MR ONEK: I will do that and then I will give you the way forward. 

Madam Speaker, I was saying for any engineer or engineering company to design a very important structure of national concern and a lifeline for our country –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members in that corner, can you please spread yourselves out?  Hon. Sebalu, hon. Kiwanda and hon. Awori; please spread yourselves a bit.

MR ONEK: So, Madam Speaker, professionally all of us, whether you are a medical doctor, whether you are an engineer or an economist, we are answerable to our deeds and decisions. A decision was made because there was an argument and the World Bank chose that, “Okay, let EKAS continue.” So, there are two things here: World Bank has a responsibility because they have made a decision, they have made a choice. 

Secondly, EKAS as engineers should have been competent; they have exhibited a high degree of incompetence. What my colleague, hon. D’Ujanga, said is true, that actually it was meant to be only a spillway. But as soon as the nature of that extension changed to power production, it now required a different engineering treatment; it required different engineering prescriptions. So, there is no excuse that it was intended for this, let alone on second thought; there is no second thought in US$250 or US$300; you cannot give second thought. So, these are the things that I feel our Government must pin these consultants for, their wrong engineering and technical decisions.   

Recommendations: The consultants have been heavily paid for it, I think the figures are here, I do not know how much they have been paid; they have been heavily paid normally up to 12 percent. They have been heavily paid for a job, which is supposed to be well done; and therefore they are answerable.  In my view, our Government should take it up, call these consultants to answer.

Now, before I go to the way forward, there are one or two things. This report of the Minister is another concoction of problems. I want to quote one or two things. For example, they said the inflow into Lake Victoria in 100 years it receives average daily inflow of 73,000,000 cubic metres. It is not right because the hydrological figures here are different; these are people who measure flows and all those details. The hydrological flow here indicates that it is 133 cubic kilometres inflow into Lake Victoria over the last 100 years, that is a yearly inflow; and this 73,000,000 cubic meters is only 0.073 cubic kilometres. It is a wrong figure; I do not know which technocrats are helping him. This water, which flows into Lake Victoria over the period, evaporation takes about of 100 cubic kilometres, then outflow from the Nile is 29 cubic kilometres, and then they store about five cubic kilometres. This is data are available from the experts who measure. So, there are many errors here, I will just discard this report. (Laughter) 

As for Lukyamuzi’s part of the report, maybe it is relevant.  

What is the way forward, Madam Speaker? We are in a national crisis here; there is no more either Movement of DP or UPC or FDC; right now it is Ugandans. (Applause) We have at stake our country, our national economy; we must all think together now and not think differently, and not take advantage of the bad advice we got from the Canadian consultants. 

The Government had a good intention to put power, expand it and they committed money. Unfortunately we got just a company, which never helped the Government, so we cannot blame our Government for that decision. It was a good decision, but badly implemented because of incapacity and incompetence of those concerned.  

So, I would recommend, Madam Speaker, the following: One, I learnt from the Ministry of Energy that they are having short-term remedial measures to kind of improve on supply to industries and so on. I would welcome whatever short-term measures the Ministry is doing, that is fine. I would like us to think of long-term measures immediately. 

Also within the next four or five years, we must put in place a big hydropower dam on the Nile, downstream of Owen Falls Dam that can generate not less than 500 mega watts of power. Where can we get that one? Kalagala was mentioned once, but my assessment of the Nile, as I mentioned earlier that I have assessed this River well, Ayago I and II could be fused into one Ayago with a power house the penstock to extend about three to four kilometres downstream, then we add another head and which could comfortably generate between 600 to 650 mega watts at Ayago.

There are other options, which I had proposed one time, that is, separating the Nile at Masindi Port such that one third of it is channeled to the tunnel straight to Wansoke, to Lake Albert, one third flows down; and if we separate 300 cubic metres per second flow through a tunnel and put another ground power station near Lake Albert, we can generate 1,100 mega watts from 300 mega watts.  If we can go even more risky, we divert 400, we can generate 1,500 mega watts because I work in hydropower tunnels, I know what it involves. I made that study in 1981 when I was just a fresh Lecturer in Makerere, now it has come back to my mind that, that is a feasible option for a big power station.  

Why do we need a big power station? We are now drilling for oil. Should we get that oil down in Semiliki, we shall need a refinery; a refinery will take 300 mega watts of power. Now, where do we get that power from, 300 mega watts of power when we can produce only 220!  So, now we have to plan slightly more bigger – mega planning - and do that.  

Another recommendation, Madam Speaker, is that the Directorate of Water Development take charge in controlling the discharge of water, the flow of the Nile at Jinja, and monitor it professionally to ensure that we do not lose out the water head at Jinja, because ESKOM – I do not know the nature of contract ESKOM has with Government, most likely they are being paid for the amount of power they produce. If that is the case, if I were the businessman, I would release all the lake and get the money; you release all the lake, produce more power and get the money. So, we need to revisit the ESKOM contract, Government has to revisit ESKOM contract to ensure that the power they produce will be in tandem with the flow of River Nile so that we can conserve our lake.

Another thing is that we have to really work together with our neighbouring countries, those who are contributing to Lake Victoria, so that some balanced behaviour takes place so that what gets into the lake from those rivers is not depleted totally.

I was going to suggest that the Government creates an independent Hydropower Development Authority on top of the Regulatory Authority here, which is regulating only prices. Is that all?  They must do more than that; they must do master planning, energy planning for the country; they must do slightly beyond just regulating the price of electricity.  

NEMA also has been sleeping; they have not been actually voicing concern when the lake level is dropping. We wish that if the statute that formed them is not powerful enough, they must be empowered to ensure that they can stop anybody from abusing the natural resources.

Finally, I would like to recommend that a technical audit should be carried out to establish who was responsible for that mistake at Owen Falls Dam and then they are held accountable; our Government should be compensated for the misadvise. I have got this report, Madam Speaker, which I feel I should lay on the Table so that all Members can read it carefully and get the details, and then I leave my son here to move a motion.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come and lay it on the Table first. Honourable members, the Clerk is directed to transcribe that document entirely into the Hansard and copies will be made in the usual way for circulation to the Members. (Full text of the  report  can be found in the  Appendices, page12077 .)
 
MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and we have been carrying out extensive study on the behaviour of Lake Victoria. We went to Tanzania and the question that Kenya and Uganda, including Tanzania, failed to answer is why the level of Lake Victoria is dropping. There is a lot of activity going on around Lake Victoria. We should have been responsible for silting, causing the level of water to rise; and Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania have failed to explain this.

Two, the rainfall pattern in East Africa has not dropped so extensively to cause the level of the Lake to decline. So, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member who has been holding the Floor, and I would also like to inform him that there are now experts in Makerere University in Tanzania under LVEMP doing a serious study to find the lifestyle, the pattern or behaviour of Lake Victoria and then project. So, we should not really get worried that there is totally nothing. I want to seek clarification from you, why is it that the activity going on around Lake Victoria has not resulted into silting the lake automatically causing the volume of the water to rise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What activities?

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, maybe I can clarify to him.  Lake Victoria is a very enormous lake; it will take a long time to silt it. However, in my report, which I submitted here, I have got here the graph showing the release of water by ESKOM for power production and then the natural flow of the Nile is below it. So, the gap in between these multiplied by time is the volume of water, which is being borrowed from Lake Victoria, which is not the natural flow of the lake; and that is the major contributor to the drop in the lake level. If the level continues to drop beyond 2.5 metres, then Owen Falls or Nalubaale will totally lose control of the Nile. The Nile will now be controlled by Ripon Falls, which originally was actually controlling the lake and keeping it there.  So, if there is more water it flows more, if there is less water it also regulates.  

Since Owen Falls Dam was built, it took over the function of regulating the flow from Lake Victoria with a submersion of Ripon Falls. So, if Owen Falls Dam loses the control to Ripon Falls, it means that now even power production may go to almost nothing because the water will drop so low that the turbines will fail to function properly - both turbines, even the new extension.

4.38
MR SIMON D’UJANGA (Okoro County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. As I said earlier on, this is a very technical subject and a lot of patience is required in order to understand what we are discussing. Now, I would like to start where hon. Hilary Onek left, and I would like to request also that hon. Hilary Onek pays attention.  

Madam Speaker, as I said before, whether generation of power or not, the spillway on the eastern side of the Nile had to be built for the following reasons: In 1961 when we had the flood it overflowed to the bridge, and I would like Members to imagine if that bridge at Jinja is washed away where our traffic will divert to. It would divert to Karuma. So, a decision was taken that there should be a spillway, and hon. Onek knows that in the design of a spillway, the 100-year flood statistics are taken into consideration. I think we agree on this, and this is not the first time we have discussed this matter with my colleague. So, the spillway had to be built, whether it was for generation of power or not. So, it was decided to build a spillway.

Now, as incidentals, because the cost of the civil works of building the spillway was so large compared to the cost of putting five machines downstream, it was therefore decided that five machines of 40 mega watts each be installed downstream for: One, operational reasons and these are system stabilities, which I will not want to go in now. But there is two-metres difference, as Engineer Onek has already said. If you are downstream, for the same volume of water, because of two-metres difference, you get more power.  

Two, the new machines are more efficient because they are of recent. Therefore, this decision was made that, ‘install a 200 mega watts extension with a spillway and close the old station. And the old station, if any of us has been there, there is what we call AAR, this is what Eng. Onek Hilary forgot to mention. The other Engineer across the House has alluded to it. AAR means, Alkaline Aggregate Reaction, and it is enormous down there.  The house is totally cracked, in some places five centimetres, in some ten centimetres; if we go there you will see it. That is why the Minister was saying the lifespan of this old station has been reduced, so let us build a completely new, more efficient station downstream to produce 200 mega watts. This decision was made, and it was not made in error; it was deliberate. The 800 cubic meters per second, these facts are known, even EKAS knows these facts. But the new station downstream was supposed to completely replace the old station, which would be brought up only when there was peak for three hours a day.  

The other aspect to our system management was the water management. Madam Speaker, in developed countries, there are programmes to manage water.  Engineer Onek Hilary brought this up, but I would like to repeat it. In developed countries, water management is a subject on its own for power production. So, after the 200 mega watts power stations was built, it was decided that the water should be released scientifically. To produce 200 mega watts throughout the day and night, but the old station remaining shut for most of the day, bring them on only from 7.00 to 11.00. Then while this has been decided in that way, move downstream and do Bujagali, and it was planned that Bujagali should have come on line in September this year.  So, we would not be discussing this matter had Bujagali not to be interrupted. So, the problem came like this -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor is more or less confusing us. I would like to be clarified; was the urgency of the construction of the new dam due to contain floods or to produce more power?

MR AMURIAT: I do appreciate the arguments that have been advanced by my senior colleague. However, I would like to be clarified why the decision was made to construct the new power station across the spillway thus in parallel with the old dam, Nalubaale? Why was the decision not taken to build the new dam in series further downstream at a point beyond where the spillway rejoins the river?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said in my information to hon. Awori earlier on - and it is amazing that the hon. Member who wants clarification is not paying attention - but as I said before, the decision to build a spillway was taken way back in the 1960s except because of the difficulties in political events, it delayed.  So, this is a project, which was resumed after 1986.  It was so urgent because as I said the AAR reaction. If Members could have time and visit the old power station, they would see what I am talking about.  

Also in the Minister’s report, there is US$9.8 million for remedial works. No one has asked what this money is for; this money was to stop further deterioration of the old dam and power station.  So, it was necessary to do the spillway, the initial amount was 30 million pounds by ODA then other donors came in.

Now why do we build the spillway where it is?  Because it a spillway to the old dam, building another dam downstream would not help. This was a spillway to the old dam, so it had to be built there.  But the engineers decided –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Eng. D’Ujanga, for giving way. First of all, the information the public and all of us were given by the Ministry of Energy was that they were expanding power for power production, not spillway. That is why during the commissioning, hon. Syda Bbumba promised the President that there would be no more load shedding, we shall have 380 mega watts. In any case, if we were to construct a spillway, the cost would have been only about one third, or even less the amount of money we spent for that extension.  

On the cracks in the dam, which Eng. D’Ujanga mentioned, the AAR factor, the dam is cracking and leaking. It is true this dam is now 50 years old, it is cracked and it is leaking and will require a lot of mending. It is given a lifetime of 25 years from now, but at the same time, Kiira extension depends 100 percent on this old dam. The dam is the one, which sealed off over the river and allow the water to circulate to go to the other one. 

It is a similar situation like Capt. Guma Gumisiriza, now 51 years old, booking a girl who is just born as a wife. His lifespan is 70 years, he is left with 25 years; the girl is left with another 70 years. So, you cannot tie an old dam to a new extension because, first of all -(Laughter)- So if a 50-year old man books for a wife a one-year old girl, for sure you know that he will die before the girl actually even gets to be a wife. 

So, what am I talking about here? This cracking dam may one day decide to give way because it is cracked and it is being weakened. If it collapses, what will happen to the other one? It will be left hanging in the air. So, those are the rationale. I would have gone in more details; I have seen it in my analysis. Those are old things, you cannot tie an old dam on an extension; it cannot work. That is briefly what I wanted to inform him about because the difference is, I am a civil engineer, he is an electrical engineer; so he would not know the concrete element and the rest of it.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said before, this is a highly technical subject. I respect Engineer Onek and his profession and I expect him to do the same to other people’s profession, maybe not engineers even. Now, the confusion - and we can discuss this at length even. The issue is that we are having a dam. There are details maybe we cannot bring here, for example, the AAR, what causes it and where is it pronounced; and Engineer Onek knows all these things. In order to relieve stress on the dam, what does one do? And by doing that, how much have you expanded the dam’s life. 

For the information of this House, there is a group of three dam experts in the world. They are really dam experts in terms of the word, and World Bank before financing that project commissioned these people and their reports are available. For Members who are interested in pursuing this matter further, we could hold other meetings perhaps and discuss these things because the World Bank before spending money commissioned a team of world dam experts who studied that dam and sanctioned that the money should be spent. I am not an authority on dam construction, but I am aware that these people took the age, old man and young woman, into consideration before authorizing the expenditure on that dam.  

Madam Speaker, on the way forward, I would like to inform Members that Bujagali Dam failed because the funding could not be raised. The funding could not be raised, among other things, and I think the most serious reason for not raising that money for Bujagali Dam was that the World Bank thinks this country does not need another dam. And if you analyse their reasoning, they are not wrong in the following way:

Our power consumption is basically domestic in that during the day when there is sunshine and light and we are not cooking, our electricity consumption is low; the figures have been given to you by the Minister. That in the evening we load shed 130 mega watts; during the day, we hardly load shed anything, 25 mega watts, but during the day we load shed because maybe there is not enough water. So, if the dam is to be sponsored by a private firm, there is no one who is going to come here with his private money and build a dam and put machines, which are going to stay idle for all the day except for the three hours of the night and you do not pay.  

This brings us straight away to the issue of the tariff. If we brought somebody from outside to build a dam and he installs the machines there and we do not have factories to consume this electricity, and we only want to light our homes from 7.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m., four hours a night, the machine is staying idle for 20 hours, he is going to reflect that time in the tariff. So, if you do the calculations along that line, you find that there is no need for another generating station until you can build your level. But we have said this before in some other forum -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from you is, according to the wisdom of World Bank, what do they think should come first? Should we get the industries first to consume the power before we can generate enough power or should we generate the power first to enhance industrial growth? What is their wisdom as experts?

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I was exactly coming to that and I was about to conclude. Now, his dilemma is always there, ‘the egg and the chicken dilemma. But you cannot ask this question someone who is going to give you the money. So, the way forward is this: We must raise funds locally and build another power station. 

I am not going to go in the details of where it should be because I need time to look at the numbers. Maybe Hon. Onek Hilary has looked at the numbers; he can say it should be up there or here. But as a matter of principle without going into details, we should immediately look for our own money. We should borrow money internally maybe from Treasury or we can even use NSSF money and build another power station and immediately –(Interruption)

COL. BOGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to learn from the hon. Member; he has just brought about the argument of raising money locally, but on the basis of the arguments of the World Bank. I am just wondering whether the World Bank considers our power generation as one of our resources that we have the potential to export, especially given the circumstances of the surrounding countries?  

As we talk now, the Government of Kenya is organizing importing power from South Africa. How cheap or expensive is it for the Republic of Kenya to import power from Johannesburg vis-à-vis Jinja or Kampala for that matter? Does the World Bank consider all these as our potentials in the region or we should abandon that simply because they are looking at the domestic market?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I was going to cover this point. The point is this, that if you now build another power station, even you who has raised your money to build another power station you do not want your machine to stay idle for 20 hours and use it only in the evening. Therefore, we must look for where to push this power.  

If we have the oil, as Eng. Onek Hilary said before, we need 300 mega watts, that is automatic.  But there is another mining activity going on in Tanzania, we are already interconnected with Tanzania. So, should we decide to build a power station at Karuma, it means building power lines from Karuma to evacuate that power. So, we need to build another power station immediately and find where to put the power during the time when we shall not be using it, because our main concern is between 7.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m., that is when you need 100 mega watts, for example, now.

In the mean time if you import power from Kenya two things are going to happen: One, you are going to lose the revenue you are getting from exporting during off peak. We are now exporting, we get some little money, I think it is Uganda Shs 70 billion a year. If now we are going to import, we will lose that revenue.  

Two, we were selling to them electricity at a very high rate compared to here, so their sales were subsiding ours. So, we are also going to lose that benefit; the net result is a higher tariff.  So, in the short run we can import power or bring thermal stations, but the solution to the solution to the problem we have here now is building another power station. If we had built Bujagali by projection it should have been on line in September this year, we would not be here discussing this matter; we would be discussing another thing. But Bujagali delayed and the financiers are not with us, so we have to find our own money within our country, build another power station and develop market for export of this power station. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.  

As I said before I am ready to continue discussion with other hon. Members who may want to go deeper in the subject. In this short time, no one can do justice to this subject; it is a very technical subject, it is a very wide subject, we need time but the way forward is to get another power station. I thank you.

5.00
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda county South, Mbarara): Thank you Madam Speaker. The moment the spillway is being used constantly without dropping in the water level, it is no longer a spillway but a distributory river. This one needs to be known, that we created the second river on Lake Victoria, therefore it is draining water from Lake Victoria and it will continue getting lower and lower. This is simple logic; you do not need to be an engineer to understand that.

Madam Speaker, it is a shame in the 21st century that a country of 26 million is only generating 200 mega watts, and then you start blaming World Bank.  World Bank is controlling River Nile only; we have got other sources of energy. Has the World Bank stopped you from tapping those rivers in the countryside where we can get five, 10 or 20 mega watts and we add it on our grids? Has the World Bank stopped you from developing your geo-thermal energy, which we have in this country in plenty?  Let us not blame our poor planning and our poor policies on the World Bank.  

Madam Speaker, I have come to believe that technical ministries should have technical ministers. (Applause)  This tendency of depending solely on consultants who are looking for money, and you as a minister you sit or stand like a stooge - what they talk, that is what you take in - we must stop it. I cannot imagine what will happen if somebody – let me stop on that.

Madam Speaker, what happened at Bujagali, if what hon. D’Ujanga was saying here was right, that it was meant to be a relief dam –(Interjection)- I will not take the information, let me finish. If it is true what he was saying, that it was meant for that purpose; if it is true that the consultant designed it to be a relief dam then we using it constantly, opening both dams, was a technical mistake, and this is the crisis we are in now. (Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you, I think he is right. Once it is working constantly, it is no longer a relief but is permanent. However the consultant in evaluating hydrological data of the Nile there, the flood, which went over that bridge happened in 1961, 43 years ago. The trend now for the flow of the Nile, if you look at the graph, is gradually going down because there is increased human activity. We have cut all the trees for charcoal, we have reduced on the amount of rainfall, and we have increased in numbers, we are also breathing a lot of carbon dioxide borne in the area; there are many other factors. All those have created decline in the flow and for the last 43 years there has never been any single occasion of floods.

In any case, in 1961 that flood never washed down the bridge. Why? That bridge is part and parcel of the whole dam; in fact it is all embedded in the dam, it is one structure. You cannot remove that cap off; it is all one structure according to the design. So, that is the information I want my colleague to know, that there was no justification for a spillway.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I have never read it anywhere, I have never met it anywhere that really you can have two parallel dams running concurrently on a river; I have never heard of it. This is unique; I think I have first met it in Uganda; we need to do more study about this. Really for somebody to stand up and say that a project of 300 million was just a relief, I think that is also joking. 

The President, I think hon. Zziwa Margaret has mentioned this, was annoyed; the man was talking about a lullaby. This is the same paper here; there is no technical substance in it. I am not seeing it, Madam Speaker; it is not there. We need to blame ourselves; the demand rate of our power is known. We can cure this disease by using other sources of energy. If the world Bank has said no to Bujagali, we should immediately look at alternatives; we should not sleep and wait until somebody comes to wake us up.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member, for giving way. The information I want to give to the hon. Member is that, for many years we used to get power from River Kagera at Kikagati.  The potential has been there, but the Government has actually not re-instated the power generation at Kikagati, which used to supply Mbarara, Kabale and parts of western region.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Yes, that is true, although they are trying to do it now, acting like a Fire Brigade - you know here we work as fire brigades, when there is a crisis that is when we wake up. The dam he is talking about is in Kikagati, it was silting but nobody was taking care to de-silt the dam until it was chocked. Now, they are looking for the money to re-do it. Let us first examine our internal weaknesses before we blame others. 

When I hear people put the whole blame on World Bank, the consultant designed his thing; and if you use it wrongly, he is not the one to blame. He took his money and he went away, and I think there is a period when he is supposed to be responsible and I think that is over, defect liability is over.  So, what are we talking about?   

Madam Speaker, there is only one solution. We should wake up now; let us not look at River Nile as the only source of power. We have got geo- thermal potential in this country, and even cheaper to tap. We should first look at that one immediately and then these small rivers where we need little money, say, US$1.5 million, US$3 million, because we cannot raise the US$500 million that we want to put up a dam immediately. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, if I would benefit from these two engineers in your presence. Hon. Hilary Onek brought an article and he suggested that one dam be closed immediately at Kiira, which would help the water level rise up with immediate effect. I have not heard any of the engineers recommending that today; it would sound very interesting. Thank you.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, it is a good question. At the moment if we operate only Nalubaale, it can take all the water that the Nile produces. Now, the extension - out of the five turbines they are three working. If we close Nalubaale and use only that one, it will consume about 600 cubic metres, there will be some water left; again maybe we have to run about three or four turbines from Nalubaale. But if we install all the five turbines at Kiira, then we can completely close Nalubaale and run only Kiira and maintain low flow so that we maintain some equilibrium and allow excess precipitation to build up the lake level. That is a recommendation I put in that submission. Thank you.

5.10
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): I am much obliged, Madam Speaker.  Madam speaker, the other day the Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi, Mrs Mary Mugyenyi, gave me a point of order that I was shouting at the top of my voice, and I realized that I was. But one book, whose author I cannot remember, one statement says that, “When entire madness of the world has entered into man, it is not fair for anybody to say that man is mad.” You are not really fair. So, as we are making these statements there is frustration, there is disappointment; there is a crisis in the power sector, there is a crisis on the poverty flag.  

On the other weekend, as I have had the occasion to tell you, the President at a junction in Mbarara, Kamukuzi, said that Government has not performed well on the poverty reduction and household incomes. I am repeating it here, how do you perform well on the household incomes when rural electrification is failing because it is one of the variables, Madam Speaker, for poverty reduction?  It is one of the variables, if you read the literature available from Government. If therefore it has failed, are you still expecting to achieve poverty reduction levels as stipulated in your policy?  

Madam Speaker, in the Army, when you are a professional commander and you lead men into war and in the operation people die enmasse, you are held responsible. You have heard even from this Army of ours people being held responsible, others being convicted. Why can this Government not be serious as it used to be –(Intejections)- that one I can give testimony; it used to be, it is no longer. If someone –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection so that I do not over-delay on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not respond to the hecklers.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, has anybody - I asked that question to Mr Keith Muhakanizi this morning when I was in the Ministry of Finance - Has anybody sat down to calculate the cumulative economic loss these power fluctuations have caused?  Has government thought about it, death of people going on in various hospitals? You see, Madam Speaker, I am not an engineer, but let me give this debate another face. What hon. Engineer Byabagambi was talking about - thermal electricity, other sources. Should we get in problems with World Bank, our development partner, can’t we look at other possibilities? Is World Bank the one running this country or issues are being exaggerated? You are just blaming, hiding under World Bank conditionalities. 

Hon. Hilary Onek is talking about 300 mega watts for oil in case we find we have oil in Semiliki region, and he said, “Where is the power?” One big problem that we are having with the present establishment is the absence of a co-ordinated planning function, a point which hon. Byabagambi was talking about. If World Bank objects go elsewhere. It is planning that is be-devilling this country; there are disjointed ad hoc interventions.  

Look at the Health sub-sector, there has been a proliferation of health centres in the country.  That is very good, but where are the staff for these Health Center 4s – I am not calling for an answer, hon. Member; I want to finish, you will have your floor. I am jut making a point broader in the whole economic system; and can I say this, Madam Speaker, that an economic system functions exactly like a human body. Once there is a problem with the nervous system, do not expect the digestive system to function; you are at a loss, you have just forgotten. Once there is a problem in one sector of the economy - there is a problem within the power sub-sector, but it has caused a lot of loss. How many investors has it scared away?  

A point was ably made by Col. Bogere about the Republic of Kenya to import power from South Africa. We have all the power potentials in this region, probably the second best after Congo, but because of the absence of planning of this establishment of ours and ad hocking, we are really having a lot of problems.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Migereko, it is not really proper for you, you are a colleague I do not really want to give you hell here, it is not environmentalist, it is not politics – The National Economy Committee of the 6th Parliament really helped this country, because in the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) - a committee which was chaired by Mr Isanga Musumba - this country is even lucky that the National Economy Committee really delayed Bujagali project; it was a disaster for the country. 

In summary, Madam Speaker, our country has been made a project and our colleagues in the Executive Arm of Government, the implementers, should take us seriously. We should work together so that this country really - As hon. Hilary Onek said, it should not be the politics of the economics of NRM/O or not NRM/O, it should be the politics of development. Because for power now everybody is really in problems whether you are for NRM/O or not.  

5.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I have had opportunity to listen to my colleague the hon. Minister of State for Energy, now turned Minister of State for load shedding, and I know this report seems to be technical yet it does not pass the test. It certainly should have not been written by hon. Migereko, but somebody from his ministry for him to bring to this House.  

Now, the problem is there –(Interjection)- hon. Nusura Tiperu, Parliament is not like a market –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, if you can protect me from hon. Nankabirwa, I do not want to be another Odonga Otto. (Laughter)  

Madam Speaker, when a mistake has been made, it is decent enough for somebody to accept. Listening to contributions from our colleagues well versed with this field, it cannot be true that the problem is nature, that the problem is drought; the problem is professional incompetence. When you look at this statement, the hon. Minister is telling us that there were eight studies. By the time a project goes through eight studies, then there is a problem. We need to hold these people who carried out these studies responsible. 

I am sure hon. Amama Mbabazi, who is in the Chambers of the Attorney General, is taking note because we are protecting our rights as a country and we think we are short changed. These people should be brought to book.  The country is now going to lose between five to seven percent of GDP, and what are we doing, we are blaming it on drought. We are blaming this on drought, this cannot be. 

In fact today I was so proud to be part of this House because we gave an opportunity to our professionals colleagues to explain to us. Sometimes we do not give them that opportunity, we just say let us vote, and that is where the problem is. When professionals are speaking, let us have the decency to listen –(Applause)- it is not a matter of voting, it is not a matter of what World Bank says. Hon. Hilary Onek brought the report and laid it on the Table. What did we say? As a country, did we listen? 

Now we are talking about losing five to seven percent of GDP, it is billions and billions of money. We need to be serious as a nation, Madam Speaker, a person who cannot acknowledge a mistake, let alone a professional or an institution, is a dangerous person. That is why I request the hon. Minister Migereko to assist us to go back with this document to his ministry because it has not served its purpose. We are not convinced; none is convinced about this. 

Madam Speaker, this matter needs further investigation. We are talking about lives being lost. I will give you an example, Madam Speaker, about our late colleague, the hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. I went together with some colleagues to see her when she was still alive but hospitalised. The previous night power in Mbarara had gone off, they had to look for a generator of a private citizen, hon. Bart Katureebe. For 45 minutes the doctor was now manning the system manually until a good citizen lent a generator to a hospital, a referral hospital, a teaching hospital, a university hospital! And these were problems of load shedding –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. colleague, for giving way. Madam speaker, what my colleague is referring to is happening in Mulago Hospital. What Dr Lawrence Kaggwa told us yesterday when we were with the Minister of State for Higher Education, Hon. Wabudeya, is that they are load shedding even Mulago Hospital. Recently they opened up the Infectious Diseases Institute where specimens are kept at -40 degrees centigrade; and some of these specimens are supposed to be stored for over 20 years. But what is happening? They are load shedding and they are losing most of the things, even during surgical operations! Even some expatriates from other countries who have come to help in Mulago are facing load shedding; they are appealing.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, whereas it is true that Mulago Hospital is being load shed, it is important for you to note that on the ground, Mulago Hospital hardly suffers from the major loading shedding factors that encompass the city of Kampala. Mulago Hospital is given key attention by the power generation company.  

I want it also to be on record that Mulago Hospital and all the other referral hospitals have standby generators. The case that my brother has raised, which is covering Mbarara Hospital, is one, which has emerged because Mbarara Hospital is the teaching hospital under the Ministry of Education.  But we have now worked out an arrangement where we have put in provisions for standby power. This function you talked about the generator that failed was a matter that arose purely because at that time we were in the process of procuring new equipment for other hospitals. But let it be understood that all our referral hospitals have standby power.  We have even moved to the sub-district hospitals, which have generators; they also have solar capacity and that must be put on record.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I heard the Minister very clearly, he talked of all referral hospitals having generators. Madam Speaker, Jinja Hospital has no generator, and the minister promised on radio three weeks ago that they would deliver a generator. Madam Speaker, is the Minister in order to tell this House that all referral hospitals have generators? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps he meant he is in the process, I do not know. Have you delivered or are you in the process?

CAPT MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the impression made by my colleague. The generator that we pledged for Jinja was for the new recreated Paediatric Wing for the Children’s Ward of Jinja Hospital. The position is, while I was on Radio Kiira, one of the listeners called and said we have a problem in the Children’s Wing because Madhvani has just handed this new wing to Government of Uganda. We need to install a new generator in this hospital. As a responsible leader, I did commit Government of Uganda to the procurement of a new generator to help our children. I want to put it on record that a new generator has been procured and it will be delivered to that hospital.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want is from the two ministers. On page 2 of the statement of the Minister, bullet 5, it is stated that institutions providing essential and strategic services are not to be load shed. The Minister of State for Health says that sometimes Mulago Hospital experiences load shedding. Of the two Ministers, Madam Speaker, who is saying the truth and who is telling lies?

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to provide clarification on this matter. It is a fact that institutions providing essential and strategic services are not load shed. However, because most of our equipment within the system is very old and dilapidated, occasionally we get power interruptions in some of these institutions. For people who are used to power getting off due to load shedding, whenever there is a failure in power supply to such institutions they think it is load shedding. I want to assure everybody that essential and strategic institutions are not load shed, and as we continue with our programme of rehabilitating the network in these institutions, these problems will be contained and power supply will be stable. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, is hon. Mukula, the State Minister for Health therefore in order to say that there is –(Interjection)- Hon. Minister Migereko says that there is no load shedding in strategic institutions –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, what the Minister has said is that in principle they do not load shed those institutions, but says occasionally there are failures not from load shedding. I think that is what the Minister said.

MR BANYENZAKI: But, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health has stated clearly, it is on the record of Hansard, that sometimes there is load shedding in Mulago Hospital. So, who is telling the truth and who is telling us lies?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Minister should come here with correct facts. In most referral hospitals - I will talk about those I know. Kabale Hospital is not on direct line when Kabale District is shed off. So, when you say all the essential and strategic services are not load shed, I do not understand; either you mean Mulago Hospital alone, but in other parts of the country most referral hospitals are not directly connected. Therefore once there is load shedding, these hospitals do not have power.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want to seek from the hon. Minister of Energy is, he is stating that most of the equipment in most of these hospitals are old. About a year and a half ago there was a very big project of Kampala Urban Power Rehabilitation Project and he targeted – and it was a very big cost, I remember in the Committee on National Economy passing a lot of money and targeted most of the rehabilitation of these big institutions. How come institutions like Mulago Hospital, which are so critical, essential and strategic, and Makerere University, among others, were not catered for under this arrangement? We more or less on a weekly basis get power cut offs in Makerere University!

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, among other things, you have said strategic services are guaranteed power supply. In my interpretation of strategic services, it would cover also strategic places, and I regard the residence of No. 2 person in the country, the Vice President, as strategic. He happens to be my neighbour and this poor man has first to leave his residence and go back to his rural area.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the Minister answer and we close this matter.

DR JONNY BULAMU: Madam Speaker, thank you.  Yesterday I was in Kabale Hospital, and before that I was in Kinkizi Hospital in Kanungu and Kihihi Health Centre; they all have good working generators. In every district we went to, after inspecting all the Health Units, we met stakeholders to as late as 11.00 p.m. or midnight.  So, whereas it can be true that in some health units at times there is failure of electricity, we should not generalize everywhere. Yesterday I was in Kabale.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not get into an argument of which hospital has, because I do not know which one does not have.

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to throw more light on the point raised by hon. Zziwa, Member of Parliament for Kampala. Yes, it is true, we had a programme for rehabilitating the power infrastructure in a number of urban areas, Kampala, Jinja, Tororo. A substantial amount of work was done and considerable improvement in the quality of power delivered has been registered.  

Nevertheless, the power, which reaches and supplies the urban areas, is supplied depending on an old network from Jinja to Lugogo power sub-station; and there are also sub-stations in other places. Yes, a good start was made, but the entire network and sub-station system within the power supply system has not been all rehabilitated. You may be having a good system out here, but if the electric network, which delivers power to you here, who have undertaken improvements in your system, has not been worked on, if there is an interruption along the way, you will be affected, and this is what has been happening. 

I want to assure you that we are sourcing for funding to ensure that the entire network is revamped so that when we say we have had an urban power rehabilitation programme for Kampala, the quality of power that is received is to the expected levels.  

Regarding Ntinda, where the Vice President, the Right hon. Deputy Speaker, and His Excellency, hon. Aggrey Awori, stays, we have received complaints a number of times in regard to the quality of power supply in those areas. Madam Speaker, you are aware of the remedial measures that are being taken to ensure that important personalities in this country do not live in darkness when they have a lot of paperwork to attend to. I want to assure you that in due course, the Ntinda area will be clearly taken care of. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, please wind up.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I will wind up. I hope the remedial measures the hon. Minister is going to take care of, especially where His Excellency, the Vice President, stays; he should not go to a shrine and pray for more power. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, lastly, the Minister is now talking about, in his last paragraph, “The third project got entangled in issues of environment, politics and lack of our own funds.” Maybe lack of our own funds, because we rarely have them anyway, but when we are talking about issues of environment, I imagine these are professional issues. They could eventually affect even the energy you are talking about to produce. The issue of politics should not arise; do not politicise some of these subjects. If there professional argument has been raised, let us debate it and let the better professional argument win at the end of the day, and if you had listened, maybe the situation in this country would be different.

Madam Speaker, I therefore, have the following recommendations to make: One, that this issue be referred to the relevant committee for further investigation, because we want to know what happened and who is responsible for this. 

The Attorney General should be very much involved in this, if hon. Kagonyera was not engaging him so much. We are talking about contractual obligations being entered into by so-called professionals with the Government of Uganda leading to a loss of five to seven percent GDP. We cannot just let it go. We shall need a report from the Attorney General on what steps he has taken. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have heard from the civilians and the engineers; now let us hear from the environmentalists.

5.41
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am so privileged to have caught your eye. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the engineers for having articulated the concerns of technology about dams. However, Madam Speaker, I join colleagues to protest over the nature of report we have received. It does not take note of constitutional concerns the Government is supposed to bear.  I quote verbatim from the National Objectives of State Policy on Energy, namely: 

“The State shall promote and implement energy policies, which will ensure that people’s basic needs and those of environmental preservation are met.” 

Does the report project any positivity in that direction, especially when electricity is predominantly not affordable? If electricity is not affordable by most of the people, what is the end result? They will resort to deforestation, and once the trees are disturbed, can you guarantee the rains? If you cannot guarantee the rains, can you guarantee the water levels? 

So, I think the Minister should have come out with a report, which lays down the fundamental proposals, which project state policy in accordance with the Constitution. Apparently what he has said is far away from that.

Madam Speaker, why should we blame the World Bank?  We should not blame the World Bank because after knowing that we should not necessarily depend on hydro electricity, there are alternatives. This Government should have been good enough to design projects, which can promote alternative sources of energy. I am speaking about thermal energy, solar energy, geo-thermal energy, wind energy, biogas, bagasse and so many alternatives. So, Madam Speaker, I have not been convinced by the report.

Number two, Madam Speaker, is in regard to the dams. It is good that you have given me chance to speak otherwise dams can be a very unfortunate story. If they are an unfortunate story environmentally, we should use dams only when we need them and when we can rationally utilize the resources attached to the dams.  

Madam Speaker, Uganda is one of the richest countries in the world in terms of natural resources. We even have capacity to balance our budget using those resources. But why, for example, has the Bujagali Project failed?  Basically it has failed because of corruption. One of our directors in the World Bank had to resign because he ate money associated to Bujagali. What are you talking about? This is data.  

So Madam Speaker, in a nutshell also -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor is making a very serious allegation that the Bujagali Hydropower Project failed due to corruption. There have been inquiries instituted by the Government of the United States of America, involving an independent counsel; we have also had our own inquiries here involving the IGG. As sector Minister, I have not as yet seen a report proving the corruption allegations. Given the fact that we still require investments in this sector, I would like to call upon the Member who has made the assertion and these serious allegations to assist us and avail us authentic findings by these authorities in regard to these corruption allegations, or else avoid being so categorical when he is making a contribution, or otherwise he can still withdraw. I was not seeking a ruling in form of an order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, do you have that evidence of corruption?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Madam. Partially I do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Present it and lay it on the Table.

MR LUKYAMUZI: There is a case in the High Court related to a secretary of AES, who was dishing out money every week to big people in Government. She ran away and the case is still there.

Secondly, hon. Kaijuka, who was our Director in the World Bank, was forced to resign because he ate a bribe of US $ 10,000. I can give more as time goes on. What are you talking? Otherwise, Madam Speaker, the issue, which I was articulating, is that –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Is the hon. Member in order to continue making such serious allegations without tabling evidence and even substantiating what he is saying? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, can you tell us who that girl giving money was?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I can bring that data tomorrow and lay it on the Table. Yes, I have the data.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you do not have now, do not continue.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I will leave that aside.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I want it tomorrow.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I will bring it tomorrow. Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: I rise on a point of order.  Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi has made a very serious allegation against a very responsible citizen of this country by the name of Richard Kaijuka; and he knows very well that the investigations that hon. Migereko was referring to were carried out in connection with Richard Kaijuka, and no evidence was found to show that he took a bribe.  

I know hon. Lukyamuzi is a very clever man, he can do better work than experts, but is he in order to make a serious allegation against a very responsible senior member of our community when in fact he has absolutely not an iota of evidence to prove this? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, can you Table here evidence that hon. Kaijuka –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: In regard to that, I can only say that the Bujagali Dam Project had so many problems that it even caused a resignation –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do not confuse me.  I am asking you, can you table here evidence that Mr Richard Kaijuka actually took the ten thousand dollars?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I can table evidence to justify that the hon. Kaijuka had to resign because of that allegation of bribery.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, you know it is one thing to be accused of something and one thing to be actually convicted of what you have been accused.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Okay, I withdraw that in regard to Mr Kaijuka, but I will not withdraw the statement that the Bujagali Dam Project was associated to bribery.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi, who I have high regard for, and who is a great friend, has just made a very serious allegation. I am happy that you, on your wise counsel, made him withdraw. But it is important, Madam Speaker, for record purposes; and I am very sure that hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi must have learnt from the allegations made against the hon. Speaker of Parliament. It is wrong for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to simply withdraw without apologizing.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons why the water levels have fallen and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the allegations you made are very serious.  First, we have asked you about the corruption you are talking about, you say you do not have papers but you will bring them.  So, I told you to stop talking about matters, which you cannot substantiate.  Now, you have gone ahead, you are insisting that it is associated with bribery.  I told you, do not say things, which you cannot substantiate.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I withdraw that.  Why should I be obliged to apologize when Dr Kasirivu never apologized?  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order to say that hon. Kasirivu refused to withdraw when you wisely ruled on that issue?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, I think I remember the Speaker saying that this is not Pride Theater.  This is a place for serious work, please be serious about what you are saying and stop causing drama.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I am a serious debater as I will articulate just now.  

Madam Speaker, while I was thanking the engineers for the way they articulated the concerns on water levels, there is another scenario, which they may have ignored, which has environmental connotations, namely; when you congest dams in common waters you will impact on the flow of water and the entire science about electricity generation is about the flow of water.  That is why we have got dams positioned on waterfalls.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, the idea of the water level going down along the Nile, which the Minister claims is a cause of a reduction in production of power, has been disputed.  It is wrong and I would like to give information in respect to this. In 1974, there was a more severe drought - at the time I was a big boy and I understood things - but the level of the water in the reservoir did not come down as low as this; in fact it was dry for six months.  

The other piece of information I would like to give is that immediately this new power station was put across the spillway, there was a lot of water going into Lake Kyoga.  I live at the shores of Lake Kyoga, in fact Kumi County borders Lake Kyoga, the banks actually burst.  As a result some of the suds were washed away into Pakwach.  I recall very well, hon. Omach complained about those moving islands. And also looking at the rainfall pattern in this region, there is more rain in the Lake Victoria basin than it is around the Lake Kyoga areas, that is really a falsehood that the Minister was peddling; and I think there are experts.  He has even made it very clear to us that that is not the cause of the shortage of production of power at the dam.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I do concur with the observations of the engineers in regard to the fall of the water level. For example, Smith in 1961, observed the same scenario of the waterfall, and Okonga, who is based in the Water Development Department in Entebbe, has observed the same. There is one question, which the Minister should answer: Why has the ministry not maximized the use of the two units, 14 and 15 at Kiira if what we plan to import from Kenya is 30 mega watts while Kiira is able to generate 80 mega watts. What is the economic sensation in that?

Finally, what is the way forward? The way forward is as follows, and it is environmentally related; What do the environmentalists say about the way forward in regard to generation of electricity? I have already stated that dam technology is environmentally unfriendly.  When it has to come it should be maximized, and when it is maximized it should be seen to benefit all the people. It cannot be seen to benefit all the people once the tariff is not affordable.  

The way forward is, we do not have to over concentrate on the malaise of hydro electricity when there are alternatives. The environmental nature of Uganda is such that a possibility of biogas, thermo energy can change the situation.  For example Tanzania is using 860 mega watts from hydro against 1800 mega watts from thermal energy.  If Uganda can regionalize the plants associated to thermal energy, we can even minimize cost on transmission so that each region can benefit from that scenario.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.56
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyejonjo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only two points; the first is on page 2, No.5. The Minister says that, “The criteria for load shedding is as follows: Institutions providing essential services are not load shed.” I think it would assist this House if we are given a definition or criterion used to categorize these institutions as such, because whereas Mulago Hospital is a clear example, I believe that tea-processing plants in this country, for example, would also be categorized as such.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to turn to my second point, which is on the issue of rural electrification. The Minister, on page 9, touches on this issue in a very transient manner and yet the majority of our people live in rural areas. He says in paragraph 2: 

“The Subsidy which was given to consumers in 2001 and 2002 grossly affected our rural electrification programme because it was the rural electrification resources, which were diverted to bring down the tariff at that time.”  

I have been here for the last three years, and I do not remember the Minister asking us for this mandate. If these resources were diverted as of then 2001/2002, what has happened in 2003/2004?  Can we be informed of the plans that this Government has for rural electrification?

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for initiating work on certain sub-stations such as Lugombe in Kyenjojo. But my problem is this: You hear of poles being planted in several places, you hear sub-stations being commissioned in certain places, but then these projects are never finalised. I would like to hear from the Minister as to why Government does not concentrate on finalizing certain projects instead of doing piecemeal work in several areas.  I thank you.

5.59
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole county, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While this debate was going on I have wondered what the last colonial Governor of Uganda, if was in the Gallery listening to this debate, would think about the fruits of independence to the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the small dam that we are talking about today, it is the product of colonialism.  The simple things we have attempted to do for ourselves as a country, we have failed and they have collapsed.  Are we still justified as a country to continue condemning colonialism?  Now, we have started with World Bank.  World Bank is the problem, the other day before independence the problem was colonialism.  Madam Speaker, why I say this is that most of the landmarks that we have in the country are either colonial products or they have been donor-funded.  What can Ugandans do for themselves?

Madam Speaker, the statement of the Minister says that there is a power crisis in the country, and the earlier we moved in unison to address this, we are going tomorrow to have no jobs for our people, to have no production and the same song will come back; it is either colonialism or World Bank.  Madam Speaker what must we do?  

Madam Speaker, one of the things I have also noted in this debate is that we need a fundamental strategic intervention to build human capacity in this country. When you look at the countries that have developed like China, Korea, United States of America, those people plan and do their things.  Even when they use consultation to prove or find out, they come back and prove with their own human resource whether what the consultants are telling them is the right thing to do or not.  

In Uganda, what are doing?  All projects that have failed were using imported human power in form of consultants. And one of the things I have noted about consultants in Uganda is that they read the mind of the beneficiary of the consultation and they will exactly tailor the report to suit the ears of the person consulting wants to do so that they can quickly get their money; and who is paying the price? 

When hon. Onek was talking, I wondered whether this information was available to the people of Uganda and we disregarded it, and right now we are paying a price and nobody is even willing to look back and say, “We are sorry, we wish we had done this.”

Madam Speaker, this is very important. One of the things we could consider looking at in the way forward is, if colonialism built a dam and we are still using it, yet the one we are trying to build, the water is not enough. The technical capacity of our people is not commensurate with what we require within the country. The other aspect that we lack is the financial capacity. Let us see what Uganda has done for itself. Look at Namboole, it was a grant from China; look at Owen Falls Dam, it is the product of colonialism, look at all the landmarks within the country. Is it really that the people of Uganda cannot harness internal resources and do something for which they can be proud as a country?  Can’t we?

Madam Speaker, I always listen to the officials in the Ministry of Finance and wonder whose interests they serve. The other day hon. Dorothy Hyuha was on the Floor and said we had a lot of equipment from the Ministry of Health and our friends from the Ministry of Finance said: “If we bring in this equipment and material and money, they will destabilize the macro-economic stability of the country,” and nothing was done.

When you look at the modern sources of funding - A few years ago Kenya was suspended by these multilateral donors, but how did Kenya survive?  Kenya survived on internal borrowing. Right now we are using internal borrowing to mop out excessive liquidity for controlling inflation, but we are not using internal borrowing for purposes of fiscal deficit or fiscal financing. Madam Speaker, all countries worldwide use internal borrowing in form of bonds. Why can’t Government float a power bond in this country – (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I would like to thank you for giving way. Ninety three percent of the budget in the Kenyan Government is from within the country; for us about 50 percent is from the country, the rest is from donors. So, we do not have the independence even to direct priorities; the priorities are set by the donors because most of the development funds are from the donors. So, I agree with you that unless we make ourselves independent and generate resources within, there is no chance this Bujagali thing will continue.  

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, in one of the Movement conferences in Uganda there was a resolution moved, passed and adopted moved by the Director of Economics Affairs, hon. Suruma. The import of that resolution was to say, “Honorable Members, what is the source of the funds that we are using for investment?” All the funds that we had been using and we are using up to now are donor funds, which come with stringent conditionalities.  

I have noted, which will require to investigate, is the good or bad will of the ESKOM Company, which has entered our power generation industry. Madam Speaker, ESKOM is a parastatal of another country; and when you read South Africa’s strategic plans, their plans are to take over the economic activity within the African region. We have ceded all our investment in power to another parastatal from another country. We need to find out the provisions within the contract we have entered with ESKOM, and how it enhances us as a country to invest in power.  Rightly, like the President has said, Madam Speaker, some people have said that the President has done so many mistakes; but one thing the President has been consistent about is that we are going to have a crisis of electricity in the country, and we need quick intervention and immediate investment funds.

Madam Speaker, as a way forward, I wish to recommend as follows: Parliament should pass a resolution urging Government to consider the power sector as one of the priority areas that will form a basis as an engine of growth in this country.

Madam Speaker, one of the things that we need again to reiterate is that we need to generate funds internally through sale of bonds. Madam Speaker, if you looked at the Bank of Uganda and checked on the performance of the long-term bonds, they have selling bonds of about four or five years for purposes of controlling inflation. There has been excessive subscription in Bank of Uganda meaning we have excessive liquidity that we can invest in the power sector. What would be wrong with a country investing such funds in the long-term power generation?

Look at the NSSF funds; the other time we were discussing with hon. Byabagambi and other members of the committee - if we got NSSF funds and lent it to Government through long-term bonds just for power generation, that power would create more industries, more employment and eventually more subscription to the fund. And once you lend money to Government - everybody is hurrying to lend money to Government through Treasury Bills. If private people are hurrying to do that, why can’t we hurry to borrow this money and invest it so that it can have a multiplier effect on the economy and within the employment sector in Uganda and the GDP of the country?

So, Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I want to strongly recommend as follows: That Government considers the Energy Sector as one of the priority sectors of this country. That we must generate internal borrowing to ensure that the investment proposals that we want to undertake are sustainable and can be funded as and when we need them.  

Madam Speaker, I also wish to recommend that we must re-visit ESKOM contract and make a thorough study about ESKOM involvement in the power sector in Uganda, and find out whether their involvement is enhancing power production in this country or it is curtailing power production so that they can become the giant suppliers of power countrywide or throughout the whole region in Southern Africa.

Madam Speaker, we need to conduct a technical audit and hold somebody responsible for the failures of what is happening in the Nile river region now, i.e. the drop in the water level. We need a technical audit, and this one must be undertaken as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker, we need to build a dam as soon as possible to ensure that the current power deficit is quickly addressed so that we do not create a crisis within this country. Madam Speaker, I wish to move, thank you very much. 

6.08
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am so grieved that something like this could happen to a country as poor as Uganda. If you know you have information about something and ignore it, I do not see why you should be exonerated from blame. 

I want to applaud my brother, hon. Hilary Onek.  The report he has just Tabled on the Table is as old as I am in this Parliament. Hon. Hilary Onek predicted that actually there would be a fall in the water levels of Lake Victoria three years ago. He tried and actually I remember Mr Cheeye published it in the Confidential, and the Ministry of Energy did not take note of this; they actually rubbished it. I would agree with my colleague who said that the Attorney General should take keen interest in this case. The information was available but it was ignored. I am not surprised that hon. Syda Bbumba is not here; she was trotting all over the place saying that power load shedding was going to be history. She was ignoring all this advice from the engineers. 

I pity my brother, hon. Migereko, how can you expect - you say that the strategic areas - you are no longer in control of strategic areas because once you privatised the UEB, the man who is selling power is selling to who is paying him; his strategic interests are different from yours. We spend money sending delegations out of the country; I am one of those who has benefited from going outside on Government tour study. Let me tell you an experience of Singapore. They have not risked to privatise these strategic areas you are talking about; they cannot risk because these are commanding heights. Do you realize that now what you call strategic areas of concern, hospitals Police, Army are load shed now? The man who is selling power in South Africa, the company of South African Government, is looking at who is paying him, not who is your priority. So, you can no longer actually re-direct the thinking and priorities of your own.

Madam Speaker, let me say a few things about the company that is taking charge of our affairs here in the spirit of privatisation. Today I was in pain to learn that actually Face Technology is a Corporation of the Government of South Africa, and the Committee on Finance did recommend that in order to empower Uganda Revenue Authority let us give them money to buy computers to computerize their driving permits. But we divested the function almost three quarters to a corporation, which belongs to another country. Madam Speaker, we are encircled; we are encircled, we need to come out of this problem. We have to re-think our priorities and see how we can survive.  

Madam Speaker, the Minister was - actually I heard hon. Syda Bbumba blaming Parliament that the shortage is because of Parliament. But really if you listened to hon. Hilary Onek, he has reduced some of those technocrats to mere electric welders because he said it then, it has happened; and I was surprised, my colleague, hon. D’Ujanga was in UEB when these things happened, he is now telling us that they were diverting water. Do you really divert water at the cost of US$350 million?  

Madam Speaker, we must stop lamentations. I was given a short time, I could talk and go on talking about the mistakes we have made. I can imagine the pain our President is going through because he has persistently talked that we must increase capacity for our power, we have the potential; but look at the people who represent us in this signing of these contracts.  

Madam Speaker, I am not a lawyer, but when lawyers talk on matters that concern law I listen. People who do not listen and make mistakes and continue dillydallying around here must face it. I think it is high time we stood up in arms and fought some of these people who cause financial loss to this country. Can you imagine that our grandchildren are going to pay for this money that was actually consciously - you cannot say unconsciously because records were there.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend that this be referred to a technical committee so that we get enough report and we see a way forward so that we can take a decision from an informed position.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the people who were privy to this information and went ahead and caused loss to Government should be punished. I thank you. 

6.15
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to add my voice to all the general appeals honourable members have been making. One, I have a feeling and a strong belief that the problem we have in this country is that we have those who work for commission. I do not think the problem at Jinja was an omission, it is just a commission; it is very easy to go and sign contracts and walk away with a package. So, the motto of this country is being divorced in broad daylight. 

Hon. Hillary Onek is in a very difficult position.  He had just told me that in the next six months we shall lose half a metre of water, which would most likely render the turbines useless. And he tells me if that happens, it will take another six years for the dam to fill. This then becomes very serious because the expert is here and no one is willing to listen to him. He is just knocking on all doors, he is begging that they buy his idea; no one is listening. If I were the President, hon. Hillary Onek would walk out of this place a minister and the reverse would happen to some people –(Laughter)- because this is a very serious issue.  

Madam Speaker, you know it is useless to go to shrines to pray for rain, all the technical advice is here with the engineer. You meet a whole Vice-President going to a shrine praying for rain so that Lake Victoria can fill up! That is not how we shall solve these problems. It is just science, you need a calculator, graphs, some targets and it is all over.  

I have come to discover that in the agreement they were to release 600 cubic metres per second to Egypt. I read an article in the editorial of Sunrise newspaper. They were saying they suspect that officer at the dams is releasing excess water to Egypt, and the information we have is that they are now releasing 1400 cubic metres per second instead of 600 in the agreement. 

No wonder Lake Kyoga is flooding. So, the whole Government is here, but someone is negligently or deliberately because of some commissions releasing excess water to Egypt. The peasants along the shores of Lake Kyoga think that there is too much water, but it is another problem. I do not know what we can do about this. The Minister of Defence is here; if we can deploy a platoon to monitor how the other man is releasing the water other than just sitting here and someone is walking away with money. 

Why is the water level declining? – Afforestation: If you go and stand at Luweero and count the number of lorries coming with charcoal, you will even start crying. The fact that we do not have enough cheap electricity people have resorted to cutting trees, so this country is becoming a desert. I do not think there is any deliberate effort by Government to plant 1,000,000 acres of trees anywhere, there is nothing working –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, please conclude, I want to move to the Health Sector.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, we need deliberate efforts to plant trees, because no one is planting trees. In fact, in the next 70 to 80 years –(Interjection)- No, I am just summarizing. In the next 50 to 80 years  -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto, for obliging. I am volunteering this information on behalf of the Minister involved, but we have even a project. If you as an individual want to plant trees, 50 percent of your costs will be borne by Government. Anybody who wants to plant trees, I challenge him, including hon. Guma who says we have no plan that –(Interjection)- Yes, we do have irrespective of what your opinion is. I challenge anybody who wants to plant trees, 50 percent of your cost will be borne by the Government. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, why don’t you give the proper details? Why don’t you tell us proper details so that tomorrow Members can plant trees in the recess? (Laugher).

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, this information I was providing I would say was just an intervention to let my colleagues know that there is such a project. But certainly I am going to let my colleague in the ministry concerned come with full information regarding tree planting. 

Hon. Guma is saying, “What was I waiting for?”  What was he waiting for, for not finding out?  Hon. Members of Parliament are the eyes and the ears of their people. If he had said he had challenged the Government on tree planting and we had not listened, I could understand. He sits back and he does nothing –(Interjection)- Yes, you are a community worker –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, every year we receive policy statements from all sectors of Government. It is information like this that the Government should feed us with so that it percolates to the people through us their representatives. Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kagonyera to wait until there is this crisis and people are asking themselves, then he brings this information and blames honourable members for not looking for it as if we are supposed to go to ministers’ offices to look for the information? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Professor assumed that we all knew. But on a serious note really, if this money is available in the Government, why doesn’t the Government not issue circulars to all of us and say do this? (Applause)

MR BANYENZAKI: Can I clarify, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the trees?

MR BANYENZAKI: Yes, because he is misleading the House. Madam Speaker, the issue of saying that anybody who plants trees now will get 50 percent refund, which hon. Mondo Kagonyera is saying now, is not true and is misleading. It is misleading in the sense that you are talking about Forest authority, a loan, which was passed by this House.  It did not say that anybody who plants trees would get 50 percent refund. There are specifications of who is to get that money; it was a loan approved by this House and it was clear. So, do not come here and mislead the House that anybody who plants trees will get 50 percent refund.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide supplementary information on this programme of tree planting. Information can be obtained from the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment and from the National Environmental Management Authority. It was contained in the policy statement and they gave information regarding what you are supposed to do if you are going to do tree planting on Forest Reserve land or if you choose to plant trees on your own land. The funding goes on up to 50 percent of the expenses you incur. 

Initially the funding was for those who are planting over 100 hectares. There has been debate with a view to reviewing the requirement for the 100 hectares because many people do not have 100 hectares anyway.  

So, I want to inform colleagues that instead of waiting for the relevant Minister to come here and give the information, we can go to the Ministry of Lands –(Interjection)- but the information is there and if someone wants to be assisted, they will even give you technical officers to work with. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for that information, but I have a belief that there is a way Government should be run. You do not just meet someone at 6.30 p.m. and say there is a loan there, you can apply; we must be deliberately informed. In normal life where a breakdown breaks down, it would beat normal understanding. But that would also mean the government is privatising afforestation. There must be deliberate effort by Government whether by use of force, by use of prisoners to plant more trees, other than waiting for investors like me to think whether I need the Government money or not. 

Lastly, I would say –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I want to finish the Energy Sector and go to the Health Sector, please.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: It is about energy, Madam Speaker.  Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like to inform my colleagues that even the investors are not coming here; our neighbours are taking more of the investors who are supposed to come here. In fact investors who target the Ugandan market either invest in Kenya or Tanzania, and one of the reasons is power.

MR OTTO: Finally, I want to thank the Minister for saying they are going to reduce the price of fuel. I want to thank you for making a recommendation that there are considerations to reduce taxes on fuel. Honestly speaking, you are taxing Ugandans Shs 600 per litre. This is almost robbery, Shs 600 for every one litre is taxed; even fuel that goes to Congo and Rwanda and back to Uganda is still cheaper than the fuel, which Uganda Government supplies to its citizens. 

So, let us consider heavily; if you reduce the price of fuel, a kilogramme of sugar is going to be Shs 600, transport from here to Mbarara will be Uganda Shs 4000 and many other forward and backward linkages.  Please, rescue us. If you do not want to reduce the price of fuel and you happen to lose political power, just in one day the next Government will take credit of all peasants because they will say fuel now is Shs 800 from Shs 1,500 and you will not believe the humiliation you will walk away with in the eyes of the peasants. You wait and see –(Laughter)- and I am very serious. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, there is a very important clarification I want.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From who?

MR BANYENZAKI: From the Minister, because it is just a simple one. Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister has said on page 10 when he is enumerating the details on how much has been sent in the Power Sector on Power IV, which was financed at the tune of US$48 million. In the Project Document of Power IV, the key performance indicator, which is the main objective, was to reduce load shedding substantially by 2004. 

Another key objective was that power supply could no longer be a main factor retarding effective industrial development and private investment by 2004, where the real cost of power to industries would have been reduced by early 2004.  

Madam Speaker, this project has cost the Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda up to a tune of US$48 million. On the recommendations that have been made to make an audit on the dam project, I would recommend that this project also be audited because it is also a failure, because we have failed to achieve the objectives for which we had borrowed US$48 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is Power III or power IV?

MR BANYENZAKI: It is on Power IV, Madam Speaker, it is indicated in the Minister’s statement on page 10. It is a total failure, this money which we borrowed US$48 million has not achieved the purpose for which it was borrowed as a result of mismanagement of this sector, Madam Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Supplementary, Madam Speaker, on the same. The Minister states in his Statement that the intent to install machines on Unit 14 and 15, and to do this he is going to spend US$48 million.  Now, we have just been told by our friends, the experts, that we do not have sufficient head even to generate enough power from the machines that have been installed so far.  What is the rationale behind hurrying up to install Unit 14 and 15, spend a lot of money like we intend to do and yet not increase on the capacity of our stations to produce?

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, hon Member. I would like to thank Members for their pertinent and constructive contribution, particularly those who re-focused on the way forward.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to start off with the issue to do with the importation of power from Kenya, which is one of the immediate solutions that we are pursuing.  It is has been observed that if we import power from Kenya, it may turn out to be too expensive. I pointed out in my report that the arrangement we have is on a back-to-back basis.  The terms on which we have been exporting power to Kenya will be the very terms on which we shall be importing that power back. Yes, it is true we have been charging Kenya slightly higher tariff than we pay when we sell our electricity internally. But as you would like to agree with me, this is maybe the only solution that we can pursue at the moment.  Yes, the tariff will go up, but in the circumstances we really have no alternative but to do that – to import the power from Kenya.  It is a stop-gap measure, which we must pursue.

There have been issues raised in regard to whether we have a plan for the sector.  I want to assure everybody that we do have a plan for the sector and the demand we are seeing today had been projected over time. When you look at our plans, this demand is projected. It is not that it has come up accidentally. It is only that the requisite investment, which we needed to ensure that we have timely supply to take care of this demand, did not fall in place in time. So, that does not mean that there is no plan in the sector.  There is a plan and if one came to the ministry, you will come across correspondence raising all these issues over a period of time. I am sure hon. Kagonyera here will bear me out.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seriously standing on a point of order. The Minister is assuring us here that he has a plan for developing energy and one of the plans is to import electricity from Kenya, and he accepts that, that will cause the hiking of tariffs. Is the Minister in order to talk about a plan, which does not measure up to the National objectives of State Policy namely; every one we elect in Government in accordance with (xxvii), National State Objectives, must put in place an Energy Policy, which is in consonance with the improvement of people’s livelihood so that they enjoy the potentialities of their natural resources? What is he talking about? Is he in order to speculate things, which are outside the constitutional obligation? I am quoting verbatim.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister has informed you about his short-term measures and the long-term measures; he was now addressing the short-term measures.

MR MIGEREKO: Incidentally, I would like to clarify.  In our plans, importation of power from Kenya was not contained in those plans. It is only that the investment we required to have our own power is not in place, that we are having to import power from Kenya, and I thought I was fairly clear on that one –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you let this Minister finish so that we can go to the Health Sector?

MR AMURIAT: This is on what he is articulating now, Madam Speaker. I wanted to seek clarification.  Some time back when it became clear that our potential donors were reluctant to finance the Bujagali project, His Excellency, the President actually did say that even if they were no longer interested, we could find money from within the country to finance that project. What has happened with this scheme? 

This was about two years ago since the President said this, and somehow we were relieved that even without donor funding we could, as a country, manage to collect resources and see that we go ahead to increase the production of power in this country. Is this in your plan? And if it is, what has become of that funding to that project?

MR ONEK: Mr Minister, on page 10 of your submission, you have got a plan here, year, generation, how much you need, transmission, how much, total, so much; it is so uniformly spread that it does not reflect the way people invest in power. What happens is that, you will need perhaps US$500 million to invest on a power production unit and thereafter, maybe for the next ten years, you do not need this kind of series of investment, and they way it is, it is arbitrary figures. I do not know how your planners are, but I am worried that these kinds of figures, Mr Minister, are misleading you.

MR MIGEREKO: The figures we have depend on present demand and projected demand, and our technical people have sat down and thought over these figures over a period of time.  

Two, on the issue of domestic resource mobilization, as a way of assessing investment funds for the sector, yes, two years ago the President stated that we are going to starting addressing the matter of generating our own resources for purposes of investing in the power sector and other strategic and vital sectors.  Yes, this programme is on, but as you know, it takes time before you can be in a position to generate sufficient resources through an avenue, which has not been in place previously.  

The recommendations, which hon. Dombo put out here this afternoon, would go a long way in pointing to the urgency of ensuring that we move as fast as we can along this road. Fast track those arrangements as a way of ensuring that we reduce on donor dependence in as far as financing this vital and strategic sector is concerned. Indeed this recommendation will greatly strengthen the stand of Government in these matters.  

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of power production at Nyagak, Kisizi, Kinyara and other places. Yes, I must admit that Nyagak was not mentioned in my paper, but it is a fact that as I speak now, survey work is being undertaken in Nyagak area. Survey work to mark off the area where the Nyagak Hydropower Station is going to be located is taking place right now. We have got a diesel generator set, which has been put in place in Arua so that –(Interruption)

MRS UDONGO PACUTO: I thank you very much, hon. Minister. I would like to inform the Minister that, two weeks ago I passed via Nyagak but it is still bushy. It is very bushy –(Interjections)- give me the Floor, I am still explaining. It is still bushy. After this Parliament allocated money two years ago, you are now doing survey! 

Secondly, hon. Minister, let us be honest. I know people have been contributing and have been pronouncing engineers, but I know in construction we have economists, geographers and history, that is why power project is failing in this country.  You know, when you are diverting water, you should learn the history of the place before you do it. And when you are constructing, the economist should come, if not the robbers will come and take away the money. What I want to inform you here is, Members, let us be serious. 

As the Minister is saying Nyagak power is now on survey work. I would also like to inform you that if this Parliament puts in place a committee to go on the ground, really the poles which were put on the ground - remember hon. Minister when we were in Arua, WENERICO Generating Company told us they are worried that the poles will not accept power transmission because they are so weak; they are all eaten up by termites. By the time we are going to hold it, it is falling down, meaning that when you are surveying Nyagak, you start constructing it, and then the poles you have put in place are going to be down. Are we going to get the power? 

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, I am an electrical engineer, actually a professional engineer, both in Uganda, in the United Kingdom and in United States of America.  Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the hon. Member is that when we are constructing a hydropower station, there is a stage of survey, which involves, like she rightly said, geographers. The geologists also come in for the soil characteristics and the rocks; the hydrologists come in for the water characteristics.  Now, all that work is mainly by technical people who hardly address public meetings such that actually when that work is taking place, you may not know that it is really taking place. When they go, they go to the site to map out where the dam is going to be constructed. The social workers who deal with the social sector also go there to see the impact it would cause; the environmentalists also go there.  

But what I am trying to stress, Madam Speaker, is that when they go they are purely a technical team, it may not be easy to know that that work is taking place. What I know is that WENERICO, which is in West Nile, is undertaking this work. It is only when that preliminary work is done, designs are done, that you can get real construction taking place. So, I wish to inform the hon. Member that the work is going on, but the actual construction is yet to come. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Ndawula Kaweesi. The Member from Arua has raised also other issues concerning the poles, and I want to assure her that, yes, in the ministry we are aware of that problem and the replacements are being worked on, and the company, which supplied those poles, is going to be penalized for having supplied sub-standard poles.

Regarding River Kisizi; I did not mention this river in my paper, but it is a fact that there is a concession, which revolves around River Kisizi. The monies for executing that work has been secured, and Government is putting in a subsidy. I am sure very soon the work will be taking off.

Regarding Kinyara and its capacity to generate power from bagasse; yes, we are encouraging all the Sugar Production Companies, that is, Kinyara, Lugazi, Kakira to generate as much power as they can.  As I pointed out in my statement, Kakira will be putting into the grid about 12 megawatts in the year 2006. Discussions are ongoing with both Lugazi and Kinyara and we would like them to take up a concession so that they can be in a position to supply areas, which are within their vicinity.  

There are many other schemes that I have not talked about here, but which appear in our policy statement, and I want to confirm or to assure the Members that all this work is ongoing except that it takes time before many of these schemes can reach completion stage.

Regarding Karuma and the demand that it should be fast tracked, the stand of Government is that both Karuma and Bujagali should go ahead at the same time. Over the weekend, we were having discussions with the Chairman of NORPAK in regard to how we can speed up work at Karuma. NORPAK are the developers –(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: I thank you very much, hon. Minister. I seek clarification because I have heard you talk about Bujagali, and in your document, you also talk about repackaging Karuma and Bujagali. I want you to clarify to me what you mean by “repackaging.” I do recall very well that when Government brought up the issue of Bujagali, there was a very serious protracted war by colleagues in this House. There was even an association that championed the crusade; we had the National Association of Professional Environmentalists comprising of 25 Members, they even had an office in Kampala here. We also had Save Bujagali Crusade, and there is information that the collapse of Bujagali is partly due to those lobby groups that even went as far as writing letters to the World Bank. Now, when you talk about Bujagali, your explanation seems to indicate to me that now we are at par. 

I want us to be clarified as to whether “repackaging” means environmentalists are now satisfied and Parliamentarians should also join those who are going to lobby to ensure that the reasons why Bujagali collapsed, this time we are going to move as one people. I remember my Chairman, Maj. Rwamirama, saying that Mrs Syda Bbumba is even quoted as having said that Members of Parliament are responsible for the load shedding. So, in this “repackaging,” are we now talking the same language or there is something still missing? I thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I think since my name has been mentioned in association with Bujagali, it is democratic enough for me to say something; I do not see why people are shaken when I stand up.  (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I think the Minister should be fair. The scenarios related to the environments surrounding Bujagali and Karuma respectively are quite different.  For example, the environmentalists do not have any query in regard to the development of Karuma Falls because when you position the dam there, the waterfalls’ spectacular appearance will all be retained untouched as opposed to Bujagali - By the way, those of you who do not know why we are protecting Bujagali, apart from the traditions attached to Busoga, Bujagali is one of the greatest waterfalls in the lake and when you lose it, you have lost it; all about development is not necessarily about construction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when this question was first asked it was requiring the Minister to explain why there is load shedding, including the vital institutions. Let us leave this general debate about the water level and the environment because I think we are going to take some measures where you will be able to follow that up.  Minister, please answer. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the term re-packaging essentially involves looking at the issues as they were at that time, critically one by one and being in a position that you agree with the stakeholders, financing partners on the way we should move on those issues. In a layman’s language, that is what re-packaging is all about. For instance, you could have initially decided that a project be financed under Private Sector arrangement and it may turn out that today it is no longer appropriate to finance such a project purely from commercial lending and so on and so forth. When you sit back and bring in other options and you agree on them for handling that project that is what we mean by re-packaging. 

As I was pointing out, we had a meeting with NORPAK of Norway on Tuesday and agreed that the vital preliminary works in regard to putting together a consortium, formulating a financial plan for Karuma, should now start. As for Bujagali, I have just had a meeting with Regional World Bank Representative this morning and the Country Representative and we are talking about speeding up of Bujagali. So, the two, as per the President, we are trying to make sure that they are developed simultaneously so that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would really appeal to you to let us conclude this matter for now.  There is a private member’s business, which we have not yet reached.  

MR MIGEREKO: We are trying to make sure that we develop the two simultaneously so that by the time we reach 2009, we do not end up in the same situations in which we are right now.  

Madam Speaker, a lot of issues have been raised - (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, this is a matter of national importance. We have heard from two engineers here. When we are talking of shortages, we must try to maximize output. We have been told that from Karuma we can get up to 1,000 mega watts.  Two, congestion of dams in one place is also not good. Security-wise it is not good to have the other Kiira, Nalubaale and then Bujagali in one place, why can’t you spread out?  

MR MIGEREKO: First of all, I want to make one correction; nobody, not even the engineers, ever stated that Karuma can generate 1000 mega watts. I am sure Ndugu Hilary Onek will bear me out.

MR ONEK: To just help the Minister, Karuma can generate maximum 150 mega watts although they are putting 200 mega watts. The one I talked about is Masindi Port, that is 1100 or 1500 mega watts.  Thank you, Mr Minister.

MR NDAWULA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is in connection with the concentration of dams in one place.  Madam Speaker, the Electricity Sector is rigidly connected, you can only generate when there is a consumer. So, when you generate you must have a transmission line and a distribution line to the consumers. As we talk today, there is a switchyard in Jinja of 132KV, that is, the transmission voltage. If you go to Karuma, you can put a 150 mega watt plant; you have got to evacuate that power to either Lira, where there is 132KV line, which passes via Opuyo and Tororo. The Tororo-Opuyo-Lira line is under rehabilitation.  The other option is to move from Karuma to Kawanda, which is around 200 kilometres of high tension.  So, for you to invest in a transmission line of 200 kilometres double circuit just to evacuate 150 mega watts may make the project extremely expensive. It has got to get subsidy from the other generating stations.  

So, what I am trying to say is that, we can maximize the evacuation from Jinja to Kampala; there is already a double circuit that comes to Mulago North and there is another double circuit that goes to Mutundwe. So, if someone generates at Bujagali, you move 10 kilometres to the present switchyards then you can evacuate with either existing transmission lines with the same right of way by just adding some more conductors, which in real terms makes that project cheaper than the other one. That is the information I want to submit. Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: But we are putting in place arrangements to ensure that we evacuate power from wherever it is generated.  

Madam Speaker, there has been a big debate on the Owen Falls Power Extension. My view is that we cannot conclude this debate here now. My view is that we can bring the technical people in the Ministry of Lands, Water and Natural Resources together with the experts in this House and they can continue pursuing this matter, investigating it, so that at the end of the day we can be in a position to know whether the Owen Falls Power Extension will continue being of use to us or not. I think that one is very important and I can undertake to make arrangements for such a meeting to take place. I hope my dear brother, hon. Hilary Onek, will have time for this because last time we missed you in Entebbe when we were having a very crucial discussion on the management and utilization of the Victoria Nile Waters with a view to understanding how we can optimally utilize them.

I would like to request that hon. Amuriat joins us in those discussions because this is such an interesting subject. And if we are to be in a position to document all the important issues that ought to have been considered and which need to be considered, we need a different place for that kind of discussion and not here -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry for interrupting the Minister, but I thought since the alarm was made in this House, it would only be prudent for a select committee of the House to be constituted –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, leave me to do my work, I know what I am doing. Let this minister conclude and I will guide you, please. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, there was the issue concerning why Bujagali failed. As I stated in my statement, the reasons why Bujagali was halted are very clear and well documented. The one reason, which has not been proven, is that one of corruption. The view I would like to put forward is that until we have received concrete and authoritative reports from the investigations from the Independent Counsel in the United States, from the Norwegian Government, and from the IGG, it may not be advisable to continue flagging that reason, because we all know that there were problems in the Energy Sector all over the world where independent power producers could not move forward any of these projects in Laos and in so many countries, and we can now not restrict the failure or the halting of Bujagali to corruption as such.  

Madam Speaker, there has been the issue of technical capacity of Government in regard to handling some of these important projects. As a ministry we have developed a very clear programme right now for training and exposing our manpower who are handling these vital projects: the lawyers, the finance people, the engineers and so on and so forth. I am sure that given a few more years down the road we shall be in a much better situation than we were a few years ago.

But I would also like to make an appeal to the Members of Parliament, who are technically well endowed in some of these fields, to come and interact with our ministries so that we can continue tapping your resource. I think even if this were to be done at a fee, we can always sit down and discuss it.  

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of geo-thermal resources. I have indicated in my statement that the ministry has a programme for tapping these resources and work is on going. It is only that it takes time before you can see the results. I have mentioned places like Sempaya in Kasese, Bundibugyo and so on and so forth.  We know that as a country, continuing to depend on hydropower resources alone is not extremely prudent. So, we are doing whatever we can to ensure that we have got a realistic energy mix, which can ensure that if one resource fails at least we have another resource to call on; and geo-thermal in as far as I am concerned comes in fairly handy.  

Madam Speaker, there was a question from hon. Dora Byamukama regarding how we select essential and strategic services, and how come the tea industry is not captured under the essential and strategic areas in as far as load shedding is concerned.  Madam Speaker, each of these sectors was given a weighting, which was juxtaposed to the amount of power that is available within the system at the moment. Through that weighting system it turned out that hospitals, Army installations and so on and forth are the essential and strategic services.  What I know is that industries are only load shed between 6.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m., during day every attempt has been made to ensure that industries are not load shed. 

As far as the tea industries in Western Uganda are concerned, we have a problem of the network, which we need to rehabilitate. At times when power goes off, it is as a result of failure within the network –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I am getting a little bit concerned here. When we talk about load shedding and we are trying to talk about some criteria used on institutions as number one, “Institutions providing essential and strategic services are not load shed,” Madam Speaker, it beats my understanding. These very institutions, which are regarded to be sensitive, leave alone the health centres and hospitals, but there are institutions that I feel should be load shed for them to know that there is a problem of load shedding in this area. One of such institutions is basically the ministry headquarters and the Office of the President because if they use generators, the generators will be dig down in their pockets, and once the generators have inflicted some information in their pockets then they will come out and know that there is trouble in this country.  When you protect them and leave the public – (Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, since the hon. Member on the Floor has a very huge voice, may I beg you, Madam Speaker, that he speaks a little bit further away from the microphone so that we can understand what he is saying. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are you contributing or you are seeking clarification?  

MR OCHIENG: It is information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are proposing that the Office of the President should be load shed.  Please, hon. Minister, proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we hold a discussion on some of these issues so that we can be in a position to provide more information to Members. I think, hon. Ochieng, we can meet and we volunteer some of this information to you.

The other issue, which was raised, concerned rural electrification and us having encroached on monies for rural electrification to provide a subsidy for the tariff. We had a directive from the House to find money from wherever we could to ensure that we bring down the tariff. When we tried to search around, the only money we could touch was that which was meant for rural electrification. 

In light of what has happened, maybe we should have taken off time to try and persuade Members to understand why at times we must have to bear with the tariff increase because without generating our own resources internally, some of which could come from the tariff, there is no way we shall be in a position to ensure sustainable good performance of this sector.  

There was also concern raised over the pace of rural electrification. I want to assure Members that Government is committed to pursuing her programme of rural electrification such that electricity reaches every corner of the country.  Ndugu Amuriat Oboi has been a major beneficiary; his area is fairly well lit of late. But in order to ensure that we attend to the issue of low load factor, which hon. Hilary Onek alluded to, and which hon. D’Ujanga raised, we are moving very systematically to ensure that the programme for rural electrification first and foremost targets district headquarters to major economic centres all over the country, that is, fish landing sites, mining areas and areas with agro-processing activity.  

Why is that important? When we extend power to a mining area they consume as much as three megawatts, five megawatts and that is an appreciable load. That helps us to offset the cost of extending power to all the points along the way, any trading centres along the way. But at the same time it is the most prudent thing to do; and if we can sustainably pursue this programme, we shall be in a position to find a cure to that demand curve low load factor problem, which has been a major disincentive when we appeal to investors to come and inject in our energy sector.  

Madam Speaker, I want to say that I find the contribution by hon. Dombo and the contributions he has raised highly pertinent. I also would like to say that those who have asserted that the report contains nothing, in my view, need to sit down and study this report once again. Because in my view, we were supposed to talk about the power supply situation in the country and for anybody who understands figures, we have been in a position to bring out the fact that we have a major shortfall, which we must attend to and that we need resources over a period of time to be in a position to sustainably address the problem. I, therefore, think that it was worthwhile that this statement was presented to this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you! Honourable members, I think that we are in agreement that there is a crisis in the power sector in this country, and that we need to move as a country together to find some solutions. Some of them have already been presented here, but there could be others we have not yet looked at. So, I would like to propose that our Committee on Natural Resources takes up this matter immediately, and to be assisted by the various engineers who are in this House, who will be officially attached to the committee and the technical people from the ministry, although the quality thereof has been questioned so that they can also assist our committee and then we come to a solution that will help the country and help the population.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I am completely in agreement with the proposal you are making. But there are some issues, which have been general that do not necessarily require the Committee on Natural Resources on which it would be good for Parliament to pronounce itself on; like the issue of Government considering power sub-sector as a priority area. Whereas they have talked about it, it has never been demonstrated through commitment of funds by Government. For us as a Parliament we make a resolution urging Government so that it goes on record.  

The second one, Madam Speaker, is the issue of internally generating capacity and resource funding. Wherever the President goes he cries about funding and we have not generated enough capacity or generated enough resources within the country.  The only institution that can give guidance to Government would be this institution of Parliament.  

So, Madam Speaker, I wanted to propose that: One, we move a motion to urge Government to consider the power sector as one of the priority areas to which Government must commit enough resources for it to ensure that there is enough generated capacity.  

The second one, Madam Speaker, is that Government takes enough appropriate measures to ensure that we internally generate resources, which we can invest in the power sector. This recommendation will give an insight to the people in the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda on really how best we must proceed.  

Then the third one would be to refer this report to the technical committee with a view of conducting a technical audit to report to the House as to who bears the responsibility of misadvising the Government to have taken such a decision.  

The fourth one is to review the performance of ESKOM, to find out whether the consumption of waters from Lake Victoria is in tandem with the flow of the river so that the desire by ESKOM to make money does not impact negatively on the environment by draining all the water out of Lake Victoria.  

The fifth would be to recommend strongly to Government that the Karuma and Bujagali projects be concurrently considered so that we are seen as a country to be broad-based in thinking in our approach to the issues that relate to development.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought the minister would use this opportunity to correct the false information, which has been going out from his office that this load shedding is due to drought. We should correct the records that actually it is not, and the minister should be further restrained in future from giving such false information because there are Ugandans out there who can sieve what is right and what is wrong.  Thank you.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, we may talk about all these other policies and so on, but last time when this issue of electricity came, some of us were more concerned about the daily suffering of the normal Ugandans. Whereas a person can appreciate from the load shedding, even though that is bad enough, the biggest problem and the biggest annoyance is, people still continue to pay as much money as they used to pay before this enormous load shedding. This is so painful!  It is so painful to pay the same amount of money getting less electricity, and on top of that it is so painful to pay even more money than you used to pay before this with electricity started up. I think this is an issue, which the honourable Minister has to address; whereby he can at least promise us and even the public that he is going to take action against the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company for cheating Ugandans during broad daylight. I think this is the biggest issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a petition, which is due either on Monday or Tuesday on the question of tariffs. Why do we not discuss tariffs on that day because here you wanted to know why is there load shedding in this country. That was the question.

MR MIGEREKO: The issue he has raised is to do with billing, and it is a source of concern to the leadership in the ministry and we are taking collective measures to ensure that this does not continue, that people can get bills reflective of the actual power they have consumed, and they get their bills on time, which are well reconciled.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, we have really spent our time very well and I thought the way the hon. Speaker was leading us, we were moving in the right direction. I have difficulty with the motion proposed by hon. Dombo because I think we have reached a consensus, the front and the back benchers, that there is a crisis. If you follow the statement by the honourable Minister he has elements, which actually show you that already from the front bench, the matter is being taken as priority. And I think earlier on, hon. Dombo, you did indicate or another honourable Member that the President himself has said that if we cannot find a donor we will find our own money.  

So, perhaps what we could do, Madam Speaker, since it is fairly late, we agree with the idea of the committee but perhaps on Tuesday we could clarify on the terms of reference so that all the elements are taken on board rather than us jumping the gun because the committee is to search and arrive at some of the conclusions that we could make now but prematurely. So, I would like to ask hon. Dombo to hold back on the motion and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually the reason I summarized the way I did was because we need a time to sit down and actually formulate the areas that we want the committee to look at –(Maj. Rwamirama rose_)- but are we still on electricity.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Yes, I want to supplement hon. Kiyonga’s comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he was only making a proposal and nobody is contradicting it.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there are statements that can be made but have got far reaching economic consequences. A statement like item number 15 in this document, I think the minister should also re-think. When you say, “In order for the power consumers, particularly the industrialists, not to be disadvantaged and lose competitiveness, Government will shoulder the fixed cost of the investment and waive the tax on fuel.”  This really needs a study, the minister I think is a bit extravagant with his statement. We cannot sustain it.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I had moved a motion and it was seconded. But on the wise counsel of yourself and the honourable members, I wish to concede the proposal by the National Political Commissar and that the issue goes to the Committee of Natural Resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, we shall finalize it before we leave for the recess, and I will ask the experts here to put themselves at the disposal of the Committee.  But we shall conclude formally by Tuesday.  

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

Question 10/2004. to the Minister of Health

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has someone been mandated to ask on behalf of hon. Byaruhanga? (Mr Amuriat rose_)

7.25
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, “Uganda has accessed global funds for HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria, which funds the Ministry of Health has disbursed to various organisations.

Could the minister inform the House:
(a) How much funds Uganda has accessed from the global funds.

(b) Which organisations have accessed the global funds disbursed by the Ministry of Health, their areas of operation and activity programmes

(c)How much each organisation has received?”

 7.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, the Ministry of Health responds as follows: First, because of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which has hit our nation and the world globally, it is quite clear that there is need for us as a nation to respond to the needs of our people and that is why the support we got from the Global Fund is what Uganda is using as a means to kind of mitigate and to deal with the pandemic in the nation. 

However, the question raised was that, “How much funds has Uganda accessed from the Global Fund?  Madam Speaker, I wish to state that to-date Uganda has received US$26,412,213 to scale up the interventions against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in the country. Details can be seen in the attached Annex, which we have just circulated, broken down by the diseases as it were.  

The first disbursement to Uganda was made on the 29 March 2004. However, Uganda has applied for the funds in all the four rounds with the approval of all the grant applications and it is still cited in Annex 2. The total value of the approved grants is Shs 201,790,093 over the two years and an additional Shs 168,979,291 provided in the five years, again refer to the Annex 3.

Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, the Global Fund, Geneva disburses money every six months to the recipient countries. These disbursements are based on the approval or the approved work plan of each nation and as the budget so submitted.

It is important to note that the project also disburses to the implementing partners quarterly depending on the acceptable activity and the accountability reports. The second disbursement to the implementing partners is now ongoing and, therefore, not captured in the financial summary as shown in Annex 1, which we have again circulated.

Question two was raised, “Which organisations have accessed the global funds disbursed by the Ministry of Health, their areas of operation and activity programmes?” Madam speaker, honourable colleagues, the Global Fund supports both the public sector and private sector organisations, for example, the private not for profit and private for profit.  This support covers all the districts in the country. See Annex 4 but the geographical coverage is also cited. The details of the organisations and areas of operations are also contained in Annex 5 as attached for ease of reference.

Three, “How much has each organisation received?”  Madam Speaker, at the inception of the project, terms of reference were developed to guide the applicants, criteria were developed based on which adverts were made in the local media. Responses received and evaluated and a copy of the advert is attached as Annex 6 for your information. Based on the minimum eligibility criteria and the award recommendations of the technical review panel, the Ministry of Health entered into a contract with organisations shown in Annex 7. The total value of the contracts is also shown in Annex 7 out of which Shs 5,222,326,979,000 has been disbursed.
 
Monitoring and evaluation framework for the global funds. Madam Speaker, the project is also using existing monitoring systems of Government. These include the line ministries, local governments, civil society organisations, the NGOs, FBOs and private not for profit organisations, the private sector organisations, the country co-ordinating mechanism and Parliament, including the Auditor General. The idea is to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation systems of all the implementing partners.  

In addition, the project is engaging the financial management firms to monitor projects’ implementation. The programmes’ monitoring will be conducted by the Ministry of Health technical programmes supported by limited numbers of the private sector organisations. Madam Speaker, I thought that we would attach the details of the organisations for ease of reference and to enable honourable members of Parliament easily access this information and go into monitoring some of these organisations, which are operating in their constituencies.

Madam Speaker, the second question, which was raised, was number 11/04 which is on the Order paper and it was raised by hon. Patrick Musisi. I do not know whether he would like to proceed with the question.

7.33
MR PATRICK MUSISI (Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  As it appears on the Order Paper, it was slightly rephrased, but maybe I better read it as earlier on presented. I had a slightly small preamble. It reads:

“We are aware that a number of expired or fake commodities are on the Ugandan market. It is alarming that there might be a huge amount of fake drugs. There is a consignment of drugs that was imported from M/S Ningbo number two factory in China.

These drugs were inspected by a drug analyst, one Aeneas Kakwemeire, the only drug analyst in the country with this type of qualifications. He condemned the drugs, which include among others injectable Chloroquine and Diclofenac.  

These drugs were not meeting the Chinese standards of manufactured drugs and did not, therefore, conform to the international good manufacturing practice. Unfortunately, these drugs had been cleared by some officials in the National Drug Authority.

Furthermore, we recently interacted with the Commonwealth Secretary Official who hinted that we are importing drugs from India, which country has only 20 or so factories that meet the good manufacturing practice. The rest of the drugs from the other factories in India are in effect poison.

The question now is:

(a) This having been an eye-opener, do we not have a huge deposit of fake or dangerous drugs on the market?

(b)  What controls does the ministry employ to see that such drugs are removed from the market, clinics and hospitals?” I am stating this because recently I had a bout of malaria in my house, I and my wife, but we were subjected to a number of pricks before the malaria cleared. So, I am a bit scared. And to make it worse, sometimes when you get an injection, you get patches, you know, it is a funny reaction.  

(c) Having failed to renew Mr Kakwemeire’s contract because he could not bend to dishonesty, what has the minister done to ensure safety of lives of Ugandans?”  I have stated that Mr Kakwemeire, after having identified that they were fake drugs, he was terminated from working with the National Drug Authority. Why I am saying this is that I have got an internal memo from the National Drug Authority –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I am getting a technical problem. I do not know whether the answer, which the minister has, is in response to what is on the Order Paper or in response to what you have?

MR MUSISI: It is exactly what I gave him. I personally delivered this question as it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the minister?

MR MUSISI: To the minister’s office.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the answer is related to what he is saying.

MR MUSISI: Yes, I delivered this personally. So, my last bit of the question is part four of the question. (d) “Today Malaria has become resistant -(Interruption)

DR ALEX OKOT: Madam Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure, it is clearly stated that when a Member asked a question, he will only stand up and mention the question and the minister will respond. So, today I am really perturbed by the way we are proceeding. I believe that the honourable Member should have known how we should proceed and proceeded in accordance with our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem I have is that he was saying that, the way it is written on the Order Paper is not how we asked it. But, honourable Member, I think we agreed that preambles are not necessary; we just ask the question and get the answer.

MR MUSISI: But effectively the question remains the same, maybe just the last bit of it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just say question 11/04.

MR MUSISI: Thank you.  So, as it is.

7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague, hon. Patrick Musisi, Member of Parliament for Busiro South for the question raised. Just for purposes of clarity, what we have on the Order Paper is what we are responding to, and the copy of his letter, which we received, is here. But we will endeavour to respond nevertheless to some of the issues he has raised because the gist and the content of what he has raised is captured in the Order Paper.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to state very clearly that in 1993, Parliament of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am getting extra confused. The question regarding the answer to the first question has already been distributed to us.  The second question is shown on the Order Paper, but the question has already expressed concern about the nature of the question. As if that was not enough, the answer for the second question is not distributed. Why is there that inconsistency? 

CAPT MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I wish to maybe help my brother, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, to say that these are oral questions and within the procedures of Parliament, the responses of the minister are not usually circulated. But we will endeavour to circulate this as it were.

Madam Speaker, I wish to respond to the oral question raised by hon. Patrick Musisi. The question was, as he has raised very clearly, taking into account the preamble:

(a) “This having been an eye-opener, do we not have huge deposits of fake and dangerous drugs in the market?

(b) What controls does the ministry employ to see that such drugs are removed from the market, clinics and hospitals?

(c) Having failed to renew Mr Kakwemeire’s contract because he could not bend to the dishonesty, what has the minister done to ensure safety of life of people of Uganda?

(d) Today, malaria has become resistant to chloroquine or malaria-related treatment drugs, is the use of the fake drugs or the inferior drugs not the cause of this anomaly?”

Madam Speaker, I wish to respond as follows: One, the importation of drugs into the country. In 1993, we established, by a statute of Parliament, the establishment of the National Drug Authority. The monitoring, importation, distribution, storage and absence of expired drugs in the country is vested in the National Drug Authority (NDA) under the provisions of Section 5(d) and (e) of the National Drug Authority Policy and the Authority Act Cap. 206. NDA was put in place for the following measures to implement this mandate:

1. Registration of all drugs before importation.
2. Inspection of all manufacturing sites for compliance with good manufacturing practice.
3. Licensing of importers of pharmaceutical products.
4. Licensing of all drug distribution outlets.
5. Post marketing surveillance
6. Supervision of disposal of condemned and expired drugs or sub-standard drugs or counterfeit drugs in the country.

Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, according to the published data of managing drug supply by World Health Organisation and including the Ministry of Health, between three to five per cent of all the drugs circulating in any market, in any country, inevitably expire within the distribution time. I want to put it on record that the National Drug Authority has an effective surveillance and very effective implementation unit such that - for example, India. Before we established the National Drug Authority, India had over 20 thousand drug manufacturers. But when we established the National Drug Authority, the Government of Uganda, through the National Drug Authority was able, using the statute and the law as it were, to go in and inspect all these premises of these manufacturing plants before they were licensed by the National Drug Authority.

Therefore, the system which is in place, is to identify such expired drugs, which are there and to remove them from the distribution system. Uganda has such a system, and I want my colleague, hon. Musisi, to note that we have a system in place.  The National Drug Authority conducts a routine surveillance and removes any expired drugs, which are destroyed by incineration at Nakasongola where we have the current site of incineration. Steps are underway to construct a dedicated central drug incinerator for the same purpose in Kampala with a mechanism in place. Madam Speaker, I wish to assure the House and my brother hon. Musisi and the country at large that no huge deposits of fake drugs or dangerous drugs are in our market.

The other question, which was raised, was the question of the consignment of drugs that was impounded or imported from M/S Ningbo number two factory from China. Madam Speaker, I wish to state very clearly that this matter is before courts of law in our country, and in keeping with the normal practice of good governance, separation of powers especially the three pillars of Government, the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary, it would be subjudice for me to continue or to subject this matter to debate in this House. It would be inappropriate for me to comment on this matter.  

Madam Speaker, the other question was the employment of Mr Kakwemeire, who was with the National Drug Authority. I wish to state very clearly that Mr Kakwemeire’s contract expired on the 10 April 2003, and the National Drug Authority Board decided not to renew it for good reasons.  His end of service and arrangements were made to make sure that his benefits were paid to him in accordance with the National Drug Authority Personnel Manual, and this he did sign for.  

As to whether Mr Kakwemeire is the only qualified drug analyst in the country, I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that the National Drug Authority has a number of analysts with similar qualifications, which include three senior analysts. Consequently, National Drug Authority continues to analyse all drugs imported into the country and is in position to ensure safety of lives of all the people of Uganda. And I want to state very clearly that we have analysts in the National Drug Authority Control Laboratory, which is near Mulago. The senior analysts are Mr Peter Ssali and Mrs Annet Sekiyindi. The analysts are Mr Tarsis Byamugisha, Mr Glorious Turyasingura, Mr Chris Ntege and we have also very good laboratory assistants for this purpose.  Technicians are Mr Bahuhire, Mr Hashaka Andrew and Mr Okurut Simon. All these people are part of the dynamic team that the National Drug Authority has and the ministry has employed.

In respect to the resistance of malaria parasites to various drugs, Madam Speaker, this has got nothing to do with the inferior drugs as suggested by my brother, hon. Musisi. This is a matter, which is world over and it is a phenomenon arising from the complex factors, including the mutation in the parasites and prolonged use of these drugs. But the Ministry of Health with the recommendation of the World Health Organization has now recommended that rather than using Chloroquine - and in the past we used to use chloroquine with the combination of Fansidar SP. We have now, with the recommendation of World Health Organisation, adapted the use of Artemether, which is in place and does not have any side effects. I would suggest that Artenum, which is in place would be the one that hon. Musisi would in future, with the guidance of his doctor, be able to access to. 

We have a manager in place for Malaria programme, we have also got the Director General, Prof. Omaswa. It would be in order for my honourable colleague, and I would be very open to him, to receive him at an appropriate time and to see that the problems he has had in treatment of malaria maybe do not occur again. We are prepared to assist you where possible, even to have a confidential discussion with your doctor and the Director General, Prof. Omaswa, whenever you so feel.  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I wish to once again reassure the House and the country that the Ministry of Health, the National Drug Authority and other stakeholders are well positioned to ensure the quality of drugs that are imported and distributed in the country. The National Drug Authority is in place. We are continuing day by day to acquire effective ultra modern equipment, which we use for analysis. And I want to assure you that this regular surveillance that we carry out impromptu in the private clinics, in the private pharmacies and also in our hospitals, the quality assurance we have put on the ground within the health sector strategic plan is in place. We will not leave any stone unturned in making sure that every life of every citizen of this country is protected. I thank you.

7.52
MR JOHN DRAZU ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the first question, I want the minister to clarify the following: There are reports that proceeds from the Global Fund are being stolen. Two, there are further reports that some unscrupulous persons are re-exporting drugs meant for AIDS patients. Thank you.

7.53
PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for his response. I just want to look at one issue and that is, his proposal to use Artenum. Artenum costs Shs 15,000 a dose; Artemether, the cheapest costs Shs 10,000. Can the minister tell me, at the level of poverty in the country, how many people can afford this, especially in the rural areas where Artenum is not there, even Artemether is not there? You are advising hon. Musisi just because is a Member of Parliament, he can afford. Can we know whether you had put in place some places in the rural areas where Artenum and Artemether can be accessed by the ordinary person?  

Secondly, even Artemether itself, I used it once, but even one dose could not work. I had to take it, spread it over another week, then I was advised to take another dose. So, honourable minister, the issue is not as easy as that. People are dying like cockroaches in the rural areas.  

One time, honourable Minister, there was importation of nets. Those which could be accessed by the ordinary person, which cost Shs 4,000, were going to be burnt just because they were not treated. But then the treated ones were not there and they are very expensive. So, what really does the ministry expect the ordinary person to do? You go to Mulago Hospital and then they write a prescription and you come out as you went in, and children start convulsing as they are going out because they are not treated. Can we be really advised on what we can tell our local people in the constituencies, now that the minister has said that Chloroquine cannot work?

By the way, people do not know the dose of Quinine that is supposed to be three times a day for a week. They go to these local people, they give them three tablets as if they prescribing Fansidar, and then the whole thing is incubated in the body until - people do not know what to do! Mr Minister, can we be advised?

7.55
MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just few observations and clarifications, which I am seeking from the honourable Minister: One, under the Global Fund support to local governments, I have seen under the first disbursement of funds to the public sector especially the column of Malaria. I want to find out from the honourable Minister, what criteria do they use in allocating these funds and how do they assess that this district really needs this fund for the Malaria fight? 

I know very well that the western region, and Masindi in particular, we are greatly affected by Malaria and I have seen in your first disbursement in November, Masindi was left out and other districts. I want to know why because people are suffering from Malaria, you visit a parish health centre you find there 100 cases of Malaria and these are children, and children are dying. Can you tell us the mechanism you used in disbursing this money to these other districts?

Two, I am happy to note, Madam Speaker, that at least the National Drug Authority has been involved in regular surveillance in these pharmaceutical shops and in the clinics. At one time, I had visited one of the clinics here in Kampala and they entered and I saw every one running up and down and they went even behind the curtains to check on the drugs, which they had in stock. I am happy, but again we get scared especially when we visit our doctors, when they prescribe to us some medicines, they advise us not to visit the Indian pharmaceutical shops because they are not sure and their worry is that some of those drugs are not up to the standards. We want to be rest assured that some of these pharmaceutical shops, and especially the Indian pharmaceutical shops, have the right drugs. Please help us. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, this is related to the Ministry of Health. Recently, there was in the media stories about shortage of condoms and especially Engabu was talked about even by the President and you know, a certain part of the country has been using Engabu so much. I want the minister to assist us and to put to rest, especially during this festive season, to assure this country and that part of the country that condoms will be really in stock and enough. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.58
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I was very impressed when the Minister of State for Health recently called a meeting in Mbale where Members of Parliament from the eastern region were able to discuss Malaria and how we can contribute to the struggle against Malaria. This was very useful. I want to commend him for this.  But I would also want to know whether he has strategies for involving Members more effectively in fighting these other diseases like Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and so on and so forth because I think our role is still important. I know that in some districts, the directors of district health services do not welcome Members of Parliament to go and discuss these issues with them. So, I am trying to find out if there are other additional strategies for involving us in this.

My second question is to find out whether you are sure that all the pharmaceutical companies, which have been established here, are actually producing effective medicine because there are a lot of question marks to some of these drugs, which are being produced here locally especially by Indian companies. I have nothing against Indians, but this is what is happening.  

Then on the question of HIV/AIDS, I know that we are specifically discussing global funds, but could you tell us a little more about what has happened to CHAI projects, I think they got some money and all of a sudden things died up. 

My last question was related to what hon. Bintu has already spoken about. There has not been a clear statement from the Director General of Medical Services about the Engabu condoms. Are they effective? Those who have been using them are they already infected, what is the fate of these people?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask really that we just get a few questions and remain within the subject?

8.01
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  My first question is related to Capt. Byaruhanga’s question to the minister. It is unfortunate that after mentioning that colossal sum of money, which we get in regard to those defects, no mention has been made about how far Uganda has gone in venturing through its research namely, the Joint Research Centre in Mengo in regard to what discoveries, what developments we have made because we are answerable to the international community, which has been giving us money. It would be absurd if we report nothing in terms of advancement in regard to modern research so far carried out. The second question –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, how does our own role of research come into this question?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Joint Research Centre in Mengo is receiving money from Government in regard to the cure of AIDS.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but the question of hon. Byaruhanga was specific to the funds from the Global Fund.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, but if you remember the Prime Minister answered my question and referred me to the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this question was asked by hon. Byaruhanga, it was specific, “How are we utilising money from the Global Fund?”

MR LUKYAMUZI: I appended that question with my question and it is available in the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not recollect that one.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, my second question is about the fake expired drugs. This is a very serious matter. Whether the case is subjudice or not, any mention about the presence of expired drugs is a serious matter. Is the minister aware and can he assure us that there are no fake drugs in the National Drug Authority stores? If so, is the minister aware that I have information here to the effect that, last week four lorries carried expired condoms to an unknown destination. I would like to know whether it was the Engabu species of the condom.

Madam Speaker, is the minister aware that in the Government hospitals right now as we speak, there is no medicine to address Malaria, including Chloroquine? It is not there! The medicine to be fake or expired were predominantly Malaria cures, what guarantee is there that what we consume from the private medical stores is not bad for our lives?

Finally, whether the matter is subjudice or not, there are also available reports, Madam Speaker.  This matter is not new to us, the IGG has intervened in regard to the interdiction of two officers who were working in the National Drug Authority; those officers were interdicted. As we speak now, much as the matter is in court, they have been reinstated on work. Can the minister explain why there is that excess?

I was proposing humbly, Madam Speaker, that any mention in regard to countries like China, where there are doubts about medicaments being imported or intercepted, raises a lot of alarm. It is true that the companies mentioned in regard to the production of fake drugs are Chinese. Why do we not make some inquiries through the appropriate committee so that we get the true story of what is happening because anything impacting on life is something you cannot take lightly? Thank you very much.

8.06
MR PETER PATRICK OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable Minister mentioned about the effectiveness of the National Drug Authority. I come very far at the end of this country, and the difficult area I am talking about is an island. I would like to have further assurance from the minister whether he is saying that the National Drug Authority has effective and good people, and those who are well facilitated whether they do reach Sigulu Island because I have in many cases reached these areas and found the contrary. You clearly meet somebody in a clinic selling drugs, some of them are expired, even when they are not expired - in other incidences, Madam Speaker, you basically find drugs indicated “Not for sale” being sold in some clinics.

As if that is not enough, Madam Speaker, there is also the element of people who brag and move around as people from National Drug Authority, impersonators. I do not know whether the minister is aware of this because in many cases, I have received a lot of complaints from clinic managers and people who deal in drugs, somebody has intercepted them, has confiscated all their drugs. Even when they have genuine receipts, they have genuine travel documents, they have their certificates you find somebody confiscating their drugs. If you follow up, you fail even to get this person. I would like to have an assurance from the minister on that very particular aspect.  

The other thing, Madam Speaker, maybe is not in this very aspect but it is along the same line. I will use this opportunity to inform the minister that there is this health centre II arrangement that we have. In my constituency, this arrangement has been left to the local governments to foot the bills of the nursing assistants. So many magnificent houses with good arrangements, but the nursing assistants who are in these areas are not paid. Some have spent 28 months, some have spent two months and others have spent 10 months. What they are basically doing is to receive drugs that the minister sends every other time and they sell. They say that they have to live. They were appointed, they were given all the documents, but at the end of the day, the local governments are not able to pay them and they are doing risky business and they are letting the country down. To some extent they have gone ahead to even charge money. What I am talking about is not small money; they are charging Shs 2,500 in other areas Shs 3,000. Madam Speaker, I would really request that the minister gives me some little bit of clarification about that. I thank you very much.

8.09
MR NASANI NABETA (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just asking two questions in regard to the National Drug Authority (NDA). I think you remember that in February, I presented a petition by Jinja drug sellers in regard to the capacity of NDA. In fact, some of the people who were arresting and harassing the people in Jinja were no longer in the NDA at the time of the petition.

Some of the drug sellers at the time were alleging that NDA was discriminating them and was actually leaving the Indian pharmacies in place and actually wiping out most of the Ugandan pharmacists or the drug sellers. So, I would like to ask the minister, does the NDA really have the capacity to know and to carry out its fulfilment of making sure that actually there are right people, because these drug sellers buy drugs from these Indian traders.  So, how do you start closing people who are actually buying drugs from the importers?

The other issue I also wanted to bring out is that, when you go to the doctors sometimes they will say that if you buy Chloroquine from United Kingdom it is okay, but if you buy Chloroquine from another place then it is not okay. Does the NDA have the technical capacity to find out the contents of particular Chloroquine from everywhere to see that actually the Chloroquine being imported in this country is of standard?  Actually from scientific evidence, we are told that Chloroquine still works if you buy the actual contents of what Chloroquine is supposed to be. Does the NDA really have the capacity to know the difference? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

8.11
MR PATRICK MUSISI (Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much. This is a further question to the honourable Minister. According to the information I have here, there have been drugs that have been cleared internally within NDA when the drugs had already been condemned. I have got an internal memo here clearing drugs that had already been condemned. Therefore, when I get the flowery appraises from the honourable Minister, I am very much worried that he does not know what is happening under his own department.

Furthermore, when he talked about one of the analysts having his contract terminated, the honourable Minister would at least try to be clear on this very issue that the result of terminating Mr Kakwemeire’s contract was not basically because his contract had expired, it is because he had – I have got letters here of correspondence showing that the same person had been viewed as being insubordinate to the very fact that he could not accept inferior products to enter our market. It is this so-called insubordination that led to his earlier suspension and eventually his contract was not renewed.

8.12
MR JOHN C. ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four questions for the honourable Minister: One, my understanding of the Global Fund is that it is a medically oriented project, which is supposed to help us in our health sector. Aware of that, honourable Minister, how come that in this huge list of all the partner organisations I do not see organisations that are technically well capable of handling health issues? For example, I am beginning to get shocked to see that there is no well-known organisation such as AMREF. I do not see the virus research institute, which is in Entebbe. I do not see clinics like Marie Stopes clinic. How come there are basically these organisations, for example, World Vision is originating from the United States and they are well known for being more capable in socially oriented services than medically oriented issues? 

Finally, I would like to use this opportunity to ask the minister whether his ministry is aware of an internationally well known virus known “West Nile Virus” a kind of virus that even was put on the international alert of the United States Government warning people visiting Uganda that there is a disease called West Nile Virus. And as matter of fact, I do not know whether the honourable Minister participated in the negotiations of this Global Fund. But as far as I remember, one of the secretaries of state for health in the United States of America shortly before the signing of approving Uganda to get this Global Fund, he joked by saying that he hoped through this Global Fund the West Nile Virus will be fought so that Uganda’s image does not continue to be bad. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please respond.

8.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank all colleagues for the questions you have asked. I would like to be very brief in responding to the issues, which have been raised. One, “The global funds being stolen” that is not correct and I am not aware. The ministry is not aware of any funds that are being diverted, stolen or in any case being misappropriated. That is not a correct position.  

The other point is the export of ARVs out of this country. You know the management of drugs in this country is quite clear. The National Drug Authority or any other pharmacy cannot take drugs out of this country without the authority of the National Drug Authority. Now, first of all, the ARVs are drugs that are clearly regulated. The ARVs are very sensitive drugs because if we do not manage the ARVs properly - and that is why you find that even in establishment of the system for treatment of HIV/AIDS in our country, we have had first to build the infrastructure, to train the people and ensure that we have the clinical capacity to manage the treatment of HIV and AIDS in our society. Because if the drugs are not properly taken, or not being managed properly, the use of the drugs are abused then the virus is bound to mutate. The mutation of the virus will cause a much bigger problem again because the strain would not be able to adhere to the cocktail of drugs that we import into the country. 

So, it is important for you to note that some of the people misrepresent the issues, and you know that our members of the press sometimes do not go into depths to find out the actuals on the ground. Some of the members of the press suffer from intellectual laziness, inability to access information and obtain the correct information.  

The issue of the artenum or althamythane. The position is that yes, artenum or althamythane is an expensive drug, but because Malaria is the biggest killer in the African Continent. Last year alone we lost close to three million people to Malaria; Uganda alone we lose over 70,000 people to Malaria and about 50 per cent of those are children. You will note that between 40 to 70 per cent of the outpatient cases are really mainly Malaria and that is why you find that because of the resistance to Chloroquine, to Fansidar SP we have now gone to the world recommended prescription of artenum. 

But I want to put, honourable colleagues, to rest by saying that starting from this financial year artenum and althamythane will be part of our PHC kit. It will be made available free of charge in all our hospitals, in all clinics and our people will be able to access these drugs, which are better improved and also approved by World Health Organisation.

Now, the issue of dosage: I want to say that the solution really to the management of Malaria is in our ability to prevent. Because I want to tell you that, I do note sometimes the arguments being raised by my brother, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is talking of dosage and we did discover that some of the drugs actually are sub-standard, and the Committee of Finance and Planning, when we were investigating and evaluating the functions of National Drug Stores, when we came to our conclusion that it should be retained, we discovered that: One, National Drug Stores buys in bulk and because they buy in bulk, they get discount and their drugs are cheap. Two, they get drugs with long shelf life. Three, they also get drugs, which are not normally found in other stores. 

We recommended to the Minister of Health that: One, in order to minimize fake drugs and under dose on the market, they should not privatise National Drug Stores because they supply the right drugs and deliver them to the health centres. We also recommended that, you should not send money to local governments because they are encouraging the market of these sub-standard drugs because they go and buy drugs all over the place.  

Lastly and most important is that for them they give credit to Government, which others do not do. So, I am asking the minister, why have you not implemented the recommendation of the committee because if you had done so, most of these issues would not be arising of under dose, of expired drugs. I thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Rwamirama for his observation and respond as follows: One, the National Medical Stores was established by Government, and it is a strategic and core component of the management of the health management systems in the country. Now, you know to maintain transparency, procurement has got to be advertised and in the Board of the National Medical Store, there are very clear standing regulations that have been drawn in procurement of drugs. One of them is that the people who are on the board are people who are qualified, some of the best brains we have in the country in pharmacology as pharmacists, as lawyers and so on and so forth.  

The position however is that, whereas in management of goods that we have in our stores, first in and first out is the criteria of releasing drugs. But I want you to note that the need to underscore many factors in managing such a complex sector, one of the things was that National Medical Stores did not have adequate working capital and that is one of the recommendations you did submit to us. Lack of adequate working capital, we now had to go and negotiate with our development partners and the Danish Government has now come in and made also certain firm recommendations, which we are implementing. 

 I want to say that because of the recommendations you gave to us, the recommendations of course Parliament made to us, the sector committee and also our development partners, we have not reached to a point where the Danish who had made a commitment to give Uganda six million kroners have now increased to 17 million kroners.  That means that we will now be able to hold even some of the drugs that we are lacking, and sometimes when you are procuring or when you are making orders, you will find that if these drugs are lacking in the store you would recommend a second re-procurement centre. 

But the point is that the Director General and the policy of the Ministry of Health is that, all Government institutions, referral hospitals, district hospitals and all health centres, procurement at the district must be made first at the National Medical Stores for purposes of potency and to ensure that  the quality of drugs supplied to our units are those that are approved at our national level. 

Now, the position raised on the issue of Malaria: Madam Speaker, I want to say that Malaria, as I said, is one area we need to seriously concentrate on. The high infant mortality rate we have in the country is a consequence of Malaria. The high maternal mortality ratio has also got a connection to Malaria –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we would like to put an end to today’s work. I would really appreciate if Members allow the minister to finish so that we go home.

CAPT. MUKULA: So, Madam Speaker, I want to say that Government of Uganda is addressing the issues as follows: One, we intend to procure and we will have 1.5 million nets by September this year so that we ensure that our children and the pregnant women can now be protected and insulated against some of these mosquitoes -(Ms Bintu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it so burning?

MS BINTU: The honourable Minister has said that the procurement is meant to be fulfilled by September this year and we are already in December, we are soon entering 2005. I am seeking clarification whether he meant by September 2005.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, I want to give some important bit of information with reference to the figures, which have been articulated by the minister namely, the predominant age of Malaria within children. The information I want to give is that the children between one year and six years in Africa or in Uganda predominately die of malnutrition. So, when Malaria comes to invade a body without a defensive mechanism, it just breaks the bones. That is the information I want to give you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let the minister finish and we go home. If it is not too burning please –(Mrs Tuma rose_)- is it a matter of life and death?

MRS TUMA: It is to do with nets. Some two years ago, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health helped us with some nets, some Members of Parliament, and we were able to help our people in the villages and they were very grateful. But it has been very difficult to access those nets of late, and now that the procurement is made, where can we access these nets? Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I would like to say that yes, you are right, September next financial year as it were.  

The issue raised by hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi on the statistics, I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi.  Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the biggest problem, and this is the statistics drawn by the Ministry of Health, the biggest killer in Africa and in the Sub-Saharan region is Malaria. The figures I have clearly quoted are very clear. The position is that nutrition is a secondary factor, but the primary cause is the anopheles mosquito, which bites our children and they carry the parasites of Malaria, infect our children and cause them to die. That is the cause that we are talking about.  

Now, the issue of funds allocated to the public sector: First of all, I want also to say that we are taking appropriate measures like indoor residual spraying, the use of nets, we also intend to introduce DDT at an appropriate time once Parliament has sanctioned it and so on and so forth. All these are means of addressing the problems on the ground. The nets will be distributed through the districts and I want to assure honourable members that once these have been brought, we will make a very clear statement. And in the policy statement in the next financial year we will put a criteria, which will be brought before Parliament here, on how we are going to manage the distribution of these nets and if there is any input that is required, we would be very well guided once Members of Parliament debate the policy statement.  

The position of allocation of funds to the districts: As the honourable Member of Parliament said, we have a clear criteria and the resources that we have put in, all this resources, which come from the Global Fund, go to the district. We have had what we call a first line approach to deal with the key areas, and in the second line disbursement we would now come in and focus on districts that are prone to Malaria, and I am very sure that the districts of Masindi and Hoima will be able to benefit from our second line approach. We are now dealing with the critical areas as you know this is the first stage, and as we receive the resources we will continue to implement what we call the priority points in the implementation of this strategy as recommended by the implementing or the national coordinating committee.  

The statement on condoms: I want to say that we will be issuing a very clear statement and the Director General, Prof. Omaswa, will be issuing a statement to the nation. We do not have a shortage on condoms; and I repeat, we do not have a shortage on condoms in the country. The position is that because we withdrew - because any batch that comes into the country of those imported is always tested. The other batches passed the test criteria, it is one of the batches that we had a random test that we subjected to the withdrawal from the market. 

I want to assure you that this does not mean that the Engabu condoms are bad. It is because we want to ensure that any item, before it is used in the market, it is checked and because of this criterion we are able to safeguard our people before the condoms were released into the market.  That is why I want to assure you that we have capacity to deal with the demand of condoms especially now as we enter the festivities of Christmas and New Year. But I would like to appeal to you honourable colleagues as you go to the districts and to your constituencies, to request our people to adhere to the ABC policy. It is the only way we can save our nation from this pandemic.

Malaria: “How shall we involve the Members of Parliament in some of these other ailments apart from Malaria, Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and Diabetes, for example?” Yes, I think that is a good point.  We will take note of that and ensure that we have common dialogue, regular interface so that Members of Parliament are regularly involved because we note that the districts sometimes do not involve Members of Parliament when the resources are sent to the districts. The chairmen, the councillors tend to hijack this position. I think we will now use it at our national level to see how best we can be able to work together so that the releases, the details of our implementation of the health sector strategic plan I and II can be shared between us, apart from the policy that we release.

MR ALINTUMA: Honourable Minister, you have raised a very interesting point. According to the list that you have given us as Annex, I had perceived it that the money from your ministry once approved goes directly to the implementing agent. But according to the statement you have raised, the element of the districts has come in, is it that the money is sent to the district and then the district gives it to the implementing agent, or you do it directly from the ministry?

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, as I said in the opening remarks, we have a criteria of working with the public units and that is also through the district, and also units, which are for profits, and those for no profit. The position is, once we release the money to these other organisations, be it CBOs, NGOs and so on, they will now be able to respond directly to the Global Fund headquarters. But we have also got resources, as you have seen in the circular and the documents we have given you, that go direct to the districts. This will be managed by Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and a district director of health services.

There is also a criterion of implementation. Maybe we will have to come out with a much more explicit position on how resources released to the districts are utilised, and I would like to assure you that by Tuesday next week we will have a much more detailed criteria on how the resources are utilised. But the funds for the NGOs go direct to them and the funds for the public go direct, as I said, to the CAO and the district director of health services. But we will have a more detailed position on how these districts should be able to utilise this money.

In regard to the question of IGG, those who were interdicted but have come back and are working in the National Drug Authority, I am not aware of any.  All those who were interdicted are still out.

I was reading about the container, which has been released. That is not correct. The position is that the container is part of the exhibit in court and it has not been released. So, what you read in the Monitor is part of the uncertainties and lack of follow-up of the correct information that the press suffers from. A container is part and parcel of the court exhibit and it cannot be released.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that in regard to Sigulu islands, there is regular visit. And I want to assure you, honourable colleague, and as I promised we will be able to go to your constituency and to your district, and even go to Sigulu islands so that we can be able to ascertain the correct information on the ground. But in terms of follow-up, there is a district drug officer at the district headquarters and our officers randomly carry out these checks, we have vehicles, which go out and carry out these checks.

In regard to impersonators, those must be arrested.  As usual you know that Uganda we are not living in heaven. There are people who are sometimes prophets of doom and even impersonate Members of Parliament.  So, when that case does happen, he should be arrested and in most cases we have arrested most of these people and put them where they belong once they have gone through the court process. 

In regard to the sale of drugs, again this is a matter, which is administrative in your constituency. We will follow it up and ensure that we do not allow the staff to sell drugs. But we need to strengthen the management on the ground –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am really appealing to you to allow the minister to finish.  It is coming to 9.00 p.m. we have been here since 2.20 p.m.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is in his interest about sale of drugs.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can share that information later.  Minister, please conclude.

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will share with my handsome Member of Parliament some of this information. 

The issue of discrimination: The locals and Indians in Jinja Municipality.  Definitely, they know that the policy of Government of Uganda is not to discriminate and if there are any cases of that nature, where you have sighted unfairness or uncertainty or even impartiality by officers or men within the National Drug Authority, I will be very glad to receive that information so that we can be able to take appropriate action. But we are just, we are fair and we do not subject anybody to unfair treatment.

Of course, there is a tendency for some of the people to assume that drugs imported from United Kingdom or Germany or from United States are better drugs than the drugs from India. But we have got within the pharmacology aspect the potency, which is a measure, which the National Drug Authority uses to ascertain the quality of drugs to ensure that the content of the drug is measured within the recommended pharmacology and the potency of the drug brought into the country. So, I want to assure you that whatever drugs brought into the country meet the required minimum of World Health Organisation in terms of drugs imported into Uganda.

The issue again of my brother, drugs being cleared when they are condemned raised by hon. Musisi.  This is not correct. It is not correct that the ministry or Government of Uganda, National Drug Authority, can actually clear drugs that are condemned and allow them to go to the market. You would have seen a major problem in the market. But I want to assure you, honourable colleague, and I would like to invite hon. Musisi, Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, I will take him through a conducted tour of the kind of functions the National Drug authority goes through and take him out to the inspection to inspect our testing centres; and also have abrupt tests or checks in some of the pharmacies and you will note how efficient the National Drug Authority has tried to be within a short time.

Termination of Mr Kakwemeire and the contract, which expired: I want to say that Kakwemeire’s contract expired and like any other arm of government the board or the management team has got a criteria before your contract is renewed. He is not the first one we have terminated and he is not going to be the last one we are going to terminate.  I want to assure you that Mr Kakwemeire is a qualified pharmacist, and I am very sure he can get a job elsewhere. Right now is surviving like any other pharmacist. We have got over 170 pharmacists in this country and Kakwemeire is one of those pharmacists. He will get a job.

The issue of health units in the country, HIV/AIDS, district hospitals: I want to say, Madam Speaker, that the issue, which was raised by hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi in regard to the drugs or the research, the AYAVI centre, which is in Entebbe, the global funds are not meant for research; the global funds are meant to be for HIV and AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis. AYAVI has a different funding component, and I want to say that it was only yesterday when they had another evaluation – I mean they had a party, but within that time they carried out an evaluation position. There are reports, which are available, and I would like to say that we will be able to carry out and circulate to Parliament the current reports from AYAVI and the progress that is being made on HIV and AIDS research vaccine and I want to assure hon. Lukyamuzi, that you will be able to get that report.

I would like to thank, Madam Speaker, all the colleagues who have been able to raise issues, which we have attempted to answer. It has been a long day, but I would like to thank colleagues who have sat until now to listen to the responses and raise questions which are important for your constituents. I want to assure you on behalf of the Minister of Health and the entire team, that we will continue to irrigate you and support you in your constituencies with the difficulties that we have. But I want to assure you of our political support from the sector.  I thank you.  (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for your patience and perseverance. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning to continue with the Order Paper.

(The House rose 8.43 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 17 December 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)


