Friday, 15th December 2000

The House met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday when we adjourned, we were at the point of pronouncing ourselves on the Motion. We had reached a stage where the Minister was going to move a Motion for the Bill to be read a Third Time. But we have not realised the necessary quorum for that purpose. I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes so that we can mobilise and get the necessary quorum.

(The House was suspended at 11.13 a.m. due to lack of a quorum)

(On resumption at 11.32 a.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: If there are any hon. Members outside the Chamber, I request them to come in. We are trying to raise quorum.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, as we wait to ascertain the quorum, I would just like to seek clarification from you on a matter that, in my view, is very important to the procedure of Parliament. Parliament in its wisdom did resolve to institute a Select Committee to investigate the Ministry of Defence. Yesterday’s headlines and today’s headlines in the New Vision seem to have mounted a protracted attack on our Colleagues, the hon. Members of Parliament on this Select Committee. One of the attacks was from hon. Miria Matembe, the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, as reported by the New Vision. 

Parliament in its wisdom did mandate this Select Committee to carry out these duties. As this Committee is continuing to get more information, and the terms of reference were very clear, they are being ridiculed and the integrity of Parliament is being put to question.  

I would like to know, did the Select Committee have the mandate to proceed to carry out this inquiry? And if it did, what is Parliament doing about saving the integrity of these very credible Members of Parliament? Because the whole matter could be put to question, and some of the political rivals, in a period of four months or so, would now use this opportunity to attack our Colleagues. I would like to seek clarification on that.

MS EGUNYU: Mr. Speaker, with regard to what hon. Mike Mukula has raised, I would also like to know if these Members of Parliament did not have the mandate to travel to investigate the choppers, and how the money was realised to enable them travel.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let me start with the clarification sought by the hon. Mukula. It is correct to say that this august House by its resolution mandated the Select Committee to investigate certain matters pertaining to the Ministry of Defence, which are stated in the resolution. And I take it that any undertaking or any trip they decided to undertake was within their authority to execute that mandate. If they decided to go to Arua, for example, it would be up to them, because they would be looking for evidence, which would form part of their report. And I think that is what you asked them to do.  

There may be some other problems connected with the circumstances under which they left this country to go wherever they have gone, but in all fairness, I think this is a matter that should not, for the time being, generate debate. The hon. Members are yet to come back, and it will only be fair for them to be around when any explanations are being given with regard to the circumstances under which they went. But certainly, my understanding is that it is part of the execution of the mandate, which this House gave them.  

You mandated them to undertake that assignment, and the trip they made, maybe in their own judgement, was necessary in order for them to get whatever evidence they wanted to get. So, I suggest that we leave it at that until they come back, so that they are here to give further explanation.  

Hon. Members, I am still having a difficulty with raising a quorum. Why can’t we just for a change do one thing and mobilise ourselves this afternoon and dispose of this matter?

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas you asked a rhetorical question, definitely the people who can answer that question are not here. Therefore, to think that between now and afternoon they will get your message, is putting it rather steeply. I would propose that in your wisdom, you adjourn the House to Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, I was actually banking on your capacity to mobilise your Colleagues who are not here. That is why I was making that suggestion.

MR. ANDRUALE AWUZU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would it be procedurally correct if you again adjourned the House for another 15 minutes, so that we can raise the required quorum? Now we need only about 15 more people, so I think that is better than adjourning the House to the afternoon. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We are only lacking six people!

MR. TIM LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, we have less than 25 Ministers here now. If only the Ministers, who are about 60, could call some of the other Ministers to come, then we would not have a problem.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, if we could plan our business in the House to start speaking in English and then later on we go to making laws, maybe it would help. Because once we are at that level, many people come in, but when we are at the Committee Stage, we are not able to raise quorum. So, maybe we could restructure our business.

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, is hon. Okumu Ringa in order to say that in this House we speak any other language other than English? 

THE SPEAKER: I did not quite get hon. Okumu’s contribution. 

MR. DICK NYAI: He said that we should come here and first start speaking English and then proceed to making law.  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: But that is what we do.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, today is Friday and this afternoon a lot of our Colleagues will be going upcountry. I want to request you, since we only have a few people need, and if the hon. Members will be co-operative, to wait for a few minutes rather than come back in the afternoon, so that when we leave we just go. If we come the second time, then you can adjourn.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying exactly what hon. Andruale was saying. 

MR. SSEMBAJJA: Mr. Speaker, knowing very well that some of us have to go for prayers, and we respect God, if we are not here in the afternoon, then you will realise that we are also doing a service to ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: The impression I get is that you do not wish to come in the afternoon. I will therefore adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 11.46 a.m and adjourned until Tuesday, 19th December 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)



