Thursday, 13 December 2007

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. The bad news is that our colleague Michael Ocula had an accident last night as he was going to his home around Kireka/Namugongo. I have been to Kadic Hospital Bukoto to see him; he is in the private wing, room 3A. I was able to hold a conversation with him. He sustained two fractures, which will be attended to tomorrow. So, that is the news. 

Honourable members, we had planed to have a break for Christmas around 20th but I see some interruption that may come next week. We could have Idd and another function in Entebbe that may take most of you. Therefore, I am appealing to you that when we handle the business today; let us curtail it so long as the impact is made on any particular business. We may not have three days next week, we may have one or two. That is why, in order to clear the business, we should curtail some of the contributions that we make so long as the impact is made. 

2.36
MR ISSA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues, Members of Parliament. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday I was reading the New Vision newspaper on the first page and besides that I happen to have had an opportunity to attend a meeting of anti-corruption, which was at Hotel Royale. I was greatly disturbed especially by the manner in which Members of the public and public servants have always tried to devalue and undermine the integrity of this Parliament. There was a statement, which was made by the Inspector-General of Government herself describing Members of Parliament as idle people and wasting a lot of time here discussing only their own emoluments.

I think it is the right time that Members of Parliament should rise up and demonstrate to the people of this country that this institution needs to be respected. Not only to stop there, Mr Speaker, the IGG was summoned by the parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and she stubbornly refused to appear before this committee and went ahead to say, “How can I appear before an idle and dormant committee when I have a lot of work?” I think these statements put even the integrity of our IGG into question because Article 227 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda talks about the independence of the inspectorate. I want to quote Article 227 which reads: “The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority and shall only be responsible to Parliament.” 

The last five words of the above are very important to me as a Member of Parliament and, therefore, call for co-existence between Parliament and the Inspectorate of Government if we are to achieve the sole objectives, which are enshrined in this Constitution. But for the IGG not to consider this important Article in the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what is your complaint?

MR ISSA OTTO: My complaint is that I think as Parliament we should condemn these kinds of statements from a public servant and we should make it very clearly known to some of these officers that the integrity and value of this Parliament is very important. As a matter of fact –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you my colleague for giving way. The Member is raising very serious matters particularly touching the integrity of Parliament. Indeed I too read the same story yesterday and it was particularly disturbing where the IGG is quoted saying that Members of Parliament are wasting time just debating increments of their salaries. 

The information I want to give is that earlier this year there was a kind of stand-off when the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs wanted to interface with the IGG. She also went to the press to castigate Parliament, “I cannot come there, I am not responsible to Parliament; I cannot account to Parliament,” but to my surprise in the committee’s report the IGG’s budget was passed. Is there no way really we can run in tandem; not that really we want Parliament to overshadow the IGG - but where even the President acknowledges Parliament as the third arm of Government, but now an institution comes to undermine Parliament with which that institution ought to be working with! Is there a way we as Parliament first of all, the way we are being treated: maligned, degraded and put to shame unfairly and also the way how Parliament seems to be unable to assert itself to the extent where one defies Parliament but Parliament proceeds to pass their budget, is there a way how such a practice can stop?  

The information is that this is not new. It has been persisting, it is ongoing and Government itself seems not to be coming out to question or put the IGG to order. I thank you.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much for the information.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is a serious matter. I do not know how to handle it but in the first place, we have to correct facts: Parliament has not increased its salary; the salary which Members of Parliament are getting – this Shs 1.4 million was determined at the time hon. Mayanja Nkangi was the Minister of Finance. This was in the Sixth Parliament. Therefore, the question of Members of Parliament increasing their salary whenever they sit does not arise. That is a fact. The fact is that salaries of Members of Parliament -(Applause)- have not been increased since hon. Mayanja Nkangi was a Member of Parliament. 

We had hon. Ssendaula and now we have hon. Suruma but the salary of Members of Parliament, which is Shs 1.4 million, has never been increased. In any case, the salary of Members of Parliament is not determined here; it is determined by the commission. It is the commission to make negotiations to determine it. So the question of you sitting here to discuss that one does not arise. 

However, you are talking about an important office, that is, the Inspectorate of Government. I think that there is need for all agencies of Government to work together. We are not at cross purposes; there is need for harmony between the Executive and Parliament; between Parliament and the Judiciary; between Human Rights and the Inspectorate of Government et cetera. So if what you have said is true, I think there is need for all the concerned to sit down and see how best to work together without demeaning one another. 

The leadership over this is the leadership of the Executive because when we talk about Government many times we talk about the Executive. The Executive is the head of the three arms of Government in the sense that the President is part of the Executive. So I do not know what the Leader of Government Business - the Prime Minister is here if he has anything to say about the complaint of hon. Otto and hon. Ssekikubo. Maybe let us hear from hon. Butime before we hear from the Prime Minister.

2.45
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just to add a few points before the Prime Minister comes in, I think that the IGG needs assistance; she needs counselling because she is firing in every corner. If you are an institution, you do not attack other institutions especially institutions, which are allies to your work. Parliament is definitely an ally to the work of the IGG and the IGG herself. Firing at Parliament is absolutely unnecessary because Parliament can also wait for you at an appropriate time and deal with you conclusively. So if I were the IGG, I would not fire in every direction because through that firing, you can even kill your allies and friendly forces. I think she does not know who her friendly forces are. 

She has gone on to criticise ministers who went to see the hon. Brig. Jim Muhwezi at Luzira and those who stood surety for him. People have a right to stand surety for any person; those are individuals. To attack ministers is also unnecessary because ministers are also allies to the IGG. 

She has gone on to say that she was appointed by God. (Laughter) That is what she said. Appointed by God; protected by God. Now, who was not appointed by God? Who is not protected by God? So you can see, I think she really needs counselling. Maybe if there is a friend here who went to school with her or somebody she respects, you should go and sit with her and counsel her. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to provide additional information that in addition to pronouncing that she was chosen by God, she has actually made her office extremely difficult to access. I had an issue, which required her intervention and for three months I attempted to go to her office but she basically blocked me and refused that she does not want to meet Members of Parliament. Even when we at one time met at the lift, I was advised that, “You cannot travel with her in the same lift -(Laughter)- in the building there. So really to add to what hon. Butime is saying, she needs to be counselled because it seems there is a problem in the way she handles the public and the way she interprets her office to be. 

I was shocked that if I, a Member of Parliament, cannot be given an opportunity to see her for three months - I had to write to her and express my displeasure as a Member of Parliament because I had an issue, which required her intervention but she refused basically and I was even refused to move with her in a lift! I was told that once she comes, she travels in the lift alone. I found it very strange. So really I want the Leader of Government Business to take this issue as very serious because as Members of Parliament, we also need to be respected and Parliament as an institution not only requires respect from Government officials but also from the public. That is the information I wanted to provide. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I was personally invited for that function at Hotel Imperial Royale but I was embarrassed that that is what I had been invited for. The way the judge behaved was really not called for. The statements made about Members of Parliament, the leadership of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, the members of that committee; it was not called for. If I did not have another meeting I was ready to answer her from there. Unfortunately, I left earlier. 

But the concerns raised by Members - the way it appeared in the papers – they even left out other things, which were mentioned by the IGG. She alluded to so many things about the committee. We know the committee is led by a legal person who knows the law, but for the IGG to go ahead and impute bad motives on Parliament and the leadership of Parliament was not called for. 

Our rules are very clear that if committees need to be clarified, they may call – we have even met the President. If the committee can meet the President, who is the IGG to come and attack Members of Parliament? This institution –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is something that is developing in Parliament, which I do not understand. The institutional and legal framework clearly gives us enough means of compelling compliance because we vote the money that the institutions use. To what extent can Parliament continue appropriating money to an institution that cannot come to account for activities to an institution that appropriates money? I just wanted to find out: might it be useful in future to invoke powers to ensure compliance and cooperation from other seats of Government? 

THE SPEAKER: No. You see, there is a difference between an institution and an individual. I do not know whether you are saying if you are unhappy with an individual holding an office, you punish the institution. I think here people are talking about an individual rather than saying, “Let us use this to punish the -(Laughter)- I think it is the public really that suffers as a result.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, she also went further that she has always communicated, she has sent her reports to this Parliament and no single report has been debated; that this Parliament is incompetent. At one time she forwarded a report to the Speaker, the Speaker sat on it until she communicated again and that is when the report was acted on. So I think the Prime Minister should help the judge. We have had I think Maj. Otafiire has got experience and I really associate now with the comments the Maj. Gen. Otafiire made in this Parliament -(Laughter)- Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe Prime Minister - there is the shadow Attorney-General.

2.54
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would humbly appeal to Members to handle this matter with a lot of care. It is true the IGG might have made some unpalatable statements somewhere and –(Interjection)- yes, because we are relying entirely on press reports. I sit on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I would like to inform this honourable House that we have been confronted with a number of complaints from various circles about the Office of the IGG. However, at the same time the way the IGG is being attacked by various Government organs is - there has been an on-going wrangle, which has not been resolved up to now between the Office of the IGG and the Attorney-General; up to now it has not been resolved. 

Secondly, we have had a number of individuals who have tried to do whatever they could to ensure that they bring down the Office of the IGG. So, we should handle it with a lot of care and caution well knowing that the institution of the IGG is a creation of the Constitution and it has got its own mandate. This matter we are talking about –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, here we are talking about harmony, harmony that should exist between different agencies of Government. That is what we are talking about.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am not disputing that but what I am talking about is this issue which is still before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. You realise that even the complainant refused to disclose his or her own particulars. The complainant said, “This is an anonymous complaint against the Office of the IGG”, and it came before the committee. So the request I am making is that before we make observations and resolutions here, I would request that we first get a report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: No. We are not talking about Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. That is a different matter. You just came late. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving me this opportunity to give this information. This is not the first time the IGG has attacked the institution of Parliament. At one time when the Public Accounts Committee handled the matter of Mega FM where a minister featured and Public Accounts in its work demanded that the minister refunds the money and the minister effectively did so, the IGG went to the media and attacked Parliament as a hopeless institution that left the minister; and yet what Parliament did on its part, Parliament does not have the powers to prosecute. 

If the IGG thought that there was anything to be pursued, she should have sought for help from the Public Accounts Committee for more information for her to pursue the matter. But as far as the Public Accounts Committee is concerned, what should be known is that Public Accounts Committee basically works to advise Government to make systems in Government work in order to deliver. We cannot prosecute. 

It is unfortunate and it is really unbecoming for the IGG as a person because when she speaks repeatedly, it reflects that the institution of the IGG is making a statement; and in this last case, the IGG was not only attacking the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, she actually - if you read the contents of her statements - she attacked the Judiciary, she went further and attacked Parliament as an institution, that it is not effectively fighting corruption. So it was not just a matter of the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Her appearance based on that anonymous reporting, it requires a lot of things. In my view, the IGG needs some degree of caution because if you behave like a mad dog biting everybody, I think that is unfortunate. (Laughter)

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think Article 227 is very clear. The IGG is answerable to Parliament. So I suggest that you summon her and counsel her. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think enough has been said.  However, there is a need on the part of the Executive, which is on the top, to ensure that agencies of Government conduct their business in harmony and respect to each other. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BUSINESS

PETITION OF THE SITTING TENANTS OF BUGANDA ROAD FLATS AGAINST DISCRIMINATION BY NATIONAL HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED

THE SPEAKER: Which business do we start with; private Members’ business or a statement, which was supposed to have been made yesterday?

HON. MEMBERS: Private Members’ business.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but hon. Sempala is not here. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 39/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nampijja is not here. Let us handle some other business.

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS

3.02
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament I beg to present the government business available for the House for next week as follows:
1.	The Public Service Bill, 2007
2.	The Local Governments (Amendment No.2) Bill, 2007
3.	The Tourism Bill, 2007
4.	Questions for oral answer.  

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.03 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): I hope, Mr Speaker, that you already have a copy that we sent you and also the Members [Hon. Members: “No”.] They were delivered here in the morning. They were formally delivered to the Clerk to Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, proceed. Members will get copies. 

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling and I also thank you and the House for giving me some minutes to make a statement on the EPAS. Members of Parliament asked the question about EPAS before we went for recess and hon. Ekanya raised the question on the Floor here. I took time off to explain in detail that this negotiation was in progress and was on course because we did not want something to affect our traders. However, since the question was asked yesterday, I would like again to brief the Parliament what has been happening in the realms of the EPAS.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that Uganda has been negotiating an economic partnership agreement with the European Union. The negotiations actually started in 2002 and for some time Uganda negotiated under the umbrella of Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) configuration. Three other partner states of the Eastern African Community (EAC) also negotiated under this umbrella while other partner states negotiated under the Southern African Development Community (SADC) umbrella. 

Discussions on the aspect of members of the customs union negotiating EPAs under different configurations and its impact on the customs union were held at the East African Community summit level. At the summit of August 2007, the heads of state recalled their decision of 2002 that the East African Community should negotiate as a block in the multilateral and ACP–EU trade relations and agreed that the EAC should explore possibilities of negotiating an EPA with the EU. 

Following this directive, trade ministers from EAC countries met to harmonise positions and give guidance on the way forward. Subsequently, the EAC and the EC met at ministerial level on 14 November 2007 and agreed that in view of the very short time remaining until the expiry of the Cotonou Agreement trade regime on 31 December 2007, it would not be possible to conclude a comprehensive EPA that fully addresses the aspirations of all the parties. It was, therefore, resolved that EAC and EC should finalise their framework agreement as a stepping stone towards a full EAC–EC EPA that will comprise of trade in goods and market access, development co-operation and fisheries. 

The framework agreement furthermore provides for a mechanism of continuation of negotiations beyond 31 December 2007. Accordingly, on 27 November 2007, the five partner states of EAC and the EC initialled a framework agreement that covers one, market access; two, development co-operation; three, fisheries; four, mechanism of continuation of negotiation in other areas beyond 31 December 2007. 

The essence of the framework agreement is to operationalise the market access offers made by EAC and EC to each other. The EC market access offer consists of duty free and quota free access except for rice and sugar for which transitional arrangement is to be put in place. After 2010 all Ugandan exports to the EU will be duty free and without quota restrictions. I think that is something, which had to be done. Implementation of the EAC community access offer begins on 01 January 2008. 

On its part, EAC also made her market access offer to UE that consists of 82 percent of liberalisation of imports from the EU over a 25 year transition period. In effect, the first liberalisation will begin in 2015, note carefully, and it is to be done in phases. The EAC offers to liberalise 64 percent of her imports from the EU in 2010. The products covered in this phase are already zero rated and do not attract any import taxes under the EAC Customs Union Common External Tariff (CET). This is because they are either classified as raw materials or capital goods. 

From 2015 to 2023 there will be further liberalisation covering 14 percent and Uganda’s imports from the EU will be undertaken. About one fifth, that is, 18 percent of our imports from the EU are to be excluded from the liberalisation. The criteria for including products on this list included contribution to rural development, employment, livelihood sustainability, promotion of food security, fostering infant industries, contribution to Government revenue, and protection of Uganda’s interests in the regional markets. Products which were deemed to contribute or to have potential to contribute to increase production and trade competitiveness were excluded from the list. 

In addition, products which the EU cannot produce by virtue of its climate such as millet were also offered to liberalisation because the EU cannot produce or export these products. This approach helped us to shield as many sectors as possible of the economy from liberalisation where competition would have been real. 

The framework agreement also addresses issues of non–tariff barriers and trade defence instruments. The latter allows Uganda to raise tariffs to protect domestic products against imports of either goods that are being dumped or where an increase in imports is hurting the local industry.

In order to prevent any trade disruption, the framework agreement maintains the same rules of origin during the period of the negotiations for the comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA). The one significant exception to this is in the areas of apparels and textiles. Here we have agreed with the European community on the simplification of the rules of origin to allow Ugandan companies to source fabric from anywhere in the world and still be able to export garments made into the European Union free of duties or quotas. It is anticipated that the private sector will find this feasible given the proximity of Europe to Uganda and the East African community in general.  

With regard to inland fisheries, the provisions commit the European community to improve our access to the EU market, attract capital inflows and investment into the sector, enhance aquaculture production, remove supply side constraints and improve the quality of fish and fish products so that we meet sanitary and Quito-sanitary measures or standards in EU market.

On this development, the East African community and the European community have agreed that the economic development cooperation will be an entire chapter in the final EPA text. Development co-operation will aim at addressing the supply side constraints or impediments to business and to enable signatories, including Uganda, to build capacity to exploit trade opportunities created by the EPA. 

The European community side has confirmed that it will provide the resources to address these constraints through their regular development aid as well as through the aid-for-trade initiative and the European Union budget. Both sides agreed to continue negotiations in this area next year. The implication of the EPA framework is that Ugandan exports to the European Union will continue getting preferential treatment in form of duty and quota free access to the European Union market. Unlike under the Cotonou Arrangement where some products were excluded, all products will be covered under the EPA. 

Honourable members, the East African community and European community have agreed that the following areas of future negotiation will continue into next year. These are customs and trade facilitation rules or origin technical barriers to trade and sanitary and Quito-sanitary measures, trade in services-related issues, intellectual property rights, transparency in public procurement, agriculture, dispute settlement mechanisms, economic development co-operation and any other areas that the parties find necessary. In order to sequence this process with the East African community market negotiations, we have agreed to finish negotiations in this area by July 2009.

Mr Speaker, I understand that there are some views that Uganda as a least developed country did not have an initial framework agreement since she is eligible to benefit from the Everything-but-Arms initiative of the European Union. 

Permit me to clarify as follows: predictability and transparency are prerequisites for private sector growth and provision of this is an important element of providing an enabling environment for the private sector. The EPA of Everything-but-Arms does not provide any of these.  First, the EPA is unilateral; it is just something done by the other side. That is, it was not negotiated but simply given under terms and conditions decided by the European Union unilaterally. This means it that can be withdrawn or modified any time at the convenience of the European Union. 

The EPA has a list of potential beneficiaries and some of the least developed countries have been barred from using the EPA for having policies or practices, which the European Union does not approve of. This kind of situation is not suitable for long or even medium-term business or investment decision making. The lack of flexibility works against our private sector and continues to undermine its competitiveness and efforts to move to invest in value addition ventures.

Our private sector has pointed out to us that when we agree together, we could better resolve these shortcomings through a negotiated arrangement.  

Secondly, hon. Members of Parliament, it is important to note that currently, both the Cotonou Arrangement and the EBA are available to Uganda exports, at least since 2001. An examination of the utilisation of these two schemes indicates that up to 99.5 percent of Ugandan exporters to the European Union prefer the Cotonou Arrangement over the EPA. This is mainly because of the stringent rules of the origin of EPA compared to the other agreement.  

Under the EPA we can only use components or inputs from either the European Union or another least developed country, but not from countries such as Kenya. Our fellow least developed countries also suffer from similar problems thus we cannot source inputs from such countries. On the other hand Cotonou allows us to use material from countries such as Kenya. 

Under EBA use of non-originating materials is allowed only up to 10 percent while under the Cotonou Agreement it is 15 percent. It was, therefore, prudent to choose an arrangement that builds on the Cotonou Arrangement in the form of EPS where more development friendly rules of origin can be negotiated. A case in point is the rules of origin that will govern the textiles and the apparels sector, which I have mentioned at the beginning.  

The task ahead of all of us as national leaders is to develop response strategies to enable the country take advantage of the opportunities created by the Economic Partnership Agreement. Following Cabinet approval of the National Trade Policy, my ministry, headed by hon. Janat Mukwaya and with my two other Colleagues, hon. Rukundo and hon. Prof. Kamuntu and you who actually honourably appointed us to take charge of this aspect of the government, is finalising the National Trade Sector Development Plan, which should help us to develop capacity to take advantage of the various trade opportunities available to us. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to brief you on this important subject.

3.19
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the hon. Minister of State in charge of Trade for the statement. I wish it had come earlier. I am seeking just a few clarifications. In the statement, on the first page, there is reference to finding it necessary to reach some framework agreement and on the second page the expression used is that on the 27th of November 2007, the five partner states of the East African community and the European Community initiated a framework agreement that covers market access, development cooperation, fisheries and so on. I want to find out from the minister the implications of initialising this agreement. What is the legal implication of this act of initialising this act?

Two; does the minister intend to make that initialised framework agreement available to Members of Parliament so that they can know exactly what the agreement includes? 

In the paragraphs below, there is reference to the East African Community offering to liberalise 64 percent of her imports from the EU. Is it possible for the minister to make - or give particulars of what these imports actually are? I am asking this because it goes on to say that about one-fifth of our imports from the EU are to be excluded from liberalisation. What are these supposed to be? 

Yesterday, in the absence of the minister, I made reference to the MP’s statement, which he delivered at a conference from 15 to 16 of October 2007 to the effect that there has been limited interface between the negotiators on the one part and the EALA and national Parliaments on the other part, regarding the likely impact of EPAs thus relegating our cardinal duties of representation, legislation and oversight. I wonder whether the minister has the intention of involving both EALA and the national Parliaments in the subsequent negotiations that shall be taking place with regard to the EPAs. I thank you.

3.20
MR PEREZA AHABWE (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for at last bringing this statement, but also I must once again register my disappointment to the minister for waiting until he was prompted by this House to do his job. We wrote to the minister sometime back and we thought he would respond, unfortunately he did not until we raised this matter yesterday. I do not know whether he wrote it at night, but I think it is important that people should learn do their work and inform us in good time before we look as if we are at conflict.

Like I said yesterday, in the process of negotiating this agreement, the Parliament of Uganda, through the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and members from other committees, was always brought on board and updated on the progress of these talks. At that time it was under the East and Southern Africa countries under the auspices of COMESA as he clearly states in his statement, but it was only I think this year – yes, early this year - when the Summit of East African Heads of State agreed –

THE SPEAKER: No; if I may ask, are you comfortable with the statement? Have you internalised it or you need time as a committee to study it before responding? Are you in position to respond now or you want more time to internalise it as a committee before responding?

MR AHABWE: Well, it depends on your guidance. Otherwise, as an individual I am very sure that I know what I am talking about because I have been following what has been happening even without being informed by the minister. I have all the documents with me; I have a draft agreement with me and I also have statements from other sources. 

My complaint, although I will agree with you that later on we can study it as a committee and involve a wider section of Parliament, is that when Government decides at some point to disengage Parliament, then it is suspect; that is my biggest problem. Why they shifted from ESA-EU negotiations and started negotiating at the East African Community level and reached a point of signing an interim agreement without putting us on board, is also suspect. 

Mr Speaker, I want to assure you that reliable sources say that some of the officials from the ministry have some kind of scare because they know that we have capacity to unearth some of these things that they are hiding. I can give you an example. There was a study that was carried out by consultants and the ministry about the potential impact of signing these EPAs at the moment. From this study, and I am going to only give you one aspect of the impact on Government revenue, by the end of next year 2008, Government will have lost Shs 170 billion in terms of revenue as a result of signing these EPAs. By 2012, Government will have lost Shs 340 billion and by 2028 the government will have lost Shs 3.8 trillion -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, in view of the information that you are trying to give us, don’t you think that the House and entire country can benefit from it if after receiving this statement, you as a committee go to analyse it and come out with a report? Don’t you think that is the best way?

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, I do not think I will disagree with your wise guidance. I was only trying to respond partially so that Members know the gravity of this kind of action. Otherwise, I agree with you that the committee takes on this statement, looks at it, invites the relevant technical people and the minister for interaction and maybe report to this House as and when it will be ready. Thank you.

3.28
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to welcome your wise counsel on the guidance you have just provided in respect of how best to have this issue compressively debated. But before we come to that, allow me make some general remarks and some specific ones. 

The general remark is basically to reiterate what my colleagues have already echoed. I want to tell you honourable members that this complaint is not only in Uganda. In the recent international meetings in which I participated, we discovered that there has been a persistent omission from the government in conducting the negotiations and yet the repercussions of these agreements are going to be major. 

So at that level, Parliaments would wish to be brought on board. This is not fair and it is not only in the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, but in many of the EU related activities. For instance, honourable member you know or you may not know that we have a country strategy paper, which is the basis for Government accessed funds through the EDF, but the Ministry of Finance has never - even when you have asked, that document has never been provided here. At one time we were required as Members of Parliament to go and meet the head of the European delegation and the agenda was to discuss the contents of the country strategy paper and this is the document we had never got. We finally accessed some draft and this is going to be practically a problem and I know there are many Members of Parliament who engage in international meetings. 

You must go to those meetings when you are comprehensively informed so that you deliberate as a person who is informed. For instance, in the recent meeting in Rwanda, there was a joint parliamentary assembly and everybody was condemning East Africa for hurrying to negotiate and endorse the economic partnership agreements when more time would have made more concessions. I did not know what they were talking about. We tried ringing back to the Ministry of Trade; we did not have any specific information. If we continue operating like this, we are going to show a lot of disjointedness and disorganisation as a Government if comprehensive information is not given in time.

Mr Speaker, on the specific issues, the details of the other things, we shall discuss them when we consider the report. But that report will be incomplete if the minister does not bring the copy of the agreement because in this report per se, he has nothing. It is the details of the agreement that were initialised and its implications are impacts that the committee must come up to assess vis-à-vis other documents and other policies that have been provided so that this House can make a meaningful debate.

But if I can ask the minister a specific question: there is an impression which is created by the recent leaders’ meeting in the EU Summit in Lisbon - an impression has been created that ACP governments have been forced and pressurised to sign the economic partnership agreements. Given the statements that we are provided, those who read the papers yesterday should have read the response by Mendelssohn, the Commissioner for EU, I want to find out from the honourable minister, is this impression created right that the East African region has been pressured into signing because they wanted to access the EDF funds and also other visions from the EU?

Secondly, I want to find out whether there are any other regions also that have concluded the interim EPAs or the framework EPAs and what the implications of this will be.

I would have had many issues, but they will be more useful if the committee has received the copy of the agreement so that we consider it with other arguments to make it a better debate. But I want to find out from the minister whether there is also a mechanism in the agreements or the framework that they signed for review and considering the impact and what should be done should such a thing occur. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I concur with the hon. Members of Parliament who have expressed serious concern over the manner in which Government has handled this particular matter. I would like to draw the attention of the House to maybe three things:

One, that we are faced with an international alignment in trade that beats Europe against emerging industrial countries like China and India and, therefore, they are moving also very fast to secure agreements with those countries that are willing to be bribed into quicker agreements, which agreements will eventually seriously undermine our ability to benefit from the trade opportunities that some of the emerging industrial countries offer. 

It is so easy to say that we have secured a trade agreement with Europe, but that does not mean that you have access to the market. Because this is about the product you have and willingness of those who should buy and this has been our biggest problem, for example, with AGOA. We got AGOA and we got nothing in the end and, therefore, in some of these agreements, we should really fall back and ask, “What is our interest; what is our comparative advantage relating either to Europe or to China?” - because even in terms of population, they just swamp Europe. 

Secondly, in China now they are transforming in terms of the kind of food they eat and the real trade would be in agricultural produce, for example. It is very important that we as a country also protect our name. We went to the Mexico Trade Negotiations and Uganda’s name became very bad; that we undermine the alliance of the south to negotiate a fair trade deal. Now East Africa, with Uganda in it, pulled out of the rest and the rest are again bitter with us. 

I remember the President actually urging that this agreement be signed and I think sometimes even when something is really good, sometimes the decent thing to do is to move with everybody else where bigger objectives will have to be dealt with. Because we isolate ourselves; we can deceive ourselves that we have the capacity to trade with Europe but, I can assure you, without the protection of a common position with those countries that are actually able to supply to us and undercut Europe, you will have a big problem, and this is not considered.

Finally, this is what I was alluding to in the first place. The final statement of the minister says the task ahead of us as national leaders is to know development response strategies to enable the country take advantage of the opportunities created. If you are not even ready, why are you hurrying? What is the hurry for Uganda? What will we lose? Can the minister tell us what we would have lost if we did not sign? Since we are not even ready, we are developing strategies for the potential now. Can the minister tell us what the hurry is for? Thank you.

3.38
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to thank the minister for his presentation.  

I note from the minister’s presentation that the EPA/EU negotiations began in 2002, five years ago. The world has changed considerably, not least that things like global warming and low carbon emissions are now key issues and taking centre stage in any negotiations, particularly in trade around the world. Is it possible that things that were started in 2002 are still relevant five years later and will be relevant whenever this agreement is expected to be completed? It is not clear when - going by what we have heard - it could take another couple of years. Is it possible that the things that were started will still be relevant?

Having said that, low carbon emissions, carbon trading, and a low carbon economy have started being major considerations in every negotiation around the world. Fortunately, Uganda and many African countries are still low carbon emitters whereas the developed countries are heavy carbon emitters. And these are going to be major considerations in any form of trade. I have not heard the minister or I would like to ask the minister whether in the negotiations Uganda and East Africa are going to take serious advantage of the now advantageous position of being low emitters negotiating with serious violators or polluters of the atmosphere in this trade. 

We have just attended a climate change workshop with hon. Dombo and the way the world is going to move, this is going to be a key issue certainly in the very near future. I was listening to Madam Nancy Pelosi, the Speaker of the US Parliament and she certainly said global warming and carbon emissions are going to take centre stage and to be the nucleus of any negotiations around the world. I would like to hear the minister make a statement on how Uganda is going to take advantage of this. 

Finally, in the past, Uganda and Africans have been disadvantaged in the agreements and negotiations that we have participated in. A parallel has been drawn in many cases, in Rwanda, for instance. I can also mention the exclusion of Mr Robert Mugabe from the Commonwealth, from Lisbon because there is a certain category of members who are not happy to have him when many African countries have been heard to think that he should not be excluded. But the voices of inclusion did not have their rightful space in terms of the numbers of members who would have voted for this. 

I would like to hear from the minister – besides, many EU members are also members of other associations around the world. For instance, members of EU with whom we are negotiating are also members of the Commonwealth, are also members of the G8; I would like to hear parallels drawn between our expectations and the way we are moving with similar agreements on the same sector with the other equally interested parties like between EU and EU countries. 

An example I would like to give is the visa and migration arrangements. Whereas members of the EU in Eastern Europe have free access to the UK, who is also a member of the Commonwealth, members of the Commonwealth do not have free access to the UK. I would like to hear whether parallels are being drawn to highlight the disadvantaged position that needs to be clearly spelt out as we negotiate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.44
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and to state from the beginning that the economic partnership agreement is an agreement that is not being contested that it should not be signed. The ACP’s and the EU’s trade configuration from 2002 is under the Cotonou Agreement and the Cotonou Agreement expires on 31st December of this year. Therefore, there is need for a configuration within which the ACP countries can trade with the EU countries. 

The issue now is – before I say that, the configuration within which the negotiation was being conducted in which Uganda belonged was ESA. Tanzania was under SADAC but then the East African states felt that since we are within the same Customs Union, it is appropriate for East Africa to negotiate as a block. That is why the heads of states agreed that Kenya pulls from SADAC and the East African Community negotiate as a block. That is where we are in the negotiations. 

The issue now is that as East Africa, we do not know where Tanzania was with SADAC and where we were with ESA and before the initial negotiations there should have been at least the detailed agreement, which we were working on. I think it is important that we have the agreement, which East Africa has been working on with the EU, what they had initialised which my colleagues have already talked about, so that we discuss it. 

Then the other issue is that the ACP countries felt that it would have been good to negotiate as a block but the problem we have is that the East African Community has signed this initial. Meanwhile there are many concerns that many ACP countries have that they feel should be addressed. Let me highlight some of them. 

One issue is the question of market access. Let me talk about Uganda; our trading percentage is between 20 and 36 percent with the European Union, and over 60 percent of our trade is with China and Asian countries.  Now, the issue of market access would mean that goods from the EU would come to our countries without the taxes and vice-versa, but the concerns are about what capacity the Ugandans have. Can you imagine that if you opened the market now the standard of our goods in Uganda could meet the market of the EU? 

The concern from the ACP is that we should first develop the capacity for Ugandans and the capacity for East Africans to access that market in the EU before we open up to that percentage. So, there is need to phase up. They are not disagreeing on the signing; they are agreeing that we negotiate but that this opening up of the market be phased. I have heard the Minister talking of phasing. The unfortunate part is that we do not see the details of how you want to phase in the 25 years. If you had told us, maybe we would not be debating. Probably, you will have already addressed our concern of how the phasing will be done.

The other issue is, you have talked about agriculture but is not yet in the clusters that are initialled. The other concern of ACP is that the EU is dictating what the priorities for the ACP are. For a country like Uganda, our priority for development might be support for agriculture, support for education and support for health care, while the EU says that our priority is human rights, governance, peace and security. So, those are the contentions. What do we want to bankroll the money for? Where should it go? Should it go to education, health and so on?  These are the intricacies that are making negotiations - prioritisation, standardisation and phasing of access to the market. 

The committee should examine the agreement as we have initialled so that all the stakeholders can give their views. I am also glad that the Minister says that they have agreed to continue negotiations. So, the committee will get the concerns of Ugandans so that as you continue with the negotiations, which you intend to conclude by June or thereabout according to your statement, our concerns are addressed. So, those are the issues. I support the idea that we examine it through the committee so that we understand and get the concerns of the people. 

The information flow has also been very difficult; you want information but the ministry does not want to give you the information, and yet when you go out there they start saying that Ugandans or East Africans are letting down ACP positions. So, I thank you and I welcome the fact that you have actually accepted to negotiate as the East African Community, because originally Tanzania was under SADC and yet we are under the same trade confederation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Where will further debate on this matter take us? What do we intend to achieve by debating further on this statement? We must have a goal we are aiming at. With this kind of debate, where will we go? 

3.52
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. I suggest that the best way we can handle this subject, which is very wide, is for the matter to be sent to the committee, and we commit all the ministers who are knowledgeable about this case to discuss the matter and then come out and report to the House. 

From listening to the debate, I think there is a gap in terms of the knowledge that we should have. For example, people have not looked at the interim agreement that we have or the reasons why we thought we should discuss as an East African block; people do not know about it.

Secondly, there is also the issue of time. As the lady from Apac has rightly said, if we do not sign anything by now, in January our goods to Europe will attract tariffs straight away. The bazungu gave us almost five years but people have been doing nothing and then they came and asked for the time to be extended. These bazungu are wondering what type of people we are! For five years we have done nothing and then when the time comes, we ask for it to be extended again. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to bore the House. I think that the best way is to have a committee and go to that committee with all the facts, and then we will come and inform the House. That is my proposition.

THE SPEAKER: We have received this statement and our committee in charge of the sector should receive it, analyse it and call whoever they want to call, including the technocrats, and then come back and report to us. They will advise us on the way forward, rather than these general comments on this and that without reaching a conclusion. I think we better send this document to the committee.

MR DOMBO: The guidance I want is related to what you have just said. The Minister has laid a statement before the House but he has not presented the agreement. Would it not be right for him to bring the agreement either tomorrow or at an appropriate time so that it becomes an official document and then it can also be considered together with the statement?

THE SPEAKER: If we agree to send this matter to the committee, the committee definitely will ask the Minister for the copy of the agreement to analyse it. Definitely, it is an obvious thing that the committee will have to have the document. Don’t you think that is the best way?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, just for purposes of information, I want to thank the honourable member from Apac for bringing the dimension of ACP. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker; one time you appointed me to represent Uganda in the ACP Group, so one can share this information. 

The Cotonou Agreement referred to was signed in 2000. Within the provisions of that agreement, by 31 December 2007 the provisions that allow us to export our commodities into the European market will expire. The moment that expires, Uganda’s export will face very stiff tariffs, which they are not facing right now.

Secondly, as the First Deputy Prime Minister has pointed out, negotiations have been going on for five years and fortunately, the East African Community has almost all the relevant institutions; they have a parliament, a secretariat, a customs union and an external tariff. So, by all accounts, it was ready for signing. Why then would we move at the slowest speed when we could set the pace?

THE SPEAKER: I imagine that when the committee starts to examine the matter, they will benefit from your submission justifying this, that and the other. I think what you are saying now can be later handled by the committee, which will report to us and then we will discuss that report. Is that a way forward? Is it the consensus? – (Interjections)- The matter is sent to the appropriate committee to expediently handle it and report to the House. 

3.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I rose on the Floor of this House to report on an incident, which I thought was important. This was the arrest of some of our colleagues in respect to the election, which is taking place today in Bugweri County. The Leader of Government Business promised - (Interjection) - Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, there was an acting Leader of Government Business in your absence, who promised on behalf of the Leader of Government Business to make a statement. I thought it would be important, but I also see that hon. Adolf is not here.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have the answer. I made an inquiry with hon. Adolf about the undertaking that he had made, that the Minister of Internal Affairs could make a statement on this subject. The advice I have received from him is that he did communicate to the Minister of Internal Affairs to make the statement and unfortunately, for one reason or another, the minister is not here to make that statement. However, he has requested me to allow him time so that he gets in touch with the minister so that this statement is made on Tuesday. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I brought the matter to the attention of the House, my interest was to see that what happened yesterday could not jeopardise the smooth holding of today’s by-election. Because I made the statement based on the information I was given, I actually notified you that I would leave the House and go to Bugweri. I wanted to know when the minister would make a statement so that I am able to also come back with facts, so that where we agree or disagree, we can sort it out. 

I went to Bugweri and I came back; you saw me a little late. In the morning everything was fine. I got an explanation close to what was written in the papers, quoting the Inspector General of Police. There are variations to that, but then that matter really was not too important. 

As I was coming back, I paid a visit to a number of polling areas to see whether there was any tension or violence or anything. By the time I left at around 11.00 p.m., things were generally calm. But then on the way, when I reached either Jinja or Lugazi, I received a telephone call from hon. Harry Kasigwa, who was manning the area of Busembatya, that his car had just been smashed. He and Martin Wandera, who is a former Member of Parliament, were beaten up. The journalist who was taking the pictures was also beaten up and his camera was also smashed. That is why this would have been very important. 

I believe that if the people on the ground are really concerned that elections like this are held in a free and fair way and without people perpetrating violence, they would immediately communicate to the minister. Since I raised the matter to the minister, and I will raise it here, I just thought that this is really important because it is about electing a Member of Parliament who will be part of us here, and that election should by all means be as free of these things as possible.

I went to the campaigns for the by-election that took place in Bukonzo East. We criss-crossed the place with the honourable Minister of Defence; when the Minister of Defence is there he needs adequate security but in spite of that, we stayed there very comfortably. There was no incidence as far as violence was concerned, and I thought that from there we would have an election like that. Now, if we have an election involving a minister who is supposed to be in charge of national guidance and violence takes place in his by-election, it becomes very difficult for the country to understand. (Laughter) That is why I thought it was important to bring it up. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, since- 

THE SPEAKER: There is no other business to discuss. Let us follow the Order Paper.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON POST BANK

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, this is a report which covers a span of six years and it is quite big, but I have tried my best to summarise my presentation while also doing our best to provide a detailed report to the Members of Parliament. Some of our colleagues received copies yesterday and those who missed out should be getting theirs now. 

This is a report of the standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of Post Bank on the basis of the Auditor-General’s report.  

The committee drew its mandate from Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda on enforcement of accountability of public funds, and rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In our methodology, we had meetings with the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, both of General Duties and Microfinance, the Minister of State for Industry, the Board of Management of Post Bank and the Commissioner of Co-operatives. The committee also received written memoranda and held a meeting with the leadership of the Uganda Co-operative Alliance. 

The committee was able to carry out a familiarisation tour of the selected Post Bank branches to appreciate its operations on the ground. 

The committee reviewed and examined policy related issues and audited accounts for the last six financial years, starting from 1999 to 2005.

The committee wishes to acknowledge the co-operation of all stakeholders. 

I will begin by providing some comments from section 2 of the main report. Post Bank was incorporated on 19 February 1998 to assume the services of the former Post Office Savings Bank. This company was created as a result of the enactment of the Communications Act, 1997 that provided for the restructuring of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation.

Post Bank was consequently incorporated and Government owned 100 percent of its shares. It was first licensed by Bank of Uganda under the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 as a specialised commercial bank with the mandate of mobilising savings and putting them in non-lending investments. The bank is now registered as a credit institution that allows it to perform financial intermediations, that is on-lending savings and transactions. 

Post Bank Ltd. now operates with a fully-fledged Board appointed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the members to section 3 on the general performance of the bank. The committee highlighted landmarks in the bank’s performance as follows:

In our observation, the present capital structure is not adequate to enable Post Bank to act as a linchpin for the implementation of Government’s Rural Financial Services Strategy. Although Cabinet has earmarked an additional Shs 6.5 billion as a capitalisation grant, the financial demands of the bank seem enormous for efficiency and effectiveness to be realised. In principle, if the Shs 6.5 billion is provided, the bank’s capital will stand at Shs 11.9 billion, leaving a funding gap of Shs 3.1 billion to achieve the minimum threshold to help it rollout effectively with new branches to cover the country at Shs 15 billion. 

Post Bank may be swallowed up by the risk of getting into partnership with unregulated financial organisations (Tier 4). Mr Speaker, there was a glaring experience especially when we were in Soroti where Post Bank lent out Shs 300 million to a SACCO which was not regulated. It has now landed into difficulty in recovering the Shs 300 million.

The governance, institutional and credit risks may affect the financial intermediaries, which may lead to failure of the bank. The existing co-operative laws are inadequate to attract the necessary resources to perform independent supervision of SACCOs. At the same time, SACCOs are getting into partnership with Post Bank. The committee learnt that SACCOs were not being created in Masindi District because of past experience where people’s savings were lost by quasi organisations due to poor governance. 

Currently, the bank has presence in only 17 out of 80 districts. It does not have countrywide coverage and may not be able to implement the Prosperity for All Programme within a reasonable timeframe. However, given an open timeframe, definitely they will be able to roll out. 

The committee also notes that the rapid expansion to cover all the districts may choke the bank. The Shs 500 million released by Government to Post Bank for on-lending to the SACCOs has not reached Masindi yet. 

The committee noted that some staff at the branches did not have a clear understanding of the Prosperity for All Programme. For example, the linkage banking staff members at the Jinja branch had that difficulty. 

Also, Post Bank branches are inadequately equipped and facilitated to deliver financial services efficiently and effectively. The capacity is very strong at the headquarters but at the branches out there, there are still problems. Branches do not have ATMs, means of transport and other equipment. 

The seven members of staff per branch on average, is not adequate to cover all the districts under the branch catchment area. For instance, the Arua branch covers the districts of Arua, Nebbi, Adjumani, Moyo, Koboko, Yumbe and Nyadri. This branch has one linkage banking officer mandated to mobilise the SACCOs in this vast area. 

The committee also noted that both the bank and SACCOs are having difficulty in managing two different portfolios with different interest rates offered to the same market manager. This scenario leads to discrimination and forceful market failure. 

The gross margin of four percent per annum that the SACCOs are expected to earn in the government policy arrangement is not sustainable. Four percent is far below the nine percent and 13 percent that Post Bank charges, yet the bank is more efficient than the SACCOs. Furthermore, the SACCOs bear all the risk of on-lending to the target clients who do not have substantive collateral to act as loan security.

It is the opinion of the committee that the centralised system of registration of SACCOs is cumbersome and expensive. It may not allow the fast tracking of the government programme of having at least a SACCO in every sub-county throughout the country. The requirement is that a commissioner of co-operatives is the one to consent to the existence of a SACCO in a sub-county, and coming to Kampala causes some difficulty for some of our remote sub-counties in the administration of these co-operations.

Recommendations.
The committee recommends that Government should increase the capital base of the bank to Shs 15 billion. This will enable the bank to be competitive in the commercial banking sector. 

The committee recommends that Government urgently puts in place some legal and regulatory framework for Tier 4 institutions before massively rolling out a Post Bank- SACCO wholesale lending arrangement. This law would ensure that operations of SACCOs remain prudent, sound and sustainable for a reasonable period of time. 

The Government should evaluate thoroughly all the implications of implementing the Rural Financial Services Strategy with Post Bank. Coordination and institutional arrangement as well as timeframes must be harmonised for the success of the programme to be realised.

The committee recommends that the bank should evaluate, document and implement strategies to enhance information sharing with its stakeholders to avoid exposure.

The committee recommends that Government should urgently harmonise the interest rate policy to ensure that SACCOs and target clients get favourable and sustainable offers. 

Mr Speaker, let me now turn to the accounts, which is in section 4 of our report. These are on the basis of the queries presented to us by the Auditor-General starting from 1999. Under this year, the committee observed that the accounting software that the bank procured was not adequately addressing the needs of the organisation with respect to improving efficiency and effectiveness. A proper assessment should have been made before the procurement in order for the system to suit all the organisation’s business needs. Thus, the procurement of an incompetent system was attributed to poor management by Mr Winston Sibo, who was the then accounting officer who should be held responsible and accountable. 

It was further noted that the system has caused a loss of Shs 33 million to the organisation arising from the difference in the computation of interest rates. The software was so erratic that it would continue to award interest rates even to those who had already overdrawn their accounts. 

The committee also observed that management was not properly handling all the sources of revenue. For instance, outstanding arrears, if recovered, could have enhanced the capitalisation of the bank and subsequent expansion of investments and service delivery. 

The failure to comply with VAT registration and subsequent collection could attract penalties causing unnecessary losses to the bank. It was also observed that the bank’s annual rental income exceeds the threshold of Shs 50 million required for VAT registration. Furthermore, URA, in their letter dated 29 November 2006, confirmed that the bank had not met their tax liability that included VAT, stamp duty and capital gains tax. 

The above is evidence of the weak internal controls, which can lead to losses to the bank as a result of fraud and transaction risks as well as mismanagement of financial statements. 

Double payment for the same item is a fraud and should not be allowed to occur in any organisation. For the case of Post Bank where housing allowance is paid, a bank official should not be provided with physical accommodation. This is brought out clearly in the case of the former accounting officer who was residing in a company house but he was also pocketing housing allowance to the tune of Shs 400,000 per month.

Recommendations

The accounting software should be periodically evaluated and improved to capture and analyse all the financial and business transactions of the bank. In the meantime, a parallel manual system should be strengthened to track all the problematic areas of the computerised system and a good backup system must be put in place. 

Management must recover the Shs 33 million that the bank paid out to the savings clients as a result of wrong computation of the interest. 

The bank should draw comprehensive policy agreements for managing the rent collections that should include: 
•	Which tenants should be sourced
•	Penalties charged for late payment
•	Cost effective methods for recovery from defaulting clients; and 
•	How the rent arrears are reported in the books of accounts. 

The bank should monitor and evaluate all its operations including: 
•	The legal implications due to failure to comply with various relevant laws. 
•	Mechanisms for regular evaluation of the legal frameworks affecting all decisions of management and the overall business environment should also be looked into. 
•	The internal audit department should be strengthened to comprehensively monitor the operations of the bank. 
•	Management must register for VAT immediately and start collecting and remitting this tax to URA. 
•	Management must also recover the Shs 6 million from Mr Winston Sibo. 

On the account for the year 2000, Mr Speaker, the committee observed as follows: 

There was an error in the title for the bank’s property. Instead of indicating that the bank’s property is found on William Street, the land title was registered under Salisbury Road. This apparently means that these people were not very serious with checking their records. 

Such variations are a sign of an incompetent finance and administration department as well as lack of effective internal control systems. Officers were not educated to do bank reconciliations among their core functions. 

The bank does not have a comprehensive system of checking input data in order to avert miss-postings and overdrawing. These are areas of potential fraud because clients can collude with some staff to have unauthorised access and utilisation of cash. 

Debt recovery is an area where fraud can be perpetuated in organisations. Often employees can recover the money from debtors and deliberately decline to post such transactions into the accounting system and later recommend such outstanding debt balances to be written off. This has always been a practice in statutory enterprises. 

The committee observed that the finance and administration department and the internal audit department are not liaising very well through the pre-audit arrangements to make sure that only staff that account for running advances are eligible to receiving more advances. 

The committee observed that the bank should not enter into any inter-agency arrangement or partnership without thoroughly evaluating the potential risks. 

For the year 2000 audit report, these were the recommendations of the committee: 

That management must correct the errors in the title within one month. I hope they have done this already. 

Management must strengthen the finance and administration department to be able to expeditiously and accurately capture and reconcile financial transactions in a timely manner. It should also document internal controls, clearly assigning responsibilities for management of cash and cash balances monitoring. 

A comprehensive system of internal controls to enhance better cash management should be instituted, with clear punitive sanctions for cases of negligence and deliberate theft. 

The bank payments must be pre-audited in accordance with the organisation’s policy as well as best practices in handling financial transactions. 

The bank should conduct potential risk evaluations before getting into business relations with various stakeholders. A thorough risk analysis of partner institutions like microfinance organisations should be done before the bank gets into linkage arrangements, lest the collapse of the linkage partners could lead to the collapse of the bank itself. 

During the year 2001 audit report, the committee made the following observations: 

Persistent failure to reconcile accounts by Post Bank, which is a reflection of incompetent staff and lack of substantive management systems to ensure performance of such an important finance function, still remains a challenge. 

The reconciliation between Posta Uganda and Post Bank (U) Ltd. accounts has taken a very long time and there is a need for the two companies to expedite the process.

The committee recommends as follows: 
The minister should intervene and ensure that the financial differences between the institutions are resolved as a matter of urgency. This is important because he is the political head and supervisor of the two otherwise sister statutory bodies, and he is the best arbitrator to bring them together to a resolve this matter.  

I draw the attention of the honourable members to the year 2002/2003 and 2004, which are combined. In this report, the accounts for the three years running from 2001, 2002, 2003 to 2004 have been considered jointly because the queries raised by the Auditor-General were similar. The following were the Auditor-General’s findings together with management’s responses, the committee’s observations and recommendations for the period under review; I selected the observations and recommendations exclusively:

The committee observed that there is no clear harmonisation between operations in the bank branches operating online and offline yet the bank’s savings withdrawal policy allows clients to access their savings from any branch. This scenario causes a very big risk to peoples’ savings as well as the bank’s cash balances.  

The image of any bank highly depends on how best it manages peoples’ savings. The committee observed that if the bank does not streamline mechanisms to ensure completeness and accuracy of savings and interest expense records, her growth plans may be doomed. 

Most importantly, one of the reasons people save is being able to realise that return on savings in form of interest. Thus the bank needs to ensure that interest expense records are clearly captured and communicated to the clients.

The committee recommends as follows: 
The efforts to ensure that all the branches are online should be top on the agenda, most especially with the anticipated drastic growth in the bank’s operations. 

The bank needs to invest in information technology so that the peoples’ savings and remittances are managed in a prudent manner.

Management should put in place a strong system that captures and reports interest expenses accurately in both manual and computerised branches so that clients’ accounts and passbooks are promptly and regularly updated. 

Bank of Uganda is hereby urged to strengthen or improve its supervisory role to curtail the irregularity currently persisting in the bank, especially the harmonisation of the activities of the branches online and those which are offline.  

Mr Speaker, we turn to the final account, which is for the year 2005. The Auditor-General gave an unqualified opinion for the year ending 30 June 2005, in that, all the financial statements were in agreement with books of accounts in this financial year. This in turn gave the true and fair view of the state of affairs as at 31 December 2005. So, there were no serious audit queries for this financial year.  The committee was grateful for this effort and urged the bank to continue in this direction for years to come.

In conclusion, we looked at some words of wisdom and opinion from the corporate world by Michael Clemens, and I want to draw the attention of members to just two paragraphs; first, that poor corporate governance in developing countries is a serious matter and the cost of poor governance is very high. In the article I am referring to, it was found that well governed firms trade at a premium of 160 percent compared to poorly governed firms. If this emerging financial institution, the Post Bank Ltd., cannot attract its fixed capital, it will be doomed to remain on a small inefficient scale. However, if it can struggle to grow, so will the poor community, who are anxious to access its services in order for Bonna Bagaggawale to bear fruits, prosper indeed. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee, for the report.

4.30
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to very sincerely thank the chairperson and his committee for ably undertaking the task that Parliament mandated them to do.  As you may realise, the committee was dealing with a backlog of work, handling reports from 1999 for the last six years. I think it was an enormous task, but I trust that they have come up with a very informative report. 

Because it is a backlog of scrutiny, I maintain that we have taken rather too long to get to understand the things unfolding in Post Bank (U) Ltd. The whole report, from the beginning to the end, gives me the impression of gross mismanagement. I am even beginning to develop cold feet over the capacity of Post Bank (U) Ltd. to handle the Bonna Bagaggawale programme because as we speak, it is reported that they have only 21 branches in the 17 districts where they have set foot throughout the country. They are in 17 out of 80 districts, and out of the 17 we have 21 branches, and as if that is not enough, all the branches are understaffed and yet the task before Post Bank is immense. In my opinion, Post Bank is not an entity that will yield results if that is the status quo. 

Mr Speaker, I am also concerned about the parameters or the indices that are used for the SACCOs to qualify for the funding from Post Bank. Apparently, the parameters may not have been properly grasped by the various SACCOs that would require access to such funding from Post Bank. No wonder certain SACCOs, as per the report, have gained access to funding even when their capacity to handle such funding was not properly assessed. That is why Post Bank is finding difficulty in following up repayments of such loans. 

I think hiding information generally and lack of capacity building of the various SACCOs should not now be blamed on the individual SACCOs. Before accessing the funds, the SACCOs must have built capacity. Who takes up the challenge now? I thought it would still be the duty of Post Bank to satisfy itself that the SACCO they are dealing with has the capacity to take up the task. However, now if monies are just disbursed to an entity whose capacity is in doubt, how do we proceed? This arrangement of the Bonna Bagaggawale programme through Post Bank, in my opinion, is going to be a very big flop.

Let me refer to page 30 of the report; some of the revelations in the report about the erroneous transactions in Post Bank would give me the impression that Post Bank is even not worth being called a bank. You can check bullet 1 on page 30; it says that on 13 October 1999, deposits and withdrawals of Iganga were posted under Pallisa; then on 25 October the same year, deposits of Kabale were posted under Hoima. What do you expect? Deposits and withdrawals of Oboja were posted under Jinja region. Is that worth being called a bank? 

A lot of customers are going to be crying foul because the capacity of Post Bank in itself is a problem, to the extent that now a total of 10,800 accounts had a sum of Shs 191 million overdrawn! So, I think that while Post Bank in itself is not worth being called a bank, it is now handling SACCOs and sucking the various SACCOs into the problems of the poor capacity of the bank. If anything, I think the managers- (Interruption) 

MR WAMBUZI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the shadow minister. However, if we condemn Post Bank to the extent that we should close it, I wish to inform the honourable shadow minister that page 43 of the report of the committee shows the positive side. I beg that as you condemn the bank, you keep in mind a typical Kisoga proverb, which says that if you are beating your own son, you do not beat him flat but that you fold the hand so that it does not hurt so much. 

Page 43 clearly shows that the bank has got a new image and has started moving forward to address Bonna Bagaggawale. I beg to inform the honourable shadow minister.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to the observations made by hon. Epetait and the responses by the minister in charge of industry, hon. Gagawala. At this point in time, I am seeking your guidance because on top of the serious commercial issues he was raising about financial prudence, I was also looking at the legal and regulatory framework under which Post Bank is operating. 

My concern is, whereas I can appreciate the attendance of ministers, these are really matters which are technical, particularly when it comes to issues like Tier 4’s. We would have expected the substantive minister of finance to be around before this question or this item was put forward, so that we can take these matters under serious grasp and we move on. The way I see it, we shall be expressing opinions in the general direction of the debate but without coming up with the substantive response that this matter deserves.

Yesterday we had the issue of Ebola and the Minister for Health had to be here. Today this is a technical matter on finance - on bonna bagaggawale - and there is no substantive person to take members’ concerns and give the necessary answers. What we have are general debates, general observations and general responses from ministers. Are we being properly guided to proceed in this manner?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is high time some people learnt that I am always disaster prepared. I have already asked hon. Prof Kamuntu to take charge. He is a very learned and very knowledgeable professor. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Whereas you are disaster prepared, I think the manner of procedure should be that the minister responsible for the sector should contact a colleague and ask him or her to stand in for him or her -(Applause)- instead of heaping this on you, because you may be overloaded. So, in future I think if the minister is not going to be present - for example the Minister of Education could ask hon. Gagawala to please stand in for her so that you are spared this. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague, hon. Theodore, for making that salient observation. 

As for my honourable colleague, hon. Gagawala, whilst you quote that when you are disciplining - he is not listening unfortunately -(Laughter)- I am talking to you - when you are disciplining a son you do not really slap him hard but that you can twist him or pinch him a bit, I think we are not going to allow any financial imprudence in any bank. How on earth can a whole bank - the one you are saying is now beginning to move on well – have property whose location it does not know? Check page 28, observation 4.2.12. Instead of the title reading William Street, it is registered under Salisbury and they are keeping it and you call it some prudence of some sort! 

Finally, Mr Speaker, my submission is that we need to rethink how to manage this programme. Otherwise, Post Bank, in my opinion, does not have the capacity to manage the mandate that has been tasked to it. Just check for the thin spread throughout the country - 17 districts out of 80! Remember 2011 is around the corner. The agenda was Bonna Bagaggawale; 2011 is around the corner and I do not know whether at that pace all will be reached. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.43
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report and I would like to make the following observations.  

I recognise that there has been a backlog as far as discussing the Auditor-General’s report regarding Post Bank (U) Ltd. is concerned. Although in the past their performance has not been good, according to the report of the committee, we are actually seeing that there is improvement especially when you look at the latest report which they discussed of 2005. 

Maybe what the committee should have really brought to light is whether Bank of Uganda really carries out its supervisory role over Post Bank as it does with other banks in this country. Maybe if Bank of Uganda was actually doing its work vigilantly, some of these omissions would not have been there. However, now that they have persisted all along, it shows that Bank of Uganda should also be brought into question so that it actually supervises like it does to other banks. If it was a private bank, some of these omissions would have maybe led to the closure of the bank. Now that this is a Government-owned entity, maybe that is why they are turning a blind eye. We should impress it upon Bank of Uganda to intensify supervision so that we have more effectiveness in the banking sector.

Mr Speaker, we are now looking at these omissions, which have been unearthed by the Auditor-General in light of the pending Bonna Bagaggawale programme. I would also like to complement what hon. Ssekikubo had said, that we are discussing this very important subject when we do not have any substantive minister from the Ministry of Finance. 

Bonna Bagaggawale as a programme has got confused. We do not know even what it is. We do not even know the criteria for accessing money. Recently, the Ministry of Finance went to Masaka and they met various SACCOs from Sembabule, Masaka, Rakai, Kalangala and they concluded without agreeing. So, in Masaka that programme has been put to a halt; nothing is moving. This shows that we have not really agreed on how this programme is going to be run. We should not rush to blame Post Bank; I do not blame them. As Parliament, we do not know the modalities of managing the Bonna Bagaggawale programme.

Secondly, Post Bank, like any other banking institution, is used to lending to individuals and organisations with security. Now, here are SACCOs, which are coming to borrow money without security. Their security is politics. (Laughter) Now, really, how can you rush to blame Post Bank? The best thing that you should tell Post Bank is that they are lending money to these SACCOs but they are actually giving them grants. This is because there is no guarantee that those SACCOs will be able to recover money and pay back. So, if you are going to be very stringy that Post Bank should be efficient to borrow and recover the money, it may not really be realised. I can guarantee that. 

We should not rush to blame Post Bank for Bonna Bagaggawale, but I think we should come back to Parliament and agree on how Bonna Bagaggawale is going to be implemented in this country. Otherwise, as of now we are far from that.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of capitalisation, I support the committee that the time has come for us to capitalise Post Bank, supervise it and empower it. We rushed and liquidated UCB, the Co-operative Bank was also liquidated and now as a Government we are stuck. As for Bonna Bagaggawale, which we want to implement at the meagre interest that we are proposing, no commercial bank can accept such a programme. These commercial banks cannot accept to manage Bonna Bagaggawale. So at the end of the day, we should have a Government-owned bank to manage the government programme at such a meagre interest rate.  

I would like to end there and thank the committee for their report. However, we should not bash Post Bank (U) Ltd. in light of Bonna Bagaggawale. We should come back here to Parliament and refine this Bonna Bagaggawale before we rush to blame Post Bank. Thank you.

4.49
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for giving us this comprehensive report. My concern is mainly on Post Bank. When the President first announced that Post Bank would be the one handling the money for Bonna Bagaggawale, I was a bit concerned. I have known this Post Bank for handling small monies that are sent to and fro and for students putting their money there, not big money. (Laughter) 

Secondly, in Post Bank we had problems. Money was getting lost from time to time; it was not reaching the owners. That is true and I witnessed it. If it did not happen to you, I did witness it.

Thirdly, Post Bank has very limited staff, as indicated in the report. Now we have given Post Bank the very big responsibility of handling millions of money for very many micro-finance co-operatives and yet we have not expanded the staff or given them adequate training to do their work like other banks. 

By the fact that Post Bank is Government owned 100 percent, - if I heard correctly - I think Government is running away from running its institutions. Our good Uganda Commercial Bank was sold because we were not managing it well and our good Co-operative Bank, which used to go down to the grassroots, was closed because of not handling money well, and we thought this would be the right bank to handle money. Now we have decided on Post Bank; what miracle will Government perform to ensure that this Post Bank will perform very well to serve its purpose?

Mr Speaker, Post Bank branches are very few - only 17 as mentioned - and yet we have over thousands of sub-counties with SACCOs. If I take the example of Koboko District, we have six fully-fledged SACCOs and we find it very difficult to travel all the way from Koboko to Arua to bank our money. One SACCO has managed, that is Lobule SACCO, and it takes two to three days before you can come back for the money, let alone the risks the person takes to bring the money to the SACCO. So, I think if we are to endorse this Post Bank to serve the micro finances or the SACCOs, they must be decentralised to all the districts rather than risk losing our money to thieves. 

Also, Mr Speaker, we are trying to develop these SACCOs into banks, so I think we require massive training of the management and the executive committee members of the SACCOs. You know, once you collect people’s money, you need to have the skill to give it out, multiply it and make sure that you recover it. With the limited skills that the managers have, it will be very difficult to operate these SACCOs very well.

I understand Government is training sub-county chiefs to monitor them. You can train somebody to monitor, but what about those who are managing. I think Government should lay emphasis on training managers and accountants of the SACCOs so that they can handle this money well. Unless we emphasise this training, we shall not recover our money.

I also recommend that instead of giving bicycles to sub-county chiefs, the bicycles should be given to the loan managers. Rather than giving the motorcycles to sub-county chiefs, give them to the ones who are monitoring the loans, the ones who are running after clients. We need to support the SACCOs if we want to see them perform and serve our people. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.55
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank the committee for this informative report. 

I would like to inform this House that we should be very careful. We have been given the evidence in writing and we have read and understood it, so it is now up to us to take a decision to ditch the interest of Ugandans and poor peasants who we are supposed to serve. Why am I saying this? Bonna Bagaggawale is embedded in the President’s Manifesto. Regardless of which party you belong to, we all want our fellow Ugandans to do something to improve their status of life. 

Here we are with Post Bank, condemned already with your written evidence, and we are still persuading ourselves and saying, “No, let us give it a chance”. Whose money are you playing with? Which district is going to wait? Only a few districts are covered; which district is going to wait to become rich with Bonna Bagaggawale? Even my people in Kooki County want to become rich but there is no Post Bank there. For how long do we have to wait?   

Secondly, we belong to a global village. It is sad because if I remember properly, it is this very House that at one time in its history passed a law setting up the Privatisation Unit for those parastatal bodies which were not performing. Why don’t we privatise Post Bank? Because you cannot recapitalise Post Bank, then you go ahead and risk the interests of the people. We have got the history of co-operatives in Uganda and it really stinks. Now, we are trying to set up these SACCOs and you subject them to the same conditions; we shall wind up in the same situation. For how long shall we keep explaining to the people, “oh, the government is trying to do this; we allowed Post Bank to operate but your monies are lost”? 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and members. Let us seriously consider this. I am just suggesting, although the professional person is not here, the minister of – (Interruption) 

MR KATURAMU: I thank you, hon. Magulumaali, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor. He has advocated for the privatisation of Post Bank just as it had been done for some banks in the country. At the same time, he is also advocating for the poor peasants to access money to alleviate poverty. Now, if Post Bank is privatised, it will then work on the forces of demand and supply and the interest rates are likely to be higher. How will that be reconciled with the interest you have to alleviate poverty among poor people?

MR MAGULUMAALI: Thank you very much, my colleague. Definitely, I hope there are people who are competent enough; I was only advising the government to work out a private arrangement with banks which are competent, which are in existence all over the country, so that Bonna Bagaggawale is kicked off at the same time because nobody is going to wait. You cannot risk Government funds in an incompetent body like Post Bank. That is all I am expressing. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to inform hon. Magulumaali, although he had finished his submission, that not all is going well with us in the way of privatisation. There are many Government parastatals that were privatised with the hope of saving us from mismanagement but we have not seen the best. As we talk now, we are suffering with Nytil; it is a living example. We have so many problems with many industries that we privatised. We are actually even regretting it. It is possibly the only bank Uganda is remaining with that we can talk about. 

I would only think that if the issue of management is becoming a problem, we step in because we have seen certain institutions surviving. Currently, The New Vision is running well, the water sector is running well, URA is running well, why can we not have another manager prudent enough to handle this institution to our best expectations other than advocating for policies that have been proven to fail? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I was a bit confused about the procedure. I thought people speaking were giving information to the person on the Floor. I do not know how they can give information when the person has already finished. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, I have read the report and I want to thank the committee for the good report. But as a Parliament, I think we need to understand what we are supposed to do with the various reports that we get from the oversight committees.  The committee has done post audit analysis of the various accounts of Post Bank. What are we supposed to do with that? And the committee has not told us the action that has been taken to address those issues. Now, for me it leaves me a big gap that I find myself incompetent to talk about Post Bank as a going concern because if the management is that bad that a banking or a financial institution is not in a position to know who the debtors are, then that leaves us with a very serious doubt that this bank can actually carryout its banking responsibilities. So, I think we need to find out first of all, what we should do as a Parliament as far as the management and the status of the bank are concerned. 

I fear that if we inject the Shs 6.5 billion or whatever gap, which the committee is talking about when the issue of management of the bank is not addressed, we are about to lose that money. And I would not want this Parliament to encourage a situation where Post Bank will become another UCB. It will be disheartening because all of us are now involved in ensuring that Post Bank is strengthened; Post Bank is financed in order to carryout some duties which should have been done by UCB if we had not sold it. So, what led us to selling UCB may be is on the way coming; that is my fear. So, I would like the committee to clarify to me why it did not come out with the final recommendation of what they expect Parliament to do with the information they have given us? 

The second point I would like to raise is that, we should not confuse the issue of Post Bank with the issue of Bonna bagaggawale otherwise, we would lose our path. The issue of Bonna bagaggawale must come to this Parliament as a programme of Government to address the issue of poverty in rural areas. We want it to come to Parliament as a programme. If we confuse it with this Post Bank issue, we will never be able to understand what this Bonna bagaggawale is supposed to do for us. 

We read in the papers that so many Savings and Credit Co-operatives (SACCOs) have been formed; money has been sent to rural areas through these SACCOs but we do not know under what system this money is going to the various SACCOs. We know some of us as Members of Parliament have tried to help our people; we have tried to have SACCOs registered but what is the procedure? What is the guideline? What are we supposed to tell our members? So, I think Parliament should insist that the Minister of Finance should come to this House with a full report and a full guideline of what is supposed to be done if we are to access this Bonna bagaggawale fund - if it is there at all. 

Finally –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, allow me to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that Bonna bagaggawale programme is there. Thank you. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I understand there is this NGO, which is recording who speaks in Parliament. So, I hope some people are not going to be misguided by just standing up to speak. (Laughter) 

We have read a lot about Bonna bagaggawale; all I want to know is, how much money has been budgeted for? Where is it? How can I access the money? Mr Speaker, if me as a senior Member of Parliament, in my status, I do not know where to get the money, I do not know how to access the money, how can my colleague really convince me now that the money is there? I know the programme is there but it could be air!

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with Members that the oversight committees have done a very good job; almost all the committees have done a good job but as Parliament, we have to take a position; what are we supposed to do with that information? And if we are just going to unearth theft and leave it there, what is the use? We would like to see some of these people arrested; we would like to see money returned so that we know that this Parliament has done something –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Madam, these committees are committees of Parliament. They are supposed to carry out their work and report to us to own their work. They do not execute their work without your blessing. So, all committees should report to Parliament so that you adopt the work which they have done otherwise, it cannot remain in their offices.  

MR ODIT: What I would want to inform this House about is that, we make recommendations, as the Speaker has guided and action is taken by Government. This morning, we were more than pleased in our committee to discover that the first statutory body that we investigated and Parliament debated its report and made recommendations and presented them to Government was National Medical Stores, where we found a lot of fraud. The IGG was also involved in investigations, a special audit was carried out and individuals were implicated. We recommended actions, just like in this one we have specific actions recommended. Now, the Directorate of CID has already taken action on some of those individuals.

We were given the report from the Office of the Inspector General of Police on how they have already started investigating some of those individuals implicated by the reports and they totally agreed with both the findings and our recommendations. So, I think it is really in good spirit that Government listens and considers the areas upon which they should take action. For us we report to Parliament and that is what we are doing. 

As for which institution is mandated to implement this programme, we were told in our committee that Government identified Post Bank as the agency to implement this Prosperity for All, and that is the very reason we also wanted to find out whether they have the capacity. I think we have done our part. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I was very clear in my preamble. I did applaud the work being done by the oversight committees but the explanation given by the chairperson of the Statutory Commission is not convincing. What I would want to see is that after these reports are given to us, what action do we take as a Parliament? That is my concern. I know the committee is doing its work and there is nothing else they can do beyond that other than informing us. But my problem is that after getting this information, what is the way forward? We should not just leave it there. Last year, the reports were given, this year we are receiving reports; then what?

THE SPEAKER: You see, when we adopt a report, there are other agencies of Government responsible for a particular subject as well as our decision. These agencies then take action.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, perhaps at this point I would like to say that the various ministries should also come to the House to tell us what action has been taken about some of these issues which are being raised by the oversight committees so that we feel obliged to follow up some of them. I thank you.

5.13
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. However, I wanted the chairman to help me to restore my hope or to lose hope completely. They went to Masindi after the launch of bonna bagaggawale with the Shs 500 million as I am seeing in the report. But I would wish to know from him, has any group got the money so far? And if none has got, when do we, who have not been visited, expect to get any money? Perhaps the Masindi MP has some information. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to reassure the House that in my place, bonna bagaggawale has been highly politicised to the extent that people imagine that Government is going to dish money freely to the people. That is the impression down there and I ask those ones responsible to go and realign the thinking of the people otherwise some SACCO groups like  the ones in Gweri sub county have collected the money to the tune of Shs 15 million and they are seated waiting for money that they expect from Government- (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member and this august House that after the launch of the bonna bagaggawale in Masindi, and after being given a dummy cheque, to date there is no SACCO which has received any single coin and – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, did you bank the dummy cheque? (Laughter)

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, the dummy cheque was used for publicity and it was a big one. It was publicised everywhere and in the newspapers but to date we have never received the money and I want to say that although the committee – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance is here -(Laughter)

PROF.KAMUNTU: Well, temporarily. The information that I want to give to hon. Jalia Lukumu is that, the funds given to Post Bank Masindi branch do not need to be deposited in the bank because they are earmarked electronically. Any time they want it, it is just switching a button -(Laughter) I am telling you the truth. Post Bank is electronically connected. That is the information.

But secondly, money has been disbursed - (Interruption)

MR OWORI: Mr Speaker, I feel offended when Prof. Kamuntu, whom I hold in very high esteem, stands up and makes such a dummy statement. (Laughter). Gen. Saleh has been telling everybody that there is money in Masindi, Shs 500 million, and that the SACCOs in Masindi are just asleep. So, is the hon. Prof. Kamuntu in order to speak without the proper authority of his substantive minister and make an allegation that is very false? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, as far as I see, the kind of explanation or the statement you made is a statement of fact. But you have said that Gen. Saleh said the money is there, but have the SACCOs tried to go where the money is and failed to get it? My understanding from Prof. Kamuntu’s explanation was that, Post Bank can get the money once they present the dummy cheque. But have the SACCOs in Masindi District gone to the Post Bank to demand money and been told by the bank that the bank has no money? That is what you –(Interruption)

Well, there is another minister –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I only wanted to finish giving this information to my honourable member. Actually, the Shs 500 million earmarked for Masindi is there. I am also confirming to you that money in modern banking need not be in Masindi branch – yes, I am telling you! These are the facts, I would not tell a lie to the distinguished House. I am informing you factually that there is no co-operative society that has come to Masindi branch or Post Bank and has been told that there is no money. This is simply because money can be sent electronically to the branch immediately it is loaded and that machinery is there. Electronically, Masindi branch is connected to the centre and that is a fact.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish to inform the august House that on 11th of this month, we had a meeting with all the banks that are involved in ‘Prosperity for All’ and I am amazed when I hear hon. Bintu saying that the money was not put in Post Bank. 

To prove this, on that day if there was no money in that bank- I remember Gen. Saleh questioning the General Manager of Post Bank as to why he had not given out the money that was meant for Masindi and his answer was that nobody among the SACCOs had gone there to pick any money. So, when she says that there is no money- I think that day that man would have said, “Please, you told me so but we didn’t see the money.” He was given directives and instructions on how to go about this. So, I want to put it clear that the money was put there and it is still there. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members representing areas in Masindi District, you have heard from the Minister of Finance to the effect that if your SACCOs approach Post Bank, the money will be there. Go and tell them - well, we have to start and then come back and report next week otherwise, how are we going to verify your story and hers? You rather approach your SACCOs in your district, advise them on what the minister has told us here today on 13th and come back and say, “Yes, there was a trial and they have been told this.” That is when we shall listen to you. Otherwise, why should I believe your story and disbelieve hers for the time being? Please, do that. Who was on the Floor? 

MR OMOLO: I have to thank the hon. Member for Masindi for giving that information. But, Mr Speaker, whatever the case may be, whether the money arrived yesterday or this morning, the money has not been there according to reliable sources. What I am trying to say is that, let us not use this political language of trying to convince people and call it a Government programme. In 1996, we had ‘entandikwa’ and it went its way. In 2001, we had modernisation but I have not seen anything so modern especially in agriculture. In 2006, we have Bonna bagaggawale. I don’t know if all Ugandans will become rich at the end of the day. But all in all, let us do what we say so that we guide this country to success. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to begin by thanking the committee for this important report on the operations of Post Bank, but I worry that we are actually flogging the messenger and the messenger being Post Bank who is to deliver the message of ‘Prosperity for All’ yet the problem seems to be a lot bigger than Post Bank. 

When we are dealing with SACCOs, we are not looking at the whole aspect of co-operative societies. In the past, when we had co-operatives, they were involved in production, storage and marketing. We now have a situation where we are only looking at the credit aspect and I don’t know where poor Ugandans are going to get savings from in order to contribute to this whole scheme. 

So, under the circumstances, I worry that by relying on Post Bank, which the report says may be highly incapable of rolling out this programme to the 1,000 plus sub counties, we are going to end up in difficulties; lose the money and also end up with a problem concerning the future of Post Bank. 

On the issue of whether Government can operate an institution effectively, I have been seeing recently on Kampala Road that the Kenya Commercial Bank is opening a branch. In our particular case, it seems we have problems with the management of this institution. We had a specialised bank dealing with co-operatives in the form of the Co-operative Bank. I think we need to assess carefully what caused Co-operative Bank to collapse. 

The little information I have got on this states that the problems were not caused by the people involved in the co-operative societies. Therefore, if we don’t put safeguards, a lot of this money, which is supposed to go and help the poor, is also going to be lost through similar processes. 

Rather that flogging Post Bank, let us really address the bigger problem, which is, how are we going to work out this policy of wealth for all through SACCOs? I think the onus is on the government to come out clearly on how this is going to be done. As it is now, I fear for what will happen to the people of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.28
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Representative Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the committee for this post mortem report that they have made on the status of Post Bank in view of the responsibilities it has been bestowed to foster particularly, ‘Prosperity for All.’ 

As stated in this report, Post Bank has been identified by Government to spearhead and implement this micro-finance component of ‘Prosperity for All’ and the reason given was the good performance of the bank as per Bank of Uganda rating. Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are aware that presently, all banks in which Government had a stake like Uganda Commercial Bank and Co-operative Bank have been privatised and it has been our wish as a country to have a bank where the interest of the poor Ugandans can easily be safeguarded. 

The chairman of this committee has reported that there is 100 percent share holding by Government in Post Bank. So, wanted to know; since there is 100 percent shareholding in this bank, what are the core opportunities that can be passed on to Ugandans particularly those related to development and investment? This is very vital. 

One of my colleagues here mentioned that it may be very difficult for Post Bank to make apt and timely recoveries of monies from SACCOs because the way SACCOs are going to be run, there is no strictness in providing collateral security and in the absence of collateral, Post Bank is faced with a very big challenge of depicting itself as a successful financial institution and at the same time fostering a Government policy to fight poverty in this country. 

When I saw the report of the Auditor-General, it raised rays of hope to me that Post Bank may indeed be a viable institution to carry out these important functions mentioned in this report. However, I wanted to read in this report that it had been reported that because of inadequate capital, Post Bank was not able to carry out its commercial functions efficiently and that it had not yet been able to secure a commercial banking licence. Now, may I know from the chairman whether after the Auditor-General’s report which depicts success and hope, the commercial banking licence is ready with Post Bank? And if it is not, what are the impediments? Is it the share capital demanded by Government? This House desires to know the impediments that are making Post Bank not to have a fully commercial banking licence.

When I listened to Prof. Kamuntu explaining that the physical presence of money in Masindi is not relevant and that if the SACCOs in Masindi and any other district in Uganda need money, it is a question of connecting to Kampala then the money will go there. I ask myself, “What is the relevance of opening structures in the districts?” This committee has mentioned that we currently have 17 branches in the country and we opened them at a cost and our policy is to take services nearer to the people. Why shouldn’t the money be in these structures/facilities where our people who are poor and who are the beneficiaries are located? (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Honourable colleague, thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I have information to the effect that the money which was dispensed to Post Bank Masindi was not meant for the SACCOs because there was an intention to outsource a capacity building –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the source of your information?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am coming to that. The money was intended to outsource capacity building institutions to go down to the SACCOs but not to be benefited from by the individual SACCOs. What I would like to request the minister, possibly as we are also being told to go and clarify from the ground, is that, was this money supposed to build the capacity of the SACCOs or are we trying to get micro-finance institutions in the centre to build this capacity? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Interruption) 

MR MUKITALE: I got this information from the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be structured in the way we proceed with our work here. You stood to give information and so you cannot start questioning in the same breath. You stood to give information and we wanted to verify your information by asking you the source because anybody can stand here and say that he has been informed when he has no basis of that information. What is the source of the information?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for seeking further clarification. I was only developing my point and I am saying that this explanation also comes from the Ministry of Finance. So, I am surprised that we are now beginning to blame the local SACCOs yet the dispenser is Ministry of Finance and not Post Office. Post Bank will only give us this money if Finance has done its work. There is no way Post Bank will start giving money if there are no procedures, structures or frameworks. The framework is the responsibility of the ministry concerned. Post Bank is just a dispenser; it is just a courier. The policy is not made by Post Bank – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I detect that you stood just to make your contribution not to give information. And it is a tricky way of making contributions. Can we proceed with your contribution?

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is about Masindi. The minister has told us that the money is there and that you can access it by using a button. If the SACCOs in Masindi are not ready to access that money, can other SACCOS in Uganda which are ready access that money if it is there? Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. In my conclusive contribution, I wanted to talk about co-ordination and institutional arrangement as a way forward for the success of this Post Bank responsibility. The committee has informed us that Post Bank has a strategic plan and that this plan has a strategy of networking with other stakeholders. What is evident is that, even in the traditional commercial banks existing here in Uganda, there are also networking with other stakeholders to improve efficiency in their services. 

For instance, the ATM machine may serve Tropical Africa Bank customers at a petrol station and the people access these services. Since Post Bank has not covered the whole country and there are local commercial banks in this country like Centenary Rural Development Bank, which has many branches covered country wide, can there be a legal and institutional framework to enable Post Bank to work with these existing commercial banks in order to improve service delivery? We feel that these are the areas where we do not look at Post Bank despite the lack of capacity as a new financial institution so that it can really reach out to many districts and then they work and collaborate with other commercial banks who have branches in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.40
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very good work done. I would like to seek a few clarifications from the committee and also guidance in a number of ways.

We are talking about a conveyor belt. May be I will talk about that because I am a pilot. I would equate Post Bank to a conveyor belt. When you discover that the conveyor belt cannot carry the capacity of the luggage of the tourist coming with British Air Ways- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, this report is not only for Bonna bagaggawale. If really a point has been made in effect of inefficiency of the bank to deal with Bonna bagaggawale, I think you can move on another point other than repeating the same point that has been spoken over many times.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, thank you for the guidance. The other one on which I wanted to get guidance from the committee is the issue of SACCOs registration and supervision. Mr Chairman, you proposed in your recommendation that it should be decentralised to regional level. I would also like to propose that it should be further decentralised to sub regional level because if there are 17 districts, I am sure those districts must have come from all over the regions of Uganda and all over the sub regions. There are 13 sub regions: Teso, Kigezi, Sebei and others. Can we go down to sub regions so that registration supervision does not take place only in Kampala but at sub regional level and the 13 regions are there? That is your recommendation on page 17 of the main report.

Then the other one is still on strengthening branch management. You gave the example of Arua which has six to seven districts being managed by one linkage banking officer whose duty is to identify, appraise and supervise SACCOs in that area. I think the best would be to increase the linkage bank officers to the number of districts in that area. Each district should have one linkage officer. If there are seven districts in Arua instead of having one, they should have seven so that each linkage officer is attached to one district. That is what I thought I would strongly recommend.

The issue of Shs 500 million has been touched. I am sure the Minister of Finance will go back to that. But my other interest is, even if the money has been banked in the bank, it has stayed there for a long time and eventually it is generating interest. Will that interest be given to the SACCOs? We have had this for long - Shs 500 million is now given out and the interest goes to whom it may concern.

Lastly, just like hon. Jimmy Akena mentioned; we are flogging the transmission line. However, the major problem is with the Ministry of Finance. These are the persons who should be feeding Post Bank with these monies. Prime Minister and honourable ministers, unless you sort out that confusion in the Ministry of Finance, Bonna bagaggawale is likely to fail, because you are not coming with proper guidelines. When I go to Soroti it is very difficult like hon. Peter Omolo mentioned. It is very difficult for me to explain the SACCO in Kateta because in my constituency it is only one, although it has been mentioned that all sub counties should have at least one. In serere it is only one. 

It is very difficult for me to answer questions when I am asked, “Capt Otekat, when is the money coming?” “Captain Otekat, how much money are we getting?” “Captain Otekat, how are we supposed to distribute this money?” It is very difficult for me to answer, because even Parliament has not been given that kind of guideline at all.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otekat, sorry to interrupt your contribution. Hon. Minister the point which I have gathered here is that, even we Members of Parliament are not well informed as to how the programme is going to be run and, therefore, I think it is necessary on your part to come and give us comprehensive details so that we can be able to explain to our constituencies about - (Applause) – otherwise, if we are ignorant ourselves then you can imagine the people we are representing. (Laughter). So, we could assist you as a ministry to sensitise people about the running of this programme.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, hon. Kamuntu, the minister who was assigned by the Prime Minister, should let the minister concerned with finance know that there is a big problem and that they also need to move out - for example, Soroti, despite it having many radio stations, we have never, at any one moment since Bonna bagaggawale was initiated, had a minister or any officer from the Ministry of Finance come to explain to the people what the word Bonna bagaggawale means. You can see that we even struggle to pronounce it. So, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform the Minister of Finance that as a ministry, they need to go and sensitise the public about bonna bagaggawale. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am about to close this debate because of a personal problem, but I had already identified hon. Ssekikubo and I think to balance, we shall have my Member of Parliament and one on the other side before the chairman and the minister come to wind up. I am sorry I cannot tell you the problem, but I have something that I have to attend to.

5.48
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You will appreciate that why we are rising up and yet you had guided that we move away from bonna bagaggawale, is the fact that apparently Government did not come out to tell us, as representatives of the people, the essence of bonna bagaggawale being tagged to Post Bank. It is a matter that Government needs to address, but not to ambush Parliament on; not to smuggle in such an important topic, which has somehow only been landed on by a committee of Parliament and now Government starts to respond to Members’ concerns. 

For instance, Post Bank is a bank that only had capital of Shs 3.4 billion. In May this year, according to the report, another Shs 2.0 billion was added on as its capital and yet the committee tells us that the average of other banks is Shs 15 billion. If you look at the committee’s report, you will notice that in the financial year 2005/06, it just managed to make a profit of Shs. 313 as if it is a Lwemiyaga bank and this is the bank you are entrusting with the gigantic task of managing bonna bagaggawale?

So, Mr Speaker, it is high time Government stopped ad hocking, stopped smuggling issues on the Floor of this Parliament. We need clear policy statements. In the first place, how did Government chose Post Bank? When was the decision that Post Bank be the harbinger of our bonna bagaggawale programme, made? We have never been told about that and to me, Mr Speaker, I would like, with your permission, to remind Members that the best way to guide this bonna bagaggawale or SOCCOs is to apply Tier IV and when we were passing the law – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, it is consensus that the bonna bagaggawale issue has been exhaustively dealt with. Can you deal with another issue?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am getting a bit confused and I need guidance from you. Post Bank (U) Limited is a public institution; a company guaranteed by shares and owned by Government 100 percent. According to our laws, it is Bank of Uganda that has the responsibility of supervising and monitoring all the banks in the country. So, I find it so difficult that this Parliament now has started to interfere with the business of Bank of Uganda. I am saying this because Bank of Uganda has the mandate to supervise and monitor all the banking institutions of which Post Bank is one. If we are to debate this matter, we should separate the two. If we are debating the capacity of Post Bank, we should separate it from its capacity to manage bonna bagaggawale. This should be a separate matter. 

I am saying this because as per now, Parliament has not been officially informed that Government has agreed that Post Bank should manage bonna bagaggawale. It is still a rumour. Government of Uganda has not informed us as Parliament; we have only been hearing rumours. It has to come here as a policy for us as Parliament to agree on it. 

So, for us to enter the management and supervision of banks, I think shows that we are not handling this matter correctly. We should leave the issues of monitoring and supervision to Bank of Uganda so that they do specifically that duty. So, for Parliament to come with a report on banks is not correct at all. I understand we have shares even in Stanbic Bank. So, are we going to have a report on Stanbic Bank because we have shares there? So, I think we need to separate the two.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, may I ask the chairman of the committee; is it the intention of your committee to take away the mandate of Bank of Uganda in respect of this? How did you deal with this one?

MR JOHN ODIT: Mr Speaker, I think you are right. We need to internalise whatever submissions that are going to be made here. There are too many banks in this country but the question is, why is it that only Post Bank is appearing in Parliament? Probably you should have asked that. We have made it clear in our report that this is a public bank; it is owned by Government and by Constitution and all our laws, all public institutions, which are audited by the Auditor-General, have to appear here. It is not by accident; it is by law. We have never made any attempts to do the job of Bank of Uganda! We have our own role which is clearly spelt out. We examine the Auditor-General’s report and familiarize with the field programmes before we come to submit our report. I thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, from the report of the committee it is clear that Members went into the details of the bank. They talked about staffing of the bank, its capitalization, the loan portfolio of the bank and its capacity to mobilise and recover money. I think that this was going beyond our parliamentary mandate. If we are to do our things correctly, we should actually get such information from Bank of Uganda because it is the autonomous institution to perform those functions. But for us, as Parliament, to indulge and try –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, let me ask you something for purposes of clarification. You said that the mandate to supervise Post Bank is that of Bank of Uganda. Agree? Now, when the bank that supervises makes a report, does it tender that report to any person or authority? If it does, then can’t the committee use the report tendered by Bank of Uganda to make its report? So, what is the contradiction?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I just want to help hon. Okot Ogong. I am a Member of this committee and I was involved in this work of looking at the Auditor-General’s report, which makes observations and recommendations. 

In the Auditor-General’s report are the audited accounts which have the income statement, the cash flow and the balance sheet. The balance sheet will talk about assets and liabilities; it talks of accumulated funds; it will talk of the capitalisation money and make comments. It is from that that the committee picks this information. It even goes ahead to make comments on the human resource capacity. So, it is based on the Auditor-General’s report because it covers all these issues of financial nature and internal controls.  So, the committee and the House are not out of order to mention those issues.

Hon. Ogong, if you can have time with me, I think I have some little knowledge in this accounting, I will be able to help you.  Because if I went on here to explain these issues about the net-flows, the gross profit, the rate of return here, we will end up getting mixed up because all these issues are mentioned here and the professor here knows these issues and he can even supplement and clarify further in these areas here. So, Mr Speaker, the committee and the House are not out of order.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You see, Article 163 says: “The Auditor-General  shall audit and report on the public accounts of Uganda and of all  public offices including courts, the central and local Government administrations, universities and public institutions of like nature, and any public corporation or other bodies or organisations established by an Act of Parliament.”  So, in the report which they gave us, they were dealing with the Auditor-General’s reports in a number of years, that is how I think the committee came to be charged with this particular subject. Apparently, the Auditor-General had invoked the mandate and audited this. But I think let us not go in the arguments. You made a point; we are going to examine it.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I seek clarification from both the chairman of the committee and possibly also from the speaker holding the Floor. You are all aware that as a country, because of our development partners’ structural adjustment policies, we lost our UCB; we lost our Co-operative Bank. Now, as a country we are faced with the challenge of consciously and deliberately bringing in force a rural development initiative and the only institution which we have, owned by the state, is Post Bank. 
The clarification I am seeking is, should we give up in terms of Government owning institutions and building capacity to make sure that if we need a network and a structure which we lost from the Co-operative Bank and UCB, this time round we can build the capacity of the Post Bank to provide the much needed agro-rural related structure of financial service delivery?

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a rhetorical question. You know the answer, and now you are seeking information. I think you should have given clarification. I intend to close this debate within five minutes.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the information I am going to give is, under the Financial Institutions Statute, 2003 repealed by the Financial Institutions Statute, 2004, all commercial banks and indeed Post Bank included are licensed by the Bank of Uganda. But because Post Bank is owned, 100 per cent, by Government, its books are clearly audited by the Auditor-General and consequently its accountability to the committee. But those other banks which are not owned by Government 100 percent need not go to the committee for accountability in this House. Therefore, this report is in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of this House.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I would like to end my submission by requesting Government to give us a timeframe within which they can bring before this House the Tier IV under the micro finance institutions, because it is that one that will guide us about the outcomes of the Post Bank.

As I mentioned, Mr Speaker, you will appreciate that why we are studying here and why we take interest in Post Bank is that, it has metamorphosed into a dispenser of a very important credit line to the rural areas. So, it is for that matter that we are here patiently waiting when we can regularise the SACCOs because according to the committee, the current capacity of the bank is still nascent such that if it expands to the rural areas, it is going to choke up. So, I would really like us to have a strong bank to distribute Bonna Bagaggawale, but most important, Government to bring to us the regulated framework for the Tier IV which will guide the SACCOs rather than handling them ad hoc.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, there has been a contradiction. We clearly launched Bonna Bagaggawale and the Shs 500 million to Masindi. To me, somewhere somehow, someone could be having this money and scheming it off. Whether Government is telling us the facts or not, that is not the gist.  Because if by yesterday, money was not in Masindi yet, what causes this delay? Is someone harbouring that money, scheming it off?  We need to have some sincerity on that point. I thank you.

6.05
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I wish also to thank the committee for this very good report that has given us a lot of information.

Mr Speaker, in my two minutes, I will begin with the vision of Post Bank.  Visions and missions have a purpose; their purpose is to inspire an organisation in a direction. They put the map and display them for a purpose. It is not because it is fashionable to do so. As the vision of Post Bank is given, “To become the leading financial institution for the mass market”, I find it self-centred, not client sensitive and cannot adequately inspire the bank to serve its clients. I would recommend that the vision be defined in terms of the customer, the client, rather than in terms of the bank itself. That way perhaps the bank will be inspired to think in a more customer-oriented than bank-oriented way.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, yes Post Bank is a weak bank and needs strengthening. But the problem does not start with Post Bank; the problem started with selling of UCB and Co-operative Bank. As a peasant and rural economy, Uganda will for a long time need a public bank even when FDC comes into power in 2011. It is a pity that we are mourning UCB and Co-operative banks! But the lesson should be to strengthen the only public bank that we have and Post Bank is a good start; it is the only start in my opinion.

Mr Speaker, so much has been said and it is not my intention to repeat what has been said. I just wanted to emphasise the fact that as a rural economy, we must have a public institution and Post Bank is the only one we have. We must strengthen it and we are happy for this report, which then should help the Executive or whichever institutions responsible to implement this or take this decision to do so. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.08
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first concern is about the capitalisation of the Post Bank. We have been told that this is a Government institution and I am wondering how broke it is, yet in order to strengthen the interests of the public, it should have reached that target of Shs 15 billion. May I know what is wrong? Is it a Government institution which we are calling the Post Bank or somebody owns it and we do not know? Because if it is a Government institution, it should by now be having full amounts of money that should make it run - that is Shs 15 billion.

In fact, the committee has pointed out that the district commercial officers are in place to ensure that the SACCOS are running smoothly. But may I inform the House that in some districts there are no commercial officers, including Lira where I come from. May I know from the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry why these districts have no commercial officers who should have been linking the SACCOs with the Post Bank? And then, how the Post Bank is related to “Prosperity for All”. 

I am glad money for Masindi should be somewhere, maybe the minister will take it up to go and sensitise the people of Masindi on how to access it. But may I know when the other districts will also get their portion because we desperately need it say in the case of Lira?

Finally, in Lira there is a very big women’s SACCO which actually is almost collapsing because this has been handed over through the state house and they raise something over Shs 80 million. But the information available is that, only Shs 40 million is in the bank. Please, can you take it up? In my constituency where over Shs 1.0 million was raised, members are complaining that since then, they have not benefited from this SACCO business. Can you find out what is happening with the women’s SACCO of Lira District?

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE (INDUSTRY) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I just want to express my appreciation to the chairman and his Members of the committee for a comprehensive report they have submitted to the House. In doing so, I want to respond based on evaluating the Post Bank from the perspective of its capitalisation, the quality of its assets as well as the quality of its management. Then I will answer specific issues that have been raised on the Floor to put the record right.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask you to be very brief because I have got another engagement where I have been invited.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The first point is, if you look at this report and you look at the methodology, you will realise that in the committee’s meetings, they had a series of institutions and people they met relevant to the accountability responsibility but they omitted Bank of Uganda which is a vital institution when it comes to evaluating the performance of banks. And I am saying, if you had not omitted the Bank of Uganda, which is charged with the oversight responsibility of banks, your work would have been immensely enhanced because Bank of Uganda does not only supervise but they have the fit and proper criteria of testing the staff to be recruited in these banks. Even opening branches is authorised by the Bank of Uganda. Some of these issues that you were raising could have been answered by the Bank of Uganda itself because that is part of their responsibility.

Second, when you look at page 9 of the report, on capitalisation of the bank, you will realise that the Post Bank has been capitalised by the Shs 2.0 billion which has been transferred to it and it is also recorded in the reports that Shs 6.5 billion in support of this bank is also on line. So, the capitalisation of the bank is part of the government programme. Post Bank is going to be capitalised in order to meet the capital adequacy requirements of banks under supervision. 

The second point which I think is very significant in evaluating the performance of Post Bank is to note that the report is from 1999 to 2005. Consequently, some of the criticisms that have been raised in the reports have been addressed over time and if you want proof of that, you look at the audit report of 2005 on page 43. This should allay fears expressed by Members because in that audit report on page 43 of the report of the committee, the Auditor-General gave unqualified opinion for the year ended 30th June 2005 in that all the financial statements were in agreement with the books of accounts. This in turn gave a true and fair view of the state of the bank and the committee was satisfied that there are no serious queries raised. This means this institution is recovering. So we take note, over the past, their performance was very poor but we are also encouraging this institution. We note they have responded to this weakness and indeed on the last audit report it shows the bank is on the amend. 

On the asset quality, the quality of the accounts of the bank, it is also answered by the audit report. 

When it comes to management, again I just want to share with Members that management of banks has changed over time. Because of information technology, you will notice in the industry right now, the heavy emphasis is on your capacity technologically to be able – incidentally, I will just come to this specifically on the question of Masindi because it became an issue. 

Money these days is no longer carried in billions and indeed the management of banks incidentally, I should also emphasise, is a function of Bank of Uganda. Before you can be a chief executive of any bank, the Bank of Uganda must test you and in the fit and proper person criteria of testing, they look at your knowledge in the field, they look at your integrity, they look at what they call fiducially responsibility, how committed are you to the institution and the whole question of integrity and loyalty. I would trust that if the Bank of Uganda has given that seal of approval to the management of this Post Bank, you should be comforted that then the bank is in competent management only that they are responding to past mistakes which they are putting on track.
 
Also Post Bank is the only institution owned 100 percent financial by the government. The bank is going to be capitalised. 

On specific questions, which have been raised on the Floor of the House, the first question is regulating Tier IV. Yes, for those who were in the last Parliament, Tier IV is financial institutions where the savings and credit institutions belong. You have Tier I, which is commercial banks; Tier II, credit institutions; Tier III, micro deposit taking institutions and Tier IV are the rest, that is, the savings and credit and so on. These are not centrally regulated; they are not licenced centrally and therefore their supervision is left. 

It is becoming increasingly of concern even to Government that you could have these institutions having so much money and they can have serious bearing on the integrity of financial systems. This issue I am sure the Leader of Business will confirm to you that Government is addressing, and the law is going to come before the House to regulate these institutions. 

The question of Masindi became quite difficult. I want to confirm that only yesterday – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the minister finishes, I want a small matter clarified. We had “Entandikwa”, which was a national programme. Now, we have this “Bonna Bagaggawale”, it is again a national programme. My concern is with the terminology which is difficult to some people. If it is a national programme, why don’t we use words which are easily understood nationally because we have “Bonna bagaggawale”, then you have a person called Gagawala, it is very confusing to some of us. Why don’t we use a national terminology? 

THE SPEAKER: But you see, I had earlier asked the government to come and give a comprehensive statement on “Bonna Bagaggawale” or “Prosperity for All” policy. This “Bonna bagaggawale” came as a by-the-way when they were probing the activities of Post Bank which includes that one. So, I would rather suggest that when the minister comes specifically to deal with this programme, he deals with that one so that we now deal only with the activities of Post Bank disassociating it from the “Bonna bagaggawale” which will be addressed maybe next week. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, you have explained that much clearer than I could have done and, therefore, I can specifically go to the specific issues that were raised. But for hon. Okello-Okello, if “Bonna bagaggawale” is so difficult to pronounce, simply go English and use “Prosperity for All.” And you can translate it into your own vernacular so that it is easy to pronounce. It should not be an issue really. Or you can use either Swahili or English and that is it.

Coming to specific issues, on page 6 of the report, we talk about the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have a problem of time.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, there are 22 branches and the Post Bank has now introduced mobile banking. As I talk to you, this mobile banking was introduced in the east and it can cover more districts that have no banks established. 

The second point which I also want to clarify relates to the Post Bank with its relation to savings and credits. I want to confirm that Post Bank is a linkage bank; meaning, it will only link to established savings and credits institutions. Consequently, when there are no credits and savings institutions established, there is no link between Post Bank and those institutions. In other words, the money that went to Masindi, this is how it should be understood. The money that was sent to Masindi could only be accessed by established savings and credits societies. You would not access it, hon. Otada, if you did not have those institutions.

THE SPEAKER: Please bear with me.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I will be very quick. Therefore, linking banking to established SACCOs requires them to be established and that is part of the challenge that we have to establish these SACCOs before they can be linked to Post Bank.

Lastly, in modern banking, we can share this experience. Electronic banking environment does not require that you have money sitting in your branch. I can challenge you. Some of you Members have children all over the place, do you take money to America for your child or the money can be sent from here and they pay your school fees? The same reasoning applies here. I can sit in Kampala and money can be electronically sent to Masindi as immediately as it is required there. 

So, the truth is the following: For Masindi, Shs 500 million was earmarked to be accessed by savings and credits institutions. As of now, one credit savings institution was formed and it has accessed the money. As soon as the rest are formed and they meet the criteria, they will also access the money. But the money would not have needed to be in Masindi for this to happen. This is true because Post Bank has a computerised centralised electronic system and it can be reached.

I thank the Members and I thank the Prime Minister for the opportunity he has given me. Thank you. 

6.25
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I think you are now satisfied that the person I asked to hold the Floor is eminently qualified and hon. Chekamondo is going to answer the remaining issues. I am very proud of you.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Ms Lukia Chekamondo): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to appreciate the work done by the committee on Post Bank and I want to appreciate the issues raised by honourable members on “Prosperity for All” and Post Bank. Actually, I want to answer a few items that I have an idea on and I want to appreciate that this august House is supposed to get a statement on “Bonna bagaggawale” or “Prosperity for All”. 

I wish to assure the House that on 11th we were on this thing trying to finalise it so that a statement could be brought to the House and I am sure it will come. I do not want to pre-empt what was in it. I want to assure you that the minister concerned is coming with collected information - because some things were lacking, it would already be here. I am not going to tell you the time because I do not know what time he will require. I want to assure you that guidelines will be brought here and also a statement will be brought to the Members of the august House.

Secondly, there was a Member who said that in his district there was no commercial officer. I thought this was decentralised and it is the district to handle the appointments. They have to first advertise, then people apply, the district service commission interviews, and those who qualify are appointed. I think it is not the Ministry of Finance that is assigned that duty. 

Members, I want to assure you that a statement will be brought here. We appreciate your concerns and I thank everybody for this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that this House adopts the report of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, and I thank members of the committee. 

We now come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 18 December 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

