Thursday, 10 December 2009

Parliament met at 11.31 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting. I have two announcements. At 5.30 p.m. there will be a Christian Prayer Service for the Anglican Chaplaincy at Parliament. So, Members are invited to go to the Members’ Lounge.

On Tuesday, we requested the Minister of Health to bring a statement on the MDG 5. We shall have it in the afternoon and we will add it on the Order Paper.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

11.33
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill under rule 105 and rule 106:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution under Article 94(4)(b) provides that a Member of Parliament has the right to move a Private Members’ Bill; 

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted the Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 of the Constitution which also empowers Members of Parliament to move a Private Members’ Bill under rule 105;

CONSIDERING that poor sanitation is a big problem in Uganda especially in the city centres, there is need to put in place a law to criminalise littering and also a law to regulate the collection and disposal of litter to improve our sanitation and environment; 

CONSIDERING further that littering has exacerbated spread of disease especially Cholera, it is urgent that proactive measures be put in place to arrest the situation through legislation to check littering;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled, “The Anti Litter Bill, 2009. A draft of which is hereto attached and do the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MRS OKURUT: Madam Speaker, I did not want to use a hackneyed phrase but it is true that Uganda indeed was gifted by nature and we know that all over the world Uganda is hailed for its beauty. It is green, painted in vivid primary colours that are everlasting with splashes of red, orange and yellow but all this now has, in most places, been defiled. We have a big problem! 

Those who prescribe to the Christian doctrine believe that Uganda is actually the original “Garden of Eden” but this garden is slowly going to the dogs. You only need to travel upcountry and then you will see how people litter the environment. Passengers in buses drink water and throw empty bottles on the road or in the bushes. Children pick up these bottles and either play with them or put other liquids in them and diseases spread. People eat bananas and throw peels anywhere and everywhere. And in some extreme cases, used condoms are thrown everywhere and children use them as balloons. Where are we going? 

They say that cleanliness is next to Godliness; we are losing this cleanliness. There is therefore urgent need to criminalise littering. 

Yesterday when I was speaking to one of my colleagues, he asked how practical this was. It is very practical. It has been done in other countries. I remember reading on the Internet that former President Bill Clinton at one time was almost arrested in Singapore because he attempted to throw chewing gum on the street. All the Tiger economic countries have criminalised littering. It is only by criminalising littering that our people will learn. This environment is getting polluted each passing day and disease is spreading. 

I have said on the Floor of this Parliament before that Uganda is now like one big dustbin. Madam Speaker, when you enter this Chambers, you feel like taking off your shoes. Why? Because it is spotless clean. If you come to my House you will have the same feeling because it is spotless clean. But if you go to an environment which is already dirty, you have no feeling of shame and you will also add to the dirt. It is only natural. (Interjection) Madam Speaker, please protect me from the cynicism of my honourable colleague from Bushenyi, hon. Prof. Kamuntu. 

When we talk about littering, the issue of disposal also comes in. When we are moving on our roads, any animal which is hit by a car, for example, dogs, cats et cetera, nobody takes away that animal. Every car that passes by will instead shatter it to smithereens. It is only the vultures in this country that help us to dispose of such carcass. 

This has got to go out loud and clear. People defecate everywhere in the bushes. Tourism is being affected. I remember when we were doing a film on Uganda on the Discovery Channel and we had to go filming near Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, before we went there the President directed that something had to be done because the bushes were all littered with live faeces. We cannot go on like this. 

There is this beautiful Northern Bypass which has just opened and it is helping us but when you go there and look around its environment, you will be shocked! It is already littered with so much garbage and buveera. Some people are using buveera as mobile toilets and we cannot go on like this.

Madam Speaker, I want to urge this House that if we are going to retain our identity as a clean Uganda, if we are going to save ourselves from disease, from this environment which we are degrading because of littering, we should criminalise littering. Many states in the United States have actually criminalised it. In some of the countries in Africa, you cannot go there and do what we do here. Doing this will need putting some latrines along the highways so that we do not have people getting out of buses and doing their business by the wayside. That should be in place but this is something that can be worked on. 

I beg to stop here but we must criminalise littering. The message should go out loud and clear so that people get the message. I beg to move. (Applause)

11.41
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Mary Okurut for having moved this motion that I second. 

I would like to support this motion which is aiming at introducing a Bill that will help keep the Pearl of Africa clean and in a healthy environment.

What is the philosophy of the environment? This environment that we have continued littering and degrading is a borrowed resource from our children. We shall pass on this environment to the next generation. Therefore, we must use it sustainably.

Secondly, the environment is the most precious resource of God’s creation. That is why after five days He asked Himself, “What do I do? Who will take care of my creation?” He discussed with the Holy Spirit and His Son and They said, “Let us make man in Our own image to take care of Our precious resource,” the environment. We are just caretakers! It defeats logic and human understanding that people who are entrusted with this resource go on degrading the very resource that they were given to take care of. We are supposed to offer stewardship. But when you go around Kampala or all over the country, you find that we are degrading the environment as if we are its final users. This is malice and madness. 

Mama Mary and I have a mental picture; you can call it a dream or a vision, of a clean and healthy environment. We have a mission that we charge every individual in this country the responsibility and duty of keeping a healthy and clean Uganda. 

What is our justification in seeking leave to work on this Bill? Mama Mary has said it, cleanliness is next to Godliness. If you want to see how smart and clean a human being is or how good hearted he is, visit his house. If the house is dirty, his inner character is worse. If his environment is bushy, his mind is wanting. I am not surprised that Uganda is surrounded by so many problems. The country is dirty. It is reflective of our inner sight. Why don’t we clean this picture of shame from our country and we get next to God. 

The issues of global warming and climate change are vividly living with us because of the irresponsible actions of man. If you grant us leave, the Bill will regulate the actions of man so that we can address global warming and climate change. 

If we keep a clean and healthy environment, we shall have a healthy population and reduce our medical bills as a country by a half. You might ask me where I got the statistics. The moment you live in a clean and healthy environment, you reduce your medical bills. That is common sense.

Have you ever asked yourself why Kawempe Division or Bwaise is in a vicious cycle of Cholera? The place is dirty. People are living in a dirty environment. If you want to reduce the medical bills of Bwaise, go and clean the place. You will reduce its medical bills by a half. That is common sense -(Interjections)- what are you saying about voting patterns? We voted four years ago and we do not expect you to start talking about votes now.

The moment we stop littering Kampala city, we will reduce flooding in Kampala by three quarters. You will ask Kibanzanga where he got the statistics; common sense. (Laughter) When you throw these bottles – by the way, they are thrown by responsible Ugandans. You see someone driving a Pajero, he or she does not have common sense to know that throwing a bottle of water out of the car means that he or she is littering and degrading his country and even blocking the water channels. When you block water channels and it rains; Kampala floods. And people ask themselves why we have the floods. When you were throwing the buveeras or the bottles, where did they go? You blocked the water channels. This is common sense. 

We are being asked why we are coming up with laws on small matters. Ladies and gentlemen, this is not our intention. Your moral standards have failed us as a country. Where your moral standard is wanting, where your moral reasoning is faulty and therefore your moral judgement is wrong, as law-makers, we have no option but to come up with a law to direct your morality. That is what we intend to do in this law.

When we are granted leave to go and work on this Bill and it finally becomes an Act of Parliament and it is enforced by the government, we hope the Pearl of Africa shall shine and rise again. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a straight forward motion. They are just seeking leave. So let me put the question. I put the question that this House grants leave to the member to move a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled, “The Litter Bill, 2009” and order the publication for its first reading. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish to welcome Mrs Jane Frances Kuka, former Member of Parliament, now RDC, Kapchorwa. She is in the gallery; she has come to see our proceedings. (Applause) 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

11.51
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce five Private Members’ Bills namely: 
    • The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2009;
    • The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill;
    • The Presidential Election (Amendment) Bill
    •  The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill; and
    • The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. 

It is moved under rules 43, 105, and 106. 

Madam Speaker, whereas – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have not seen the drafts of those five Bills, do you have them?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, we have the five Bills here.
 
“WHEREAS clause 2 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy which is enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the state shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance’;

AND WHEREAS Article 1(4) of the Constitution stipulates that the people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them, how they shall be governed through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or referenda;   

NOTING that the aforesaid key principles of democratic governance have not been fully realised in all the previous general elections on account of deficiencies or loopholes in the existing legal framework;

NOTING FURTHER that the Supreme Court and other courts of judicature have repeatedly pronounced themselves on such inadequacies on existing electoral laws, and recommended necessary amendment;

AND CONCERNED that we as a country are left with very limited time to make preparations for the forthcoming 2011 general elections; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this august House grants leave to introduce five Private Members’ Bills for Acts entitled:
    1) The Constitution (Amendment) Act
    2) The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Act
    3) The Presidential Election (Amendment) Act 
    4) The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act
    5) The Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2009.

Madam Speaker, it is further prayed that Parliament do cause the said Bills to be published for the first reading.” 

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, seconded; continue.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, it is not in doubt that we need amendments to the electoral laws in this country. It is agreed by both government and the Opposition, and I do not have to mention the various judgements of courts, the various election petitions to the effect that we need to thoroughly review the electoral laws if we are to have free and fair elections across the board; right from LC I up to presidential elections. We need to realign the laws of this country. 

We deemed it necessary to start with the Constitution in the first place. There are provisions in the Constitution that require amendment, particularly Articles 60, 61, 102 and many others. 

To be more specific, we adopted a multi-party political system but we never realigned the provisions of the Constitution to regulate the composition and the constitution of the Electoral Commission. 

The Electoral Commission we had during the Movement system is the same as what we have today. Its composition and constitution never changed at all. We are proposing to bring up an amendment to the Constitution to realign the composition of the commission. It will be perfectly in order as we bring the Constitution in conformity with the new multi-party political dispensation. 

Related to that, we need also to strengthen the independence of the commission. There are provisions we suggest in the amendment to strengthen the independence of the commission – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, I am meeting a technical problem. You have brought five Bills, dealing with different Acts of the laws of Uganda. I have not seen them. I think you needed five motions and five draft Bills to do this. But now, this is omnibus: one is the Constitution, the Parliamentary Elections Act, and the Electoral Commissions Act – would you like to separate them? Each Bill should be separate. They cannot be done in an omnibus way. 

So, hon. Member, please, separate them and each motion will come with its own Bill. I will give you time on the Order Paper. 

11.58
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do take cognisance of the technical issue which you have raised to which we have complied. My only appeal is that time is of the essence as far as electoral reforms are concerned. The Electoral Commission has given its roadmap and it has emphasised time and again that if the appropriate amendments are not done by 26th February, they will continue and go ahead to organise the 2011 elections based on the existing laws, which have already been adjudged flout by the Supreme Court. My appeal is that if my Attorney-General and Members who have seconded this motion could expeditiously go and separate this omnibus motion with the Bills, and if you could give us an opportunity at the earliest time, we would appreciate because I think separating this will not take us time. We will be ready, even this afternoon. I beg to request, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You go and separate them and I will give you time. 

12.00 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE& CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I wish to assure my colleagues in the Opposition, like I have done a couple of times before this session, that Government has prepared for consideration of this Parliament a couple of amendments to the existing electoral laws and I assured you, Madam Speaker, yesterday when you opened the APRM meeting at Hotel Africana; and I have had time to liaise with hon. Alaso and hon. Lukwago over this subject, and I have assured them that the Bills that Government has prepared will be reaching the Clerk to Parliament by close of business today. In fact, I expect the Bills to be with the Clerk to Parliament anytime now. 

So, with that in mind, it is up to you really the people who want to move the Private Members’ Bills but I do not see how you would want to move a Private Members’ Bill before you look at the proposals made by the government. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, we have said before and we need to reiterate that we are running short of time. I remember last month when we were in Ghana with hon. Daudi Migereko, we talked about this subject and he assured the people gathered there that as we were deliberating on those issues in Ghana, the Bills were being tabled here in Parliament. That is the statement that he made a month ago. We are getting the same information that the Bills are on their way; that they are with the Clerk to Parliament. But I have cross-checked with even the most recent gazette and there is nothing like a Bill being gazetted. We wish to know, which is which?

Secondly, is it a bar for us to bring a motion to introduce the Private Members’ Bills if Government is dragging their feet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know we do not really need to belabour this matter. I put this matter on the Order Paper because I thought you have a right to move your Private Members’ Bill. What caused problems was the omnibus nature of your presentation. But also, Attorney-General, you know that we cannot legislate in anticipation. So, if you have not delivered the documents, the Speaker does not know that you have these Bills. 

12.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I do take serious note of your guidance and the fact that you permitted this item to appear on the Order Paper, but I also note that under rule 106, which reads: “Procedure for Private Members’ Bills: A Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill.” We have not seen this draft of the Bill. 

Two, there is also something that we need to settle. This tabling of the Private Members’ Bill not taking into account Article 93 of our Constitution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have deferred the presentation of that motion because it is not packaged well. We are not proceeding with it and I have informed them and they have accepted. So, let us move to the other business. 

MR MIGEREKO: But I also would like to request, Madam Speaker that the submission of the Attorney-General be taken seriously. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Government Chief Whip, we cannot legislate in anticipation. I have not seen the Attorney-General’s Bills. Let us proceed to the next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PROHIBITION OF FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION BILL, 2009

12.06
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A few months back I did table before Parliament this Bill. I moved it as a Private Members’ Bill and it was committed to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Allow me to make some comments as I justify why we need this law. I must say that female genital mutilation is now well known by the Members of Parliament. It is a practice where the female genitalia are surgically interfered with for non-medical reasons. This is a practice which dates many years ago. It even predates Christianity, Islam and it is found in a number of countries including 28 in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has also been reported in the Middle East and also in the western world particularly in Europe and America, including Canada.

In the western world, it is mainly the emigrants who come from Africa and parts of Asia that come with this practice of FGM. I must say that we are calling it female genital mutilation while some literature refers to it as circumcision but the international nomenclature agrees that we should use the word “mutilation” to emphasise the issue of the abuse of human rights of the woman who undergoes this operation.

There are many types of this surgical operation on women and the UN has agreed on a classification which puts this injury in four types and the typology or the classification depends on how much tissue has been cut. There are four major types of FGM. I will talk of type one, two, three and four depending on how much of the genital tissue of the female has girl.

Type one refers to a surgical procedure where the clitoris is cut. In some communities they extend the cutting to include the labia majora and the labia minora which are the lips of the vagina to constitute what we call type two of FGM.

There are communities including those in Uganda such as the Somali women who live here in Kampala and also in Nakivale refuge camp but also other communities in Karamoja which practice what we call type three, or infibulations. In this type of FGM, the mutilators who are usually women that are based in communities using dirty traditional tools do injure the women by cutting the normal anatomy of a woman and they go to extent of stitching the vagina of a woman and leave a small orifice to allow menstrual blood and urine and when women are to consummate marriage by way of having sex or if they are pregnant and they are to give birth, the woman has to undergo surgical reopening. In some communities in Uganda, like in Karamoja, they use the horn of a cow to reopen the woman. 

It is very unfortunate that we sit here as Members of Parliament in this country when the women whom we represent are being tortured in form of FGM which is done in the name of culture. In some parts of the world, particularly in the Middle East, some women do it in the name of religion but the evidence which we have is that both the Bible and Koran and other holy books do condemn this kind of practice. There is no Holy Book which condones FGM. 

From the medical point of view, there is no benefit whatsoever associated with FGM. 

The origin is not very clearly known but the literature which is available traces the origin of FGM to the selfish sexual desires of a man. What we have, for instance, in parts of Uganda where this practice is cherished is that men used to go for hunting expeditions which would last two to three months and they thought that their spouses would be promiscuous when they were away. We are told that men devised this practice of injuring the women so that they would cut off the part of the woman, which is responsible for sexual arousal in hope that when men are away, the women will remain faithful and they will not go for sex outside marriage. 

Basically there is no documented benefit, be it social, economic or medical in nature associated with this cultural practice of FGM. In Uganda, this practice prevails particularly in the communities of the Sabiny in Kapchorwa and Bukwo districts and also among the Pokot and the Tepeth who are in Nakapiripirit (Amudat). We also have women of Somali origin who reside here in Kisenyi Kampala and in Nakivale refugee settlement. They normally engage in type three which I have described. We also have the Nubians who live in Bombo and practice this. We have women of Sabiny origin who migrated to various parts of the country including Busoga in places like Kamuli, Bugiri and in other areas like Masindi and Kamwenge.

According to assessments that we have done, FGM is done in over 20 districts in Uganda. So you may be here and one of your districts is where FGM is done.

I want to report that a number of interventions have been put in place particularly advocacy and community mobilisation interventions since the mid 80’s with support from the UN and other agencies and also Government.

Communities where FGM is practiced have sensitized, educated and mobilised people to appreciate that there are no benefits associated with FGM; therefore, progressively what we have seen is that communities are abandoning this practice of FGM.

In the beginning, there was a strong liking for this practice. In 1989, the district council of Kapchorwa attempted to make a resolution to ban FGM but because the communities still cherished this practice, the council made a resolution to make FGM mandatory and compulsory and the Minister of Gender then the hon. Mpanga had to fly to Kapchorwa to convince the council to rescind this decision but since then with the interventions from the UN and the Government of Uganda the people have been mobilised and the studies made have shown that progressively the number of girls and women who undergo this female genital mutilation have considerably come down to the extent that the various local governments in the region, particularly in Kapchorwa, have made by-laws and ordinances at their level prohibiting female genital mutilation. They thought that it was important that Parliament should come up with a law, which will be applicable to the rest of the country because if we are to convince every district and local government to make a by-law and ordinance, it would be a tedious process. 

Actually, the desire was to have this law came from the communities themselves where this practice prevails. That is why you see hon. Frances Kuka in the gallery as well as a big team. I think some of them are from Kapchorwa, Amudat and Bukwo; I am not sure, but I can see some of the faces. The majority of the members in the community are travelling to Parliament to witness this historic event where Parliament is pronouncing itself on the matter of female genital mutilation.

I want to assure the members that the communities where this female genital mutilation is practised are strongly behind this law. They support the enactment of a law to prohibit this practice, which they agree does not have any benefits at all.

As I wind up my remarks, I would like to thank you as a person and an individual because as hon. Rebecca Kadaga, you have been personally involved in this struggle. I want to appreciate your efforts, passion, zeal, support and contribution towards the processing of this Bill and also the efforts to ensure that we eliminate this female genital mutilation.

I must say that a number of countries where female genital mutilation is practised are all drafting laws, so it is not something new to have a specific law on female genital mutilation. Some people have argued that we could use the existing laws like the Constitution to prosecute those who carry out female genital mutilation. However, when you look at our Constitution in Article 28(12), it clearly states that you cannot prosecute anybody unless an offence and the penalty has been specifically created by this House. Although the Constitution outlaws harmful practices, I think it becomes very important to create an offence and specify the penalties associated with the offence in order for anybody to be prosecuted.

The Bill, which I tabled in this House, is intended to create offences associated with this practice of female genital mutilation and prescribe the penalties. The objects of the Bill are to prohibit female genital mutilation, provide for legislation necessary for criminalising female genital mutilation and other related activities, provide for the prosecution of offenders and also provide protection for victims of female genital mutilation.

I must add that having a law will not necessarily end the practice of female genital mutilation because there are still some communities where it is done. However, we would want to urge Government to allocate resources to support communities where female genital mutilation is practised so that advocacy and community mobilisation interventions can go on alongside the enforcement of the law.

I also want to say that female genital mutilation has had negative impacts on the communities particularly on education and socio-economic advancement of girls because it is done in the name of culture. When these young girls undergo female genital circumcision, there is societal pressure to marry off these girls. When you go to communities in Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Amudat, you will find that very few girls go to school beyond primary seven to secondary. Even though we introduced Universal Secondary Education (USE), very few girls and women are benefiting from this noble programme. 

We would want to urge Government to invest in the education of the girl child in the communities by way of constructing boarding schools for girls, and encouraging women to remain in school and complete higher levels of education in these communities. This is in addition to providing other social services like health services to ensure that the women as well as the men can access better services in these areas. 

I would like to request the Members of Parliament to overwhelmingly support this law as it is in the interest of all Ugandans. We cannot sit here and allow women to suffer in the communities. I think it is our responsibility. We want to request that after the chairperson of the committee has made her report, we show you a very brief film [Hon. Members: “No.”] We are going to show you a short film for you to appreciate what we are talking about. I know all of us are above 18 years of age -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for the eloquent presentation. This is a Bill, which is talking about abuse of human rights and that is how I see it. We gave the opportunity to hon. Baryomunsi a few months ago to make a presentation in Parliament. A number of members really appreciated the tragedy and trauma that our women are going through and this particular Bill, I am inclined to believe, will get more than 100 percent support from the House. As such, having to put the slide again may not add more. This practice is so traumatising that even the slide itself is traumatising. I beg that after the chairperson of the committee has presented, we proceed with debate and quickly pass this Bill.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Epetait for raising his fears but I just wanted to say that when I moved a motion seeking leave of this House, I did make a PowerPoint presentation, which showed some pictorial presentation of what I was talking about. What I wanted to show now was a film. 

What I want is support from the House. So if you are saying that the Members of Parliament are so scared, I have no objection to your being scared but I thought it would be important for you to appreciate what we are talking about and for you to know better. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I request support from everybody. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to join me in welcoming students of Kampala International University. They are here to witness our proceedings. You are welcome.

Chairperson of the Committee on Gender or any member, please; honourable members of this House, you are all members of this committee, can I have a member to present this report? I am going out of the rules but all of us are members of the committee. Can I have one member to read this report please? Can I appoint hon. Abia?

12.26
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009, which was read for the first time on the 16 September 2009. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 and 133(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to prohibit female genital mutilation, provide necessary legislation for criminalising female genital mutilation and other related activities, provide for the prosecution of offenders and provide protection for victims of female genital mutilation.

Methodology

The committee discussed the Bill with the following stakeholders:
1. 	Dr Chris Baryomunsi, MP Kinkiizi East
2. 	Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 
3. 	Centre for Women in Governance
4. 	LAW-Uganda

The committee held a two-day retreat with LAW-Uganda; MPs from Kapchorwa and Amudat; REACH Programme, an NGO working in Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Amudat; and other activists from women organisations.

The committee also conducted a five-day upcountry field visit to Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Nakapiripirit districts and carried out public hearings among the ethnic communities which practise female genital mutilation.

Observations

The enactment of this Bill into law shall give effect to the provisions of Article 32(2) of the Constitution of Uganda 1995 (as amended): “Laws, cultures, customs and traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or any other marginalised group to which clause (1) relates or which undermine their status, are prohibited by this Constitution.” In this case, female genital mutilation is a culture at variance with the provisions of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (as amended).

The Bill is also in line with Article 2(2) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (as amended): “If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail, and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.” Once left to continue, female genital mutilation shall be in contravention of this article and the Constitution of Uganda as a whole. 

At present, there is no law in Uganda prohibiting the practice of female genital mutilation, yet the majority of women and teenage girls are suffering silently due to this practice. The Penal Code Act under sections 219, 222 and 236 tries to outlaw female genital mutilation though not explicitly. It only provides for grievous harm, unlawful wounding and bodily harm but is not specific on female genital mutilation, yet for the law to be effective it must describe the offence and specifically provide for punitive measures.

Legislating against female genital mutilation shall not be unique to Uganda. Upon passing this Bill into law, Uganda shall be joining other sister states that have already outlawed this vice. In the Great Lakes Region, Kenya and Tanzania outlawed the practice. Other countries in sub-Saharan Africa that outlawed female genital mutilation include Egypt, Togo, Senegal, Eritrea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Burkina Faso, Ghana and Ethiopia.

By legislating against female genital mutilation, Uganda as a signatory to the different international and regional human rights treaties and conventions - the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women, and the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights - shall be honouring its obligations relating to the enjoyment of fundamental rights and freedoms by women and girls.

The practice of female genital mutilation has been conducted among the Sabiny, Pokot, Tepeth and Kadam ethnic communities, all in the name of culture. The practice is also done among migrant tribes and nationalities such as the Nubians and Somalis. Notwithstanding cultural beliefs and customs, female genital mutilation is a crystal clear manifestation of violation of fundamental human rights and freedoms of women and girls. It entails all forms of social injustices and evils that undermine a woman’s bodily integrity.

Whereas female genital mutilation has been carried out among the aforementioned ethnic communities, there is no known record of benefits ever availed or which are enjoyed by those who have been subjected to it. Testimonies reveal that the practice is only meant to satisfy selfish sexual gratification of men. 

The marriage institution is blamed for sustaining the practice of female genital mutilation among these communities. Uncircumcised women face considerable pressure from relatives and in-laws to undergo the ritual. Those who reject it are isolated and considered outcasts, ridiculed and barred from carrying out domestic chores such as milking cows and collecting food from granaries, and they are also barred from taking part in the festivities of circumcising their sons. Their husbands have to “borrow” wives to perform their mothers’ roles. The father of the boy also misses out on gifts from his peers.

Whereas community initiatives exist and there are efforts in Kapchorwa and Nakapiripirit (Amudat) to get rid of female genital mutilation, like the Kapchorwa Ordinance, the practice is still widely cherished in Bukwo. This is further exacerbated by the area’s proximity to Kenya where Kenyan circumcisers cross over to join their Ugandan counterparts to carry out the practice during mutilation periods. The committee established during its visit that a strong group of men in Bukwo are defiant of the impending legislation.

Non-state actors such as the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) have been providing funds for the fight against female genital mutilation through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Although Government has this financial year 2009/10 created a budget line in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for female genital mutilation, there is need to provide more funds in the next budget for continuous sensitisation against this practice.  

The committee established that female genital mutilation is a lucrative source of livelihood for the circumcisers and mentors. Women who have undergone this practice confess a physical painful experience, psychological torture and reproductive health complications. This is attributed to scars resulting from the cuttings. Some develop keloids, which block the birth canal. Cases of death attributed to female genital mutilation of both mothers and babies have been reported. 

The practice of female genital mutilation has had a negative impact on the education of the girl-child. The season and timing - December of every even year - of carrying out this practice often coincides with the time of sitting national examinations - Primary Leaving Examinations, Uganda Certificate of Education and the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education. As a result, many teenage and adult girls in candidate classes have ended up missing their examinations. 

This has also heightened drop-out rates since the girls are considered ripe for marriage soon after undergoing female genital mutilation. These girls range from 9 to 13 years of age. These girls who are married off, according to the laws of Uganda are defiled. Surprisingly, law enforcers in the area are not on record for arresting anyone for this crime against girl children. In Amudat, the committee noted exam centres with no girls sitting Primary Leaving Examinations this year. 

The practice of female genital mutilation is very expensive. Parents save for a whole year to gather fees for mutilation and the feast that accompanies the ceremony. This leads to poverty and the girls are forced into early marriage in order for the family to get dowry. They also sell off their food stuffs and then suffer hunger.   

Recommendations

Government should, as a matter of urgency, construct model boarding schools to help educate the girl-child. This is a Presidential pledge for the nomadic areas of Karamoja and the Sabiny area. 

There needs to be a massive awareness campaign about the dangers of female genital mutilation. Bukwo District should be targeted where pockets of resistance to the proposed legislation are evident.

Government should commit more funds to the campaign against female genital mutilation and involve the community and development officers in the districts in the campaigns. 

There should be affirmative action for circumcisers and mentors. Alternative sources of livelihood should be sought for the circumcisers and mentors. Government programmes such as NAADS can help sustain the lives of the circumcisers and mentors. 

Government should put in place protective measures for whistleblowers who may encounter stern criticisms and threats to their lives from pro-activists of female genital mutilation.

Conclusion

The committee devoted ample time to the scrutiny of this Bill and consulted widely. It was interesting to note that there is a clear gender divide in the communities on the proposed punitive measures in the Bill. The girls and women we consulted wanted extreme punishment like life imprisonment and death for those who carry out female genital mutilation. On the other hand, the men wanted very light sentences like two years or none at all, arguing that more sensitisation should be carried out before the law is enacted. The committee therefore took a middle line and agreed with the mover of the Bill on the punitive measures provided. The committee believes it will be fair. 

We therefore recommend that this august House passes this Bill subject to the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and this House for this report. 

I was in Bukwo last Monday and I want to appeal to the Ministry of Works to construct a tarmac road for these people. It took me five hours to drive from Mbale to Bukwo. I arrived late for my function. People had been waiting for me the whole day. So, Ministry of Works please, get these people’s road done so that we can help during this campaign. (Applause) 

12.40
DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Bill. I also thank hon. Baryomunsi for conducting the first reading of this Bill. I also thank the chairperson for reading the report.

In supporting this anti FGM Bill -(Interjections)- ok, I am Dr John Yekko Arapkissa, Member of Parliament for Kween County in Kapchorwa District - I will out-rightly say that I originate from a community which practices FGM. I am a Sabiny, or a Kalenjin. This practice of FGM is traditional and hence it cannot be eliminated overnight -(Interjections)- it takes time. Yes, I said I support the motion but as you have heard from hon. Baryomunsi, the law alone cannot eradicate it. There is a law against murder, there is a law against rape and another one against consuming enguuli, but rape, murder and consumption of enguuli have continued to happen. So, let this law be there so that it can be used against those who continue practising FGM.

As you have heard, FGM involves cutting the external female genitalia for non-therapeutic reasons. Therapeutic means treatment. So with FGM, the external female genitalia are cut for nothing. It does not have any value. It is not used for any treatment purposes. There are operations which people carry out – I am a doctor - on the female external genitalia, but for therapeutic reasons. If a woman has an abscess there, for example, you drain it and that is not circumcision. You are cutting the area to drain away the pus. If there are warts, you are cutting the warts. If the female genital mutilation is not done for treatment purposes – and I will inform you that I did my masters and the thesis was on FGM. 

Communities which practise female genital mutilation do it for two reasons. They want to preserve the morals of the women and reduce the sexuality of the women. Those are the two main reasons put across. So, the main reason why those communities practise is oppression of women by men. While men are supposed to enjoy by sampling woman a, b, c, d and e, the women are supposed to stick to one person -(Interjections)- while the man is supposed to show manhood that he is very agile in terms of sexuality, the women are supposed to be very dormant. It is a form of oppression of women by men. Women’s morals are supposed to be preserved while men’s morals can be free. While men are supposed to show a lot of sexual activity, women’s sexual activity is supposed to be reduced. 

There are also health complications, which arise due to female genital mutilation. Some are immediate while others are long-term. However, in my view, the main driving force in Kapchorwa now is social complications arising from not practising female genital mutilation. You face a lot of problems in the community, let alone the health complications which are immediate and long-term. In Kapchorwa, for example, we circumcise boys and girls. Yes, male circumcision is very good medically. It even contributes about 50 percent to the reduction of HIV/AIDS compared to other measures. 

Before I circumcised my son last December -(Interjections)- I did it traditionally - there are other practices I could not do because my wife is not circumcised -(Interjections)- yes, there are other traditional rituals I could not do because my wife is not circumcised. 

The point I am emphasising is that there are other social complications, which force women to go and be circumcised -(Interjections)- Ok, I can elaborate more. We have age sets. I was circumcised in 1972 -(Interjections)- Don’t you see my kiwalata? There are those who were circumcised with me in 1972, other boys who are now men. Those are my age-sets, what we call Posupen and Pomongo. When I am circumcising my son, my age-sets are supposed to come and celebrate with me but because I have not circumcised my wife, they cannot perform some rituals by virtue of my not having circumcised her. So, I may be forced to circumcise her so that I may enjoy those rituals. (Laughter) (Member timed out_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so interesting! Okay, let him have five more minutes. 

DR ARAPKISSA: So, that is the biggest driving force as of now. I have personally not circumcised my daughters but when they marry and produce two or three children, they would be chased away from their marriages depending on the villages or parish where they have married. If they are married in the remote parishes, they are likely to be forced to be circumcised and yet me as a parent I had opted not to. 

To wind up, why the FGM law might succeed, for example in a place like Kapchorwa or in the Sabiny community, is because: one, there has been persistent mobilisation of the community from bottom-up. Since 1996, there has been an NGO called Reproductive Educative and Community Health (REACH) which has been mobilising the community against FGM. I have also been actively involved ever since I was a medical officer in Kapchorwa District.

Two, the Sabiny community circumcise adolescents; it is actually supposed to be a sign to show that you are ready for marriage. Once the breasts of the girl have matured, she is thought to be ready for marriage and that is when they are circumcised.  However, of late it is those who are already married and have produced two or three children that are being circumcised. So, the emphasis I am putting here is that in Kapchorwa and Bukwo, we do not circumcise girls. We are not like in Ethiopia or Egypt where they circumcise babies of four years so that by the time the girl is mature, at the age of 18, she even does not know that she was circumcised 16 years ago. For us we circumcise adolescents and of late those who are already married. So the girls who are already married can take a decision unlike babies in Ethiopia and Egypt. 

Three, Kapchorwa District has passed a bylaw. 

Those are some of the advantages that might help this fight succeed in the Sabiny community - there has been mobilisation from the bottom up; we do not circumcise babies and we circumcise adolescents. So, this law is likely to succeed. Otherwise, law alone elsewhere has never worked. Sudan, one of the first countries to pass a law, still has circumcision continuing at 97 to 98 percent. 

There is need to have other programmes to go on side by side with the law; for example, you have to educate the girl child. The longer the girl takes in education, the less she is likely to undergo early circumcision. I will in fact inform you that most educated women who have gone up to diploma and degree level in the Sabiny community have undergone FGM because they are respected in society. If someone has a problem with school fees, they turn to that educated girl or woman who says that she should not be subjected to FGM. 

Four, we should empower the community, especially the women, socio-economically. This issue of saying that you cannot go and get food from the granary, you cannot go and milk a cow and you cannot go and fetch water if you are not circumcised should stop. If a woman is economically empowered, you will have your own granary of food, have your own cows and have a concrete floor in your house so that you are not subjected to being circumcised in order to get resources. So, if you can empower the women socio-economically, you will avoid that circumcision.  

Five, we should create awareness among the people. The more the people are sensitised about the dangers of FGM the more they will abandon circumcision. An example I will quote is hon. Sabila’s constituency where I think he has about four sub-counties where they have abandoned FGM. So, there is no FGM but also no law. Where you have people living in remote parishes is where girls get circumcised. In fact, according to the report, Bukwo is next to Kenya in circumcision but that is not true. It is because Bukwo is more remote than the middle area where hon. Sabila comes from. So, the more enlightened the community is, the faster they will abandon FGM voluntarily. 

Six is about “surgeons” - the people who circumcise.  Circumcision in Kapchorwa and Bukwo is mainly done in the month of December; in 23 months, these surgeons have something to do. So, the issue of putting up additional income for the women “surgeons” is not a serious issue because for 23 months these people have something else to do for a livelihood. It is only in the 24th month that they circumcise -(Interjections)- yes, they till the land and it is the girls who look for them in any case. So, Madam Speaker, I strongly support this motion and urge the members to support it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Yekko, you are talking about that one month, but it is very tempting to circumcise 100 girls in that one month and earn Shs 5 million which can take you for three years. So, do not say that the other 23 months are okay -(Interjections)- yes, Shs 50,000 per girl; if you have 100 that is 5 million and you are tick. (Laughter)

12.53
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee -(Interjections)– can you protect me from my colleagues across the ocean? I want to thank the committee for this very erudite report and I want to thank hon. Baryomunsi because he has also done a great job, and I thank my honourable colleagues too. 

We should have actually had a law so many years ago because this is a terrible practice. I have been to those districts and for the past year I have been writing a book and creative though it may be, it is based on reality. I have titled this book, “The Switch” because when I went there, one of the women told me that when they circumcise women, they actually cut off the “switch”. When you ask some of these people, they tell you that the “switch” is off. The switch they are talking about is actually the clitoris. This is not being vulgar but we want to put things as they are because these women have no human rights as this is part of the human rights which is denied to these women. 

The health hazards that they undergo are so grave. There is one woman that I interviewed who said that urine flows all the time and she all the time pads herself day in, day out, year in, year out until the husband said, “I am not going to live with a stinker.” He chased her out. We are talking about an issue that involves life and death and the very basics of a human being.

When I look at the report – I am just going to look at the recommendations - the question of education is very crucial. When we even talk about women emancipation, unless we get all our women educated, what we are talking about is actually not reality. Therefore, education and sensitisation will do a lot. The law may be there, and the law is very important, but once people know that there is law, then they will stop whatever they are doing or they will not go on with whatever they are doing. 

When the committee says that there should be affirmative action for circumcisers and mentors, that an alternative source of livelihood should be sought for the circumcisers, I say a very strong “No!” Once you give them that entandikwa or seed money, this will encourage other would-be circumcisers; they will say, “Oh, those ones where given something, therefore, let me go into the trade.” This recommendation, therefore, should not be considered at all. 

The awareness campaign is very important and if we are really going to enforce this law and to make sure that this evil practice dies, Government has got to put up what I would call a martial plan so that these people can be told and be given what to do. This sensitisation is going to take a lot of money. We are lucky that we have got so many FM stations, so let us use the information channels.

One of the biggest problems as to why women remain chained is this business of hiding in culture. If she is not circumcised for example, she cannot go to the granary to serve people the local brew, ajono. Unless we identify culture that is for women and uphold and encourage it, and unless we point out negative culture and say that people should leave that negative culture, women shall remain in chains. 

Lastly, I was one of the people, hon. Baryomunsi, who did not want to watch that film. Hon. Muhanga wrote in the New Vision and I watched that film in Ethiopia and I also collapsed. You also psychologically undergo that female genital mutilation and you are so traumatized. So, I really did not want to get that trauma. I urge everybody to support this Bill and let this terrible evil business become history in our country. I thank you.

12.59
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you for the opportunity. I stand to support this Bill in totality and I want to go on record for that. (Applause) I am not just doing that as a matter of fashion but we have been told of a number of consequences, immediate, medium and long term. 

In particular, the long term effects include the formation of keloids in those private parts. When the scar is forming, there are outgrowths as a result of the wrong cutting that was done and this is very tormenting for a human being. You can see how we dictate human rights in another form and therefore, this practice should actually leave my district. I do not where it should go but it should leave my district. (Laughter) 

The other time when we were seeking leave to present a Private Members’ Bills, I did even present names of victims that became disabled after they were circumcised. In the process of getting healed, they got disabled. The way the two people have died is very mysterious and the one who is still alive is so tormented. I do not see the usefulness of this practice and we shall continue to put up psycho-socio services for such persons. 

As we bring this Bill today, we have HIV/AIDS and we are saying this is one of the avenues of transmitting HIV/AIDS. Why would we then create another avenue of transmitting HIV/AIDS? We are looking at a community that may not know all these problems and we need to help them. 

When hon. Dr Arapkissa was presenting, he said that in his constituency, there are parts that are remote and do not have information of this kind and there are no roads reaching those places. In the absence of all these, we need to help them by having this law in place. Girls drop out of school because of this practice where we promote a girl to a woman. You know that by our African standard, when we say somebody is a woman, of course she definitely gets married. You know that we have no particular age but somebody can be circumcised at 12, 15 or 18 years. Imagine somebody circumcised at 12 years; what would that mean? It means she gets married at 13, and look at her production circle from 13 to 45 years for example. 

Today we are talking about population explosion and I see circumcision as one of the reasons why we have a very high population in my district, if I co-relate the two. Because somebody has been circumcised at the age of 13, she will be forced to drop out of school and this is partly why we have child mothers. 

We also have effects that are economic. During this programme, there are a lot of celebrations that are carried out and people prepare the whole year to celebrate. You will call your age-sets and there is a lot of money that is involved. Actually, if somebody carried out research in January after the December circumcision period in Kapchorwa, you would find people in total poverty. People are so poor because they have spent all the money in circumcision. This is why I feel that this practice should go away.

As I conclude, I must thank, and put this on record, the many people including Members of Parliament who have joined us in the fight against this practice and particularly you, Madam Speaker, who participated –(Applause)- in the culture days. You have also helped us to meet the President over this and that is very great. I remember Dr James Makumbi, then Minister for then Minister for Health, was the chief guest. The workshop was facilitated by UNFPA and Dr Makumbi guided that meeting and it was so- I remember him for this. 

Also, the leaders of Kapchorwa, particularly Dr Chebrot who is my predecessor, Gertrude Kulany and Jane Frances Kuka; all of you know Jane Frances Kuka. I am happy she is around. You would not alienate FGM and Jane Frances Kuka. She has been at the forefront.

Madam Speaker, there are other persons but the list is long. Joyce Nima was one time the Executive Director of Family Planning and she came to Kapchorwa and guided us. A survey was even done on that and up to today the Family Planning Association has continued to do that. 

Action for Development (ACFODE) did research and I was even one of the participants. I was an enumerator when I was an undergraduate and one of the things that they captured in their research tool was the issue about FGM. These reports have helped us continuously to fight against this practice. 

I have colleagues with whom we worked, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I worked with REACH programme which is a programme that is sensitising the community against the practice of FGM. I worked with Jackson Chekweko who is currently with Family Planning and Beatrice Chelangat who is now the director. I also want to thank them for the continuous support and the support that we have got from UNFPA, the Netherlands Embassy, Germany and so forth.

Kapchorwa Local Government cannot be left out. Through these initiatives Kapchorwa Local Government came out with an ordinance banning FGM -(Member timed out­_)

1.05
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to, first of all, thank Dr Chris Baryomunsi for having brought this very important Bill. It should have actually come yesterday. 

In October I was in South Africa to attend a gender meeting and I watched a movie on FGM. All along I did not know what they do. Since I was young, I used to hear that there is female circumcision but I did not understand how exactly it was done. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that I collapsed and I was carried out of that room where we were watching the movie from. I was carried out by hon. Mary Mugyenyi and hon. Dora Byamukama. I had never, in my life, seen anything as cruel as that! I even told myself that I would rather watch a man being shot dead than look at a young girl with women, aunties and mothers holding her legs, and a stupid woman, God forbid, comes with - I do not know what - it was not a knife. I think it was a stone, which had been sharpened and then she held the girl’s clitoris and cut downwards. I had never been traumatised like that time. The girl bled and they started pouring water on her private parts. I do not even think that was sterilised water but just water from a well. This was filmed in Ethiopia in March this year. 

So, when Dr Chris Baryomunsi said - I think somebody mentioned countries that have outlawed female genital mutilation, I think it is not in Ethiopia. This was filmed by UNICEF in March this year and it was shown to us by a Rwandese who works with UNICEF. It was so traumatising!

There are so many health hazards and even psychological hazards. And when Dr Yekko talked about how his son was circumcised, I said, “We really have a problem.” Now this is a doctor; he is a member of parliament and he is at another level. With the exposure he has, he should not even take his children for these rituals. That is why it will continue; he should leave it. 

I was once speaking with hon. Nandala-Mafabi about this Imbalu and he told me that he takes his children to the hospital because of the health hazards- getting this ka-knife and using it on everybody and it is a stupid and uneducated man who is the one circumcising your child. One day, a person’s - anyway a man, his “P” was cut by these people during Imbalu. The tip was cut off. So, it is better to go to the hospital and do it professionally. 

Madam Speaker, if these people say it is to curtail promiscuity among women, but it promotes promiscuity among men because once the women have been rendered sexually inactive, they have no sexual feelings. In this movie that I watched in South Africa, men were giving testimonies that when they go out with uncircumcised women they surely enjoy sex but the moment they move out with their own tribe’s mates there is totally nothing and sex in these girls’ marriages is very traumatic. You can imagine you have been stitched and now the man has got a cow’s horn to open and that is how sex starts.

It is too traumatic and I want to urge you Members of Parliament, you all have daughters and mothers. Imagine your daughter being held like that and circumcised. I called my children from South Africa to tell them what I had watched and they burst out and cried and said, “Mummy we do not even want to listen to your story.” Meanwhile they had not even seen the movie but they all cried and said, “We do not want to listen to your story; just stop it.” 

This is the crisis our women are going through. This is a crisis that all of us leaders are sitting and watching. I think once we criminalise it, these women will stop. Because if you say they do it once in two years, that means they have a source of livelihood. They do not even deserve anything. It is so inhuman and even you the woman on whom it has been done, how do you get the guts to cut another person? How, unless you have got a problem; maybe you are mentally sick? That is how you can hold an un-sterilised knife and cut children.

And what I saw is that after cutting them, they tie their legs together and then they cannot walk. Now, there is no treatment and so they start rotting. Some of them smell even when they have grown. We watched all this, that there is a culture -(Member timed out­_)

1.11
LT GRACE KYOMUGISHA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this debate and thank you, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, for bringing it up. I think this Bill is long over due. This practice is horrible. I was actually of the view that we watch this so that we get charged to stop this practice -(Interjections)- No, I am taking you back – so that we get charged to stop this practice once and for all. 

We heard from the horse’s mouth, Dr Yekko, that the rationale behind this practice was preserving the morals of women while those of men were let free. The second one was reducing the sexuality of women. This is very unfortunate. This is the dictatorship of men to women which is unfair and which must stop by passing this law. It is very unfortunate. This practice undermines the position and the dignity of the woman and it curtails development in those affected communities. We must pass this Bill because it is a Bill that is really very important and that will stop this human suffering. 

Another reason why I support this Bill is that this practice causes Vaginal Fistula which is one of the causes of maternal death. We know that many women are dying due to various causes but one of them is Vaginal Fistula so it means that those affected communities are having high rates of maternal death and therefore we must support this Bill.

Finally, some of these cultural practices that really undermine the position and dignity of people must stop because they are not necessary. We have used culture in a wrong way. Culture is dynamic; culture is not static; so some of these practices and behaviours must stop. I, therefore, support the passing of this Bill because it is a very important Bill in our time and in our country as it will stop human suffering. I thank you.

1.13
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Baryomunsi and the committee for the good report that is very supportive. I want to support this motion intended not to only to condemn but to totally abolish this very poor practice.

Basically, it is the men that are the cause of this practice. I want to urge that as we pass the Bill, emphasis should be put on the sensitisation of the men because certainly the women do not love it and they do not call for it. We must also address the cause and the cause is the men. This one, I really feel we must address.

I have been to these communities twice. First, with the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we specifically had gone to address this issue, and recently when you were there, Madam Speaker, I also at least had a good experience of this particular practice. Really, it is likened to removing someone’s tongue and leave the teeth just to chew whatever comes in the mouth tastelessly only to fill the stomach. This is the kind of thing that happens with these women down there.

Whereas we come to address those who have not actually gone through it, we must realise that the communities are awash of women that have undergone it and the language we are using is already like condemning them. We should find and devise a way of how to appeal to these women to also feel sympathetic to their daughters and not encourage them to come up with it. Otherwise, when we show them as if we are condemning them when they did not suffer it at will, they kind of ask, why should these girls be proud? 

There should be a way to address them and not to traumatise them. You remember when we were with you, Madam Speaker, you saw some of our colleagues, Members of Parliament; they really traumatised these ladies. They said, “Which man can come and marry you when I am here” and those men felt really not comfortable. I think we should devise a way of really addressing them.

I think there should be very punitive measures; we should not just come like we are persuading them. Once we pass a law, we should come out of the - because commonly there are many laws we are passing and we do not enforce them. But we must find a way of enforcing this law because it is a total denial of human rights. This is a basic human right to these women. We must find a way of how to enforce this law once we pass it.

We also have religions there. I am not seeing the religious groups at the forefront. They have these people every other day of worship. I think we should appeal positively to these places of worship not to look at these people as if they are seeing something positive in this culture. I think this culture is very negative and religion should be another approach to totally wipe it out.

The surgeons should be targeted, be educated and sensitised because if the girls are going there at will then this surgeon must be a teacher and tell her, “No this practice is bad, daughter go back, we are now going this other way”. We should also target all these - and not just like saying we leave them or even pay them, for what? This is what I have to say. I support the Bill and we must pass it and enforce it. I thank you.

1.18
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of this Bill and the committee. I want to start with the last observation No. 15. This practice is very expensive and it is backward. It is a culture, which has been on for a long period. The committee has told us that there are countries where they have come up with legislations to ban female genital mutilation but you realise that when it comes to areas bordering Kenya, which is Bukwo, the circumcisers are coming from Kenya.

I want to agree with what hon. Yekko said that coming up with a law alone is not enough. The most important issue after passing this law is sensitising those communities. Unless we sensitise those communities, total eradication of this practise will be extremely very expensive. We have been given a very good testimony that the law can protect the girls but when they marry them there is discrimination. It is upon this Government to make sure that we sensitise and even Parliament allocates some funds. There are even laws that would have assisted those areas to eradicate this problem but it was a failure.

As we legislate, I want to urge the entire Parliament that there is need, first and foremost, to give affirmative action in terms of education and even poverty eradication. I think when we talk about poverty eradication, we have NAADS. There is no need to say that they should get special consideration for NAADS because NAADS is in every sub-county of this country. The issue is the communities; the leaders within those areas should make sure that the population is above the poverty line because if a person is going to save all what he has to be offered so that her daughter is mutilated, such things goes to the brains.

I just want to thank the committee and the mover of this Bill and urge the entire Parliament that there is need to sensitise these communities, telling them the dangers of female genital mutilation. Passing a law alone is not enough. It is actually the beginning but as Parliament we should sensitise.

Having boarding schools is also good because the time they spend in school also assists them to escape. I want to thank the mover. I support the Bill but we should really as Parliament think of creating a small fund to assist them implement this law. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to welcome Beatrice Chelangat of the REACH Programme and the Sabiny elders. They are up there. You are welcome. They have come to see our work. You are welcome. (Applause) 

1.22
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA (NRM, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In supporting this motion, I would like to start by extending a commendation to the whole House on the unanimity with which we are supporting this Bill. But I would particularly want to single out some people that I think have worked closely in regard to this issue. 

I would like to start with you, Madam Speaker, because even if we did not relate you to anything that you have done in respect to this work, you drove up to Bukwo on that difficult road just in the cause of protecting human kind –( Applause)– we commend you. 

I also would like to thank Dr Baryomunsi – if we are to talk about the constituencies that we represent, you would realise that his is not only very far from Kapchorwa and Bukwo; also this situation does not exist in that area. And as you know, hon. Members of Parliament, bringing a Bill from the Back Bench is a long pathway. So, someone from Kinkiizi to have dedicated himself to this cause up the point that we have a Bill is something that we should appreciate and commend.

Further, allow me to also thank our colleagues from Kapchorwa, starting with hon. Sabila, the man who stood against my friend Dr Chebrot and defeated him, but can have the courage to stand on the Floor of the House and commends the person he defeated in the elections. I was happy to hear him say that on this issue they are together and pushing in the same direction. 

I know that Dr Chebrot, Dr Yeko, and Mrs Gertrude Kulany did a lot of work to mobilise elders who had been rooted into a tradition to have them turned around to support this cause. I really would like to commend those brothers and sisters of ours for that excellent work. 

I think where we have reached, victory in sight; we can win this war because the process is now irreversible. However, if we do not consistently work, we might lose this battle because this practice is not only in Uganda as you have heard; it is in Ethiopia; it is in Kenya and also in other parts of Africa.

My contribution, Madam Speaker, on the way forward, as hon. Nsubuga said, is that the issue of what we – for lack of better work – call sensitisation is very paramount. Sensitisation should be structured. We should not just say, let us do sensitisation and go home. 

My view is that Parliament, having taken the leadership to fight this crime, should dedicate a week like you did, Madam Speaker, by going to Bukwo once in a year to get into the population to talk about this issue. That means there should be funds dedicated for radio programmes focused on sensitising the communities in our country that are practicing this very negative tradition. 

The second element should be to emphasise regional cooperation. A colleague stood here and said that the surgeons come from Kenya, but it could also be possible that surgeons could be leaving Uganda for Kenya to do that same thing. Since this is a matter that is not limited to Uganda, it is important that we utilise regional cooperation in handling this issue. That will mean that Ugandans link up with the people in Kenya and Ethiopia at parliamentary levels and coordinate actions in this regard.

I also would like to propose, Madam Speaker, not as someone from the Back Bench but as a fellow Member Parliament – and this is intended not to be misunderstand as if I am saying Government is putting in money – that Kapchorwa District Council, from what you have heard, apart from individuals who have been leading this process, came out and passed a by-law outlawing this practice. They have been mobilising the elders to support this cause. My opinion is that we need something symbolic that should be rewarded to the Kapchorwa District leadership –(Applause)– so that everybody can see that if they do well, they can be noticed. I think some small grant should be given to Kapchorwa District Council. It could be in form of certificate and if Madam Speaker would give me some few minutes – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Wadri.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Chrispus Kiyonga for yielding the Floor. The information I would like to give is that in 1986 when I was a principal officer in the civil service and in charge of Government of Uganda UNICEF Country Programmes, I went to Kapchorwa on a sensitisation exercise to talk about the ills of female genital mutilation. At that time the Chairman of the Sabiny Cultural Association, Mr Cheboron stood up and said, “You, young man, you have come all the way from West Nile to talk about this, have our women complained to you that the practice is bad?” 

But since then, Mr Cheboron has made a U-turn; he is now championing this cause and under the REACH Programme, he was even offered a trip to America in appreciation of his good work. So if we can actually – from the Government perspective – come up with such an idea, it will boost and encourage the elders to support this cause. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, honourable colleague for that fortification. So I think we should give a visible award to Kapchorwa accompanied with a small grant to send a signal to the others that when they do well, they definitely will be noticed for other people to follow their footsteps – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, would we include them in the hero’s award for next year because this is a heroic act? We could pick out some of the leaders, recognise them as heroes and award medals to them. I don’t know; I am just thinking aloud.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I agree that that is one way or even just real awards recognising their effort. One may not be called a hero, but he can get a national award for being outstanding.

Lastly, this –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair and the minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is that much as we are looking at the elders being given something, let us also look what we can give to the women in appreciation for this. We can for example construct a girls’ boarding school there as a sign of appreciation of the efforts of the elders in regard to what they have done in respect of this issue. Thank you.

DR YEKO: I would like to inform the House that in relation to what hon. Alisemera has said, the President has actually directed the Ministry of Education to construct a girls’ boarding secondary school in my constituency beginning next financial year. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe just to tell you something – I was not going to share with you my secrets with the President - you know I have been working with him on this campaign - he has actually given that directive not only in respect of Kween County, but also in Amudat and all those districts where that tradition is practiced; I have got the letters. (Applause)

DR KIYONGA: As I end, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to call upon you to draw a lesson from how this process has moved to date; the process of attacking this mutilation. We have for example in Karamoja region, as you know, the practice of cattle rustling, which is also traditionally based. Unlike what we have seen in Kapchorwa, what we find in Karamoja, if I am MP today, the one that I defeat in the election uses cattle rustling to decamping me. They say, “You see, you elected these people, now your guns have been taken, why do you elect them again?”

But I want to appeal to friends that traditionally based practices will need national movement to deal with them. So although we have made progress in disarming the Karimojong, the matter is still very difficult. I hope that we could choose a good path like we have done in the case of mutilation. Let us have a national consensus; a national movement to end the practice of cattle rustling that is going on in the Karamoja sub-region.

1.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the mover of this Bill, hon. Chris Baryomunsi and the committee, and also to say that I rise to support this motion.

Sometime back, the Attorney-General was sued by a group of activists. The advocate was a renowned lawyer, known for that particular cause, Mr Rwakafuzi. We toiled with the problem of how to go about the matter until we had to concede out of court that certainly there was no need to go to court and defend female genital mutilation. So we conceded that it is unconstitutional. This has been highlighted in the report of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, it is a paradox, and that is why Dr Kiyonga is thanking Dr Baryomunsi because he comes from a district where such practices do not exist. In fact, were he comes from and the related districts, they do the reverse. Maybe those benefits could have propelled him also among others to champion the cause –(Laughter)– to ensure that this practice is prohibited. 

Madam Speaker, I thought that the mover of the motion has all along been working in close liaison with Ministry of Gender and Social Development as the sector minister and this is why the report is made by the appropriate spectral committee of Parliament. But it is surprising to note that in the Bill, the term “Minister” means the Minister responsible for Justice. 

It is true that he has been explaining to mean that this Bill has some implications of human rights violations and the Ministry of Justice should be responsible. But not necessarily so, because human rights issues cut across all sectors of Government: Minister of Internal Affairs, Gender – everywhere, there are issues of human rights. So, when you say, “the Minister responsible”, that should be the minister responsible for the administration of the Bill. I do not think it is the idea of the mover to put the day-to-day administration of the Bill in the hands of the Minister of Justice. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think it is because the Minister of Justice has the executive implementing agencies, the police, prosecutors; these are your people. The law enforcement is under you.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a copy of a letter where the President writes to the Minister of Internal Affairs and in the last paragraph, he says, “I am now directing you to liaise with the Attorney-General and all other security organs to ensure that the ordinance is enforced in all districts where FGM is practiced”. So, I think it is in order that the minister responsible is the Minister of Justice.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the following to say. The issue that we are fighting is of social nature. It requires social doctors to talk to the community members to have an attitude change. It is not a matter of the law or the criminality; it is about change of attitude. 

In this case, I recognise the important role that the Ministry of Justice plays, but Ministry of Justice plays its role at an adjudication level. But the day-to-day operations, like talking to the public and making them desist from this practice is the responsibility of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Development. 

I agree with the submission made by the learned Attorney-General that the right domestication of this Bill should be Ministry of Gender. Let this minister be the watchdog for this practice. Where there is violation of the law, it is the community development officer who will liaise with police to cause arrest and then hand them over to the Judiciary for prosecution. But to hip it in the hands of the Judiciary they may not be well-entrenched in the grassroots to serve as a watchdog. I beg to submit. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have been thinking about issues that are implicit both in the report and in the framing of the Bill. I think that the victims of FGM need psycho-social support. We need to go out into the schools and look for these girls who have gone through this trauma if we are to redeem anything. 

I still believe that the relevant ministry that could step in are what hon. Wadri has called social doctors, not the Ministry of Justice. So, that thinking of counselling should better be given a chance. 

MR OLENY: This information is very important, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with what hon. Wadri and hon. Alaso have already said. As a matter of fact, I served in the ministry with my senior colleague, hon. Wadri. At the time he left, he was acting commissioner – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Let me set the record right, because there are going to be people who will come after us to read the Hansard. At the time I left in 2001 to come to this Parliament, I was the Commissioner for Youth and Children Affairs of the Republic of Uganda. 

MR OLENY: Thank you very much for the correction. The point to note here, Madam Speaker, is that the vice that we are legislating on is a social one and building further on what hon. Chris Baryomunsi has said regarding the vice in Karamoja. I also want to say that it is true that Government has made progress in disarming Karamoja but this need to be closely followed by a similar process that my honourable colleagues have already alluded to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are you talking about the Bill? Please, you are disrupting us. No. The minister is on the Floor and you are now talking about cattle rustling!

1.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I hope you will give me time to clarify a number of issues but I thought I should come in to make a brief comment on the issue of domestication of this Bill. When the campaign against FGM started, the international community looked at it from the medical point of view. 

But when you look at the international terrain, we now look at it from the human rights angle, and when you look at the current definitions as provided by the World Health Organisation, and if I may quote some of the literature which says, “Female genital mutilation is recognised internationally as a violation of the human rights of girls and women. The practise also violates a person’s rights to health, security and physical integrity, the right to be free from torture and cruel inhuman or degrading treatment and the right to life when the procedure results in death.” So it was this that persuaded me to think that the Ministry of Justice would be the right hope but I am not strongly attached to this. I think when we come to committee stage, we can always review it and bring proposals and I have no problem with that.

1.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is the sector ministry principally in charge to oversee all the human rights issues across the broad spectrum of the government’s operations. Therefore, there are no contradictions. We are the ones who go to Banjul and elsewhere to report on the human rights record of this country and that is all encompassing.

Another matter, which I thought would not be appropriate to raise at committee stage but which I thought I would raise in general terms is the prescription of penalties. I find all the provisions which prescribe the penalties actually fixing the penalty and that it is a departure from what we have all along been doing. 

For instance in clause 4, there is imprisonment for ten years – and by the way, clause 4 is even interesting because that is where a person carries out genital mutilation on herself. It is like a person committing suicide –(Laughter)– “A person committing female genital mutilation on herself commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for ten years.” 

I do not mind about the deterrent nature of the punishment but I thought that we should not depart from the way we have been doing these things depending on their gravity or circumstances. Let me give you an example. Clause 3(2) says “A person who commits the offence of aggravated female genital mutilation is liable on conviction to life imprisonment.” You may think that that is the maximum penalty but of course courts have interpreted “liable” to mean “not exceeding.” This means that there is actually a discretion left to the courts depending on the circumstances, to give an even lower punishment. So, I thought I would highlight that and we can consider it when we reach committee stage. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

1.47
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank Dr Baryomunsi and the committee for the work done on this Bill and I stand to strongly support the Bill. 

First of all, the practise of female genital mutilation is really a torture, a pain and a trauma which is not justified. It is not justified to subject women to such pains and trauma and suffering. 

Also, I would like to note that the practise has no philosophical backing because if one believes in God’s creation, then one should see that God created a woman in his own wisdom to be as she was created. Where does a man get the powers then to change the woman through this mutilation? 

And if one believes in the concept of evolution, where some schools of thought advance that there was a big bang and matters were created that way and eventually there was evolution, in such scenarios where the evolution continues, any parts which are no longer necessary become a vestigial. Take the case of a tail in man when it was no longer useful; when man was no longer climbing trees the tail disappeared through evolution. Look at the appendix in human stomachs; when it was no longer useful, it become a vestigial. So in that way, the practise of this mutilation has no sound philosophy behind it.

Madam Speaker, when you also look at some of the reasons given by the cultures who have been practising it, some of them do not hold water, such as the case that it was meant to stop adultery. I think that can be fought through appropriate ways of counselling in families and so forth. 

I would also like to note that adultery is committed between two people – a woman and a man - and it takes two to tangle. A woman cannot commit adultery alone but this practice of stitching up women to curb adultery was only targeting women. What about the men that were involved in these acts of adultery? How did the practise affect the men involved?

Having observed that, I would like to thank the committee for the recommendations and I would also like to say that in addition to the criminalisation and punitive actions to buffer further so that these practises are not done so in secrecy, there is definitely need to sensitise the entire community. All of us should be involved in various forms. 

But also very importantly, the “surgeons” who have been doing the practise need to be re-tooled. They need to be trained into practises and other trades where they can get other means of getting gainful employment.

Lastly, as I said, all of us as human rights activities should be involved and this is for all of us to take up so that when this Bill is passed into law, it becomes effective and can then control these horrible practises. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.51
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is no better anatomist than God -(Laughter)– the Lord made man in his own image and he thought it prudent to give him a companion and made a woman in her entirety. On that particular part of the body, the Lord was not stupid to put it the way he did. All the accessories therein had very useful purposes and, therefore, it is total abuse of God’s wisdom for man to attempt to think that he is wiser than God. I am not comfortable with recommendation No. 4 of the committee which is trying to soothe the perpetuators who are attempting to be wiser than God, that we should give them affirmative action.

We have even given this Bill the appropriate title because it is actually mutilation and as you know, something mutilated is so ugly to even the human sight. Members have described the keloids, fistulas and even about possible closure of the orifice. It is horrible! Hon. Baryomunsi, you will bear with us that we were trying to avoid more psychological trauma if such a film was screened here because mutilation of a woman is actually bad. At one time, we had a video screened here and when I relayed the story to my wife, she ended up crying and I had to apologise. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we need to take a tough stand. The hon. Member for Kapchorwa, Dr Yekko, did say that the practise is only done for one month in two years and we also have the cross-border movements. There is a possibility that having enacted this law, some of those who do not believe in the law can decide to exodus to Kenya and handle their programmes there and come back mutilated. I would like to propose that during that month of practising FGM, we put stringent movement measures across the border so that even if need be, we have some female police surgeons that side. We should really be sure of the entirety of our ladies who are moving to that side so that in case they decide to come back mutilated, then the law should catch up with them. I think we need to design a programme to handle movement of ladies going to the other side during that month of mutilation. Similarly, even the movement of surgeons from the other side should be checked. What are they coming here for?

The Attorney-General has already ably pointed out the challenges that I also foresaw about the domestication of this. So, I will not go into that but there is another matter to do with clause 3(d) when we eventually get into committee stage. I had the opinion that with or without the transmission of HIV, female genital mutilation is really just aggravated. So, that particular clause of having to determine whether the individual got HIV as a result of an FGM operation would therefore require that we first have to test the individual prior to the FGM, which I think we cannot do –(Member timed out_)

1.57
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to strongly support the Bill. I deeply regret that this law is coming on board very late in the day. We needed this law very many years ago. If the colonialists ignored this practise, our own independent governments should have taken up the matter very long time ago. Even with this Government to remember after 23 years that the practise is there, to me, is bad. 

When the motion for this Bill was brought here and when we saw these pictures, I was terribly traumatised. I needed to be counselled; it was very bad. In my view, those who practise FGM practise the worst form of terrorism. I think those blown up by terrorists are much better off than our girls and women in Kapchorwa who are deformed and left to live with this deformity for the rest of their lives. It is terrible and very sad! I would like by way of emphasis to repeat what Dr Epetait said; that God, in His Wisdom, designed and created a woman according to His design. There is nobody who has got more power than God to undo what God has done to try and redesign. If you want to create your own human being, start your own -(Laughter)- do not try to interfere with somebody else’s. I think this matter must stop immediately.

I did not know about this practise until the Sixth Parliament, when hon. Frances Kuka, sitting up there, was my immediate neighbour in Ntinda and one evening, I took time off to discuss this matter with her. That was the first time I got to know that there was such a thing like FGM. We cannot afford to live together with this practise. We should eliminate it immediately. 

Lastly, I want to appeal to Government. There is a tendency on the part of the Executive not to implement laws especially laws that come into existence from Private Members’ Bills. One example is the Persons with Disability Act that was passed by the Seventh Parliament. Nobody is hearing about that law and yet we have so many buildings in all our towns that are still not compliant. Disabled persons cannot go and see somebody upstairs and the government was supposed to implement this law very fast. I would like to appeal to Government for this particular one - because this is a question of life and death – to please provide resources. When this Bill turns into law, avail resources and make sure it is implemented with all the vigour that we have.

Lastly, I would like to regret noting that there is no minister from the relevant ministry in the House when this matter is being discussed. Even the committee was not there to present the report. We are starting to devalue this law before it comes into existence, which is very unfortunate. I think it is a piece of legislation that we need to take seriously.

2.02 
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I also wish to use this chance to thank Dr Chris Baryomunsi for this great move.

There are a number of our communities in Uganda who regard themselves as marginalised and disadvantaged because either the state does not understand their problems or they themselves do not know that they are the ones perpetrating their problems. In this particular case, I am glad that the state and all the leadership in Uganda has come up to identify and inform our people that what they are doing with FGM is bad and should be stopped.

I come from a community which is practicing this crime. You have been talking about Kapchorwa which has reduced on this vice but the Pokot community is still doing it 100 percent because if you migrate there you will be forced to be cut. So, I am glad that this Bill is coming at this time.

Although the community I represent could be against it because of their ignorance or the cultural issues, I stand here to support it without being intimidated. I also regard this FGM as neglected crime. Ministry of Heath knows that there are diseases which have been categorised as neglected. One of them unfortunately affects the Pokot people solely. This is the one Karaza, locally called Terimesi. Because it categorised under that the government does not import these drugs. We rely on NGOs and smuggling some of it from Kenya. That is why this disease has continued and there is no solution up to now.

Supporting this Bill against FGM is one way of solving one of our problems as we wait for the government to consider Terimesi as a problem. Passing this Bill is overdue and we hope when we pass this law, it does not gather dust in the law books. It is my prayer that this one is not left to be idle and it should be implemented.

2.05
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I rise to support this Bill in its entirety. I also wish to praise those that have fought for this historic day when the entire Opposition and the Government side are in total agreement on what should go on. 

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the people that have been mentioned like hon. Frances Kuka and Dr Baryomunsi for bringing us to this historic day. We have been informed that the spirit of the unfortunate practice has been basically to massage the ego of men in the communities where this FGM is practiced.

We have also been informed that the effect of that practice has been to minimize promiscuity and adultery. Promiscuity and adultery have caused gross suffering to the people in society including spreading of fatal diseases, creation of orphans and abused children. This includes serious psychological scars on society.

I would like to face promiscuity and adultery boldly. It is a sin before God to commit adultery under Commandment six and under other religious faiths. But our contemporary attitude to adultery and promiscuity are very indulgent and this is the view that I would like to bring to this debate.

We have talked of making archaic cultural practices irrelevant especially if they hurt society. The western society has made polygamy archaic. Western or European men are just as virile as African men, for example, King Henry VIII of the 15th Century. European communities have made polygamy archaic. They dropped the practice almost 1,000 years ago. It is time that even our African societies boldly faced cultural practices like polygamy and outlawed them. If the man of Kapchorwa is prepared to give up his long held practice of FGM it is time for the man of Uganda to give away the practice of polygamy. It does not help anybody except the man. For the same reasons in support of transformation of our culture –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we are here deliberating in unison over a serious issue. The area where my sister and honourable colleague is treading into is first of all dangerous because of the fact that Sharia is extremely detailed in that area and region and the benefits therein are explained to those that have the advantage of enjoying them. So, for fear of contradiction either here or anywhere else, I am asking myself, is my dear sister in order to derail this debate by way of attempting to realign the whole subject into a new major subject that was catered for under the Domestic Relations Bill? Is she really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when the mover was moving his Bill, he informed you that certain communities are also here in Kampala and the honourable member represents some of them so they are affected by this and so she is quite in order. The Somalis are in our midst.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I do not want to tread on slippery ground and that is why I carefully used the word “bold”. We have got to face some things boldly if they are going to impact on the transformation of society and if the man of Kapchorwa is prepared to give up certain practices, we should also be able to face - I did not say “give up” but “face.” I used my words very carefully, to face certain practices.

I do not intend to go very much into this as we have a consensus on this matter as a House and I am very proud about this. For that matter, I would like to congratulate particularly Members of the Opposition who have sat through this. As you can see, there are 14 Members on this side and 15 Members on that side and this shows the amount of respect and commitment that the Opposition have for this.

Finally, for those that have been saying that the Opposition is always there to oppose, today is your answer. When there is a good Bill for the people of Uganda, the Opposition will support it. We will only oppose what is not good for this country. Without reservation, I support this Bill.

2.13
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank my brother, Dr Baryomunsi, for being foresighted. On the onset, I would like to say that this Bill coming here gives me a bad feeling because I sat in this Parliament during the last Parliament and many of you here did the same but it has taken the Seventh Parliament and a Member who is actually new in Parliament to bring this Bill to the House. Congratulations, Dr Baryomunsi! (Applause) 

It has already been mentioned and I would like to add my voice that FGM is dehumanising, cruel, a primitive culture and I would like to ask where this culture came from. It should not have existed to begin with because it is a violation of the rights of women. Again here on behalf of the men, I would like to apologise to the women because this is being done in a selfish way to fulfil the sexual desires of men.

With those apologies, I would like to divert the debate a little and digress from what we seem to define FGM as. In my understanding, mutilation means disfiguring, distortion, destruction, deformation, changing of form or manipulation, if you like. 

Dr Francis Epetait, my colleague from Ngora and others, have alluded to the fact that God made the female sexual organs as they are for a reason. In a way, He knew that it was good for man and woman and so anybody tampering with it goes against the Will of God. As we know, the Will of God is supreme. What would we like to say, not only to those who choose to cut the female genitalia but also to those who choose to pull and deform it in the name of adding value –(Laughter and Interruption)

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the definition of FGM - and I think my colleague has read it - it involves partial or total removal of the external female genitalia for non-therapeutic reasons. Anything that causes harm to a human being cannot be accepted even according to the Bible so is my college in order to say that pulling or elongating is one of the four types of FGM and that it is also a violation of human rights when it does not cause any harm to anybody? We are free.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe I should have allowed Dr Baryomunsi to show you this film. I don’t want you to mix these matters and I already ruled on this matter when the motion first came. I said, focus on the issue of mutilation. Please, hon. Amuriat, don’t digress.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I understand the resistance by some Members of some communities in this country to the direction that I am taking this debate but I think as Parliament, we need to say what we intend to say. I would like to suggest and I think I will bring a proposal when we reach the committee stage, that rather than use the word mutilation - if we want to exclude the other pulling, which by the way is painful -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, I have ruled you out of order. Please, don’t mix these issues. Concentrate on cutting using stones, pangas and razor blades. That is all.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, obviously female genital cutting is something that is an abomination and not acceptable but as we legislate I think we need to focus our attention on implementation of this law. This Parliament should not and must not attempt to legislate where we know implementation can be impossible.

2.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): I want to thank Dr Baryomunsi for introducing this Bill and you, Madam Speaker, for your commitment to the advocacy of this Bill. 

I want to start by saying that today we bring and debate this Bill on the day that we also celebrate human rights. Today is the International Human Rights Day. The theme for this year is: “Embrace diversity, put an end to discrimination.” I want to congratulate this Parliament for debating this Bill that discriminates on women on this day and harnessing this year’s theme.

I have read the Bill and looked at many of the sections. My view is that while the Bill punishes a number of activities or acts, one particular one, which I feel should be included during the committee stage, is those who participate in the act. There are those who perform female genital mutilation and there are those who participate in helping that so-called surgeon to carry out her activity. Those ones must also face the same penalty like those who are carrying out the activity because while section 7 talks about participation in events leading to female genital mutilation, a person who participates in the actual activity is not catered for. We must introduce an amendment to deal with those who participate in the event. I will consult with the mover of the Bill to see how we can handle that matter.  

The second issue is that when Dr Yekko spoke - I think we all realised that women are highly-motivated. The strongest reason for the motivation is being discriminated against. As a woman in society, you cannot climb the granary because you have not been mutilated; you cannot take part in a marriage ceremony because you have not been mutilated. There is no specific provision to cater for those who discriminate against women because they have not been mutilated. 

We should introduce a provision to penalise those who discriminate women who have not been mutilated from engaging in economic, social or political activities within the community so that psychologically -  and it motivates women to be mutilated if they want to be part of the community. At an appropriate time, we shall liaise with the mover of the Bill so that we introduce an amendment to cater for this particular issue so that –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for yielding the Floor. When we passed the Land Bill, with Section 32(a) and the other punishment clauses, we talked about anybody who attempts, who participates and who evicts; so I believe that like she is trying to introduce it, it would be in the spirit of what we have already set precedence for that the person who attempts to carry out FGM or who participates and actually who does the act; those three categories must be well captured. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information. “Attempting” is well-catered for under 5. We need to add participating as one of the urgent matters. 

Some people have been arguing that Article 37 of the Constitution protects them. Let me read the Article: “Every person has a right as applicable to belong to, enjoy, practise, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with others.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To add on to hon. Amongi’s argument, when I was in Bukwo last week, I told them that I am going to ensure that a provision for those who stigmatise and put pressure is included in this Bill and I spoke to you about it.

2.26
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to congratulate the mover of this motion and everybody who has participated in making sure that the Bill is finally read today. I also thank you very much, Madam Speaker, because I know in very many fora, you have been talking so much about the Bill not only in the areas that are affected but countrywide. Everyone is now aware that FGM illegal. 

Before I make my point, I would like to thank the committee. Although the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are not here, I know they have worked very hard to make sure this work is concluded. I want to specifically thank them for their recommendations. Most of my concerns are in the recommendations, especially the first recommendation that Government should, as a matter of urgency, construct model schools to help educate the girl child.

I was in Kapchorwa less than a month ago and I heard stories from young girls about their experiences with this issue and I was so touched. I cried when these young girls in primary schools would tell me their sad stories. So I would really like to request that Government -   although I know commitments are there and several times we have passed very important laws in this Parliament and they have not been implemented. I want to request that this urgent matter be taken very seriously and boarding schools be a priority not only in Bukwo but in the whole of Kapchorwa and areas that are affected by FGM.   

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I also had a story that Members of Parliament in the past who have been de-campaigning FGM have been thrown out of Parliament and have been castigated because they have not been in support of the practice. I want to request that a country wide sensitisation especially in the areas that are affected be made so that the people know that a Member of Parliament would rather lose his sit in Parliament for as long as he knows that they are making laws that are really protecting human rights. 

I would like to encourage my colleagues, Members of Parliament who come from these areas, for example, hon. Toskin, to stand very firmly - and I believe your people will not let you down because you have supported this Bill. I also believe that people from Kapchorwa are watching Parliament live; they should know that this is a national issue and it is not a Bill that is simply being passed by Members coming from that area but it is a big concern. They should understand that some cultural rights contravene some international human rights. This is an international human right, which I should say a universal human right that is given by God in that a woman created by God should remain the way she is; she must not be mutilated. So, should you fight a Member of Parliament or any political leader that will support this Bill, it means that you are not entrusting them to do their work of protecting your rights.

The second recommendation by this committee that there needs to be a massive awareness campaign on the dangers that come with the practice of FGM should be taken very seriously by the ministry concerned -(Member timed out_) 

2.32
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank Dr Baryomunsi for presenting the Bill. I come form Bugisu and in Bugisu we practice circumcision, which is actually very good. Hon. Chrispus Kiyonga of Kasese and I practice it very well, not like hon. Francis Kiyonga of Karamoja who do it but to women. We do not do it to women; we do it to men and we lay it before the public. 

The Bagisu used to circumcise women but it was stopped over 1,000 years ago. The last woman to be circumcised and who actually introduced circumcision in Bugisu is called Nabalwa who to us is a heroine. We remember her by naming our children “Nabalwa” because she is the one who introduced male circumcision and stopped female circumcision.

FGM is not a problem in Kapchorwa, Amudat and Bukwo alone; it is a national problem and an African problem. There are many people who come from Sebei who are in Kamwenge in Toro, who are in Kibanda in Bunyoro, who are in Kampala here, who are in Bugisu.  But   it is not good to carry out an exercise which people do not learn from and which they do not like. 

For us in Bugisu when we circumcise, all the neighbouring districts have started picking it up either by going to the health units or doing it from the court yard the way we do it as men. But I have not seen any community in Uganda that has learnt from the practices which people call good in Sebei.  

I want to thank the leadership of Sebei. Fifteen years ago, I was complaining to my friend who was a lawyer as to why they were doing it. He told me that no leader in Sebei can stand up and say anything against this and he is elected tomorrow. I am very happy that I have lived just 15 years after to witness that this is not liked in Sebei and that we are here making a national law to stop it. 

Madam Speaker, just barely a month ago, we received as delegation of Members of Parliament from Kenya and as Members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, we interacted with them over this matter. The problem is that in Kenya, unlike in Uganda, there are several communities that practice this, which is a big problem. Actually the President of Kenya - and I think there is a law which declared it illegal but there was no organisation locally among the community leaders to help stop it. 

So, making the law alone without handling the issue of the people who have been practicing it and who think that it is good and beneficial - it is not for nothing that the committee recommended that people who have been doing it especially the women circumcisers, as they call them, who have been doing it and benefiting from it - because I am told for every single girl they cut, they are given a cow. So it is a source of income. So to make them have an income and stop this, I do not think Government will be losing much if there is something small done for them so that they can leave the practice of cutting these women and they live a life without benefiting from this exercise. 

We have thanked everybody but there is a group in Sebei that we must thank called REACH (Reproductive Educative and Community Health). Some of the NGOs go where there are soft spots, where they can easily make money from the communities and go away. But REACH has done a lot in Sebei; it has talked to community leaders and women who have been practicing FGM and it has dedicated its time to ensure that the local people, who have otherwise been seeing FGM as good, have within this time seen it as bad and dropped it. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we really have consensus on this matter from both sides of the House. So, I would want to suspend the House for one hour to allow Dr Baryomunsi prepare his response and address the amendments, which the Attorney-General and hon. Amongi talked about. So the House suspended until 3.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 2.38 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.33 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on Tuesday I had informed you that the National Planning Authority had wanted to meet Members of Parliament at Imperial Royale Hotel today but the meeting flopped. So they are now switching to Tuesday; they will meet us in the Parliament Conference Hall. So I urge Members to attend and discuss the National Development Plan. It will now be here and so you do not have to get out of the building. Thank you very much. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My view is that there are very few people and perhaps you will have to make it later. Because people like hon. Okello-Okello, who should attend, are just entering. So there is a problem. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will make another announcement, hon. Prime Minister. I now call the mover to wind up. Hon. Baryomunsi.

3.35
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Members of Parliament who were here this morning and participated in the debate. Most of them spoke in favour of the Bill, although Members feared to watch the film that we had prepared so that all of us can appreciate what female genital mutilation is all about. 

But also it shows the positive concern that the Members have. I think some Members watched that film a few days ago, and one Member of Parliament who was pregnant developed labour pains immediately after watching that film and others collapsed. So they feared that it would traumatise them. 

But this goes a long way in informing us that if Members of Parliament can be traumatised by a film, how about the women who undergo FGM? This re-enforces the point that we must expeditiously pass this law to protect the women at risk of FGM in this country.

I must also thank the Members; like some Members commented that the ruling party side and the Opposition are united on this issue, which is very good for this country. So I would like to urge Parliament that we should always look at things in the interest of this country first without going into partisan divisions in this Parliament. 

As I wind up, allow me make a few comments on some of the issues which were raised during the debate. I commented that this practise of FGM is done in the name of culture, especially here in Uganda. One of the Members, I think it was engineer Amuriat, was asking where this culture came from. The literature available cannot place where FGM came from. But some available information indicates that the practice may have come from the area around Egypt. There are some writings in the Greek history which show that FGM could have started around Egypt. So because of the movement of the people, they could have moved with this practice. But it is not very clear how it started and why it was being done. 

There are Members who were raising the issue that we should include the matter of labia elongation as practiced in parts of this country. If you look carefully at the definition that we have provided, we are addressing harmful practice. When you look at the issue of pulling or labia elongation, it is not a harmful practice. Nobody complains. So, we are looking at this practice of female mutilation, which injures the female genitalia and gives rise to many complications. That is why we have provided a definition: “Female Genital Mutilation refers to all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia for non-therapeutic reasons.” 

So, the FGM we are referring to should not be confused with labia elongation, which is done by some communities. We are looking at the harmful practicing of injuring women. 

A number of Members did refer to complications. I am a medical doctor and I have worked on some of these women who have some of these complications. You would be shocked to see what women bear with as a result of complications arising from this procedure. 

One of the biggest problems is that in those communities, FGM is done by local women who are not medically trained; although we do not want to justify medicalisation of the practise. They use very crude instruments, which are not sterilised and these women do not know the anatomy of the people they are injuring. So because of that, there are very many complications that arise. 

The commonest is heavy blooding which can cause shock and result in death. There are cases of women who have died as a result of these. Others include HIV/AIDS because if you use a knife on one person and use it on another, you stand the risk of infecting the other with HIV. Studies have shown higher prevalence of HIV and other related infections in communities where FGM are practiced. In the process of healing, there are usually scares and very ugly formations which form in the genital area of the women. 

But also associated with FGM, are maternal complications. There is evidence that in communities where FGM is practiced, maternal survival is law. Maternal mortality is high; the chances of children who are born to survive are very low. So maternal death and new-born death are higher in communities where FGM are practiced, and this is also true for communities in Uganda. 

One of the Members commented on what we call, Vesicovaginal Fistula, where an opening appears between the vagina and the bladder or sometimes between the rectum or the anus and the vagina so that the women continually and uncontrollably leaks urine or faecal material. 

Women get fractures because in our case here, FGM is done on adolescents and adult women. Sometimes, you have to get muscular and strong people to hold this woman. So sometimes they injure and fracture these women as they struggle to get out of it.

There are women who have suffered permanent disability. If you go to Kapchorwa, there are women moving in wheelchairs as a result of this practice. But also, many women silently suffer sexual dysfunctions and they get painful sex. There are many complications which I can list, but because of time, I cannot go into that. This shows that we need to have passed this law yesterday.  

There are questions whether Members of Parliament from those areas will be voted for if they support FGM. I want to assure you that all the Members of Parliament and community leaders from areas where FGM occurs do support the prohibition and elimination and eradication of FGM. 

I also want to assure the Members that we have gone to all the communities: in Karamoja, in Kapchorwa, and Bukwo that no Member of Parliament will suffer because of supporting the elimination of FGM because the communities themselves now realise – that is why a member like hon. Sabila who was working with REACH and campaigning against FGM was voted into Parliament. So, nobody should be scared. Hon. Sabila, hon. Yekko and hon. Toskin have all been at the forefront of campaigning against FGM. I do not think anybody can politically punish them for their stand on this issue; we now have the support of the people. 

For your information, Madam Speaker, all the male Members of Parliament from these areas have married women who have not undergone mutilation; their wives are not circumcised, for the record -(Interjections)- I am informed because I am a medical doctor. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised that there are pockets of communities in Bukwo District that probably still cherish this practice. I would like to say that we have been to Bukwo and I think the major complaint, which you also raised, Madam Speaker, is the issue of provision of services. I was in Bukwo some time and the people told me that they were willing to support us but that their roads needed to be worked on. I would like to report that the community in that area is suffering in terms of service provision. It is good the Prime Minister is here. 

There is need for affirmative action in these areas particularly in Bukwo District, Amudat and the others. In Bukwo, for example, almost everything is Kenyan - the easiest way to reach there is to pass via Kenya, the mobile telephone network that you can pick is the one of Kenya, the radio station you can listen to is one from Kenya, and the currency that works there is of Kenya. I think there is really need to connect Bukwo to Uganda. That is why I am also emphasizing the fact that there is need for affirmative action for these communities in terms of extending services to them.

There was a question on whether this law will work or not. I think the difference – and somebody was making reference to Kenya – is that in Kenya authorities have been working to ban FGM using a presidential decree. This process is a bit different from ours because here we began with community interventions through advocacy, which we have built into legislation. This was not the case in Kenya; they started with a presidential decree which was, with due respect, a top-down process excluding the communities. Anyway, as we speak, the Members of Parliament in the Parliament of Kenya are preparing a Private Member’s Bill. I was in Kenya recently to provide technical support and we are in touch. Soon they will also finalise the process of legislation. 

I would like to say that hon. Chrispus Kiyonga raised an important point on the need to address this issue of FGM from a regional perspective. It true that in Kenya about 40 percent of the women are at risk of FGM, which is also practiced in some other communities in countries like Sudan particularly in the north, and in DRC particularly in the north as well. That is why I support Dr Kiyonga’s idea of the regional effort to address the FGM problem. I am saying this because it is true that in places like Bukwo, during the circumcision season there are many mutilators who cross from Kenya to Uganda to do that job. From the figures, the women who cross from Kenya to circumcise others in Uganda actually work on more victims than the locally based mutilators. So, as we intervene, cross border issues must be addressed and brought on board so that we can completely wipe out this practice.

There was concern on whether the interventions in the way forward should include affirmative action and if looking for alternative employment for the mutilators would be a wise idea. I would like to point out that the challenge we have here is that much as we are criminalising the practice being done in the name of culture, people carry out FGMs in their own good faith without knowing they are committing a crime. So, as we legislate against culture, we have to be a little bit cautious. 

The mutilators, like the Speaker has said, earn a lot of money during the month of circumcision. There have been proposals that as a way of tackling this problem, the mutilators should be engaged in income-generating activities because they have had arguments that this is their way of survival. I would like to say that although that cannot be a defence, as a way of integrating them into society it may be important to engage them in other income-generating activities. Anyway, once the law is in place and they continue doing that, they will be subjected to it. There is no doubt about that.

I do appreciate and welcome the proposals by Dr Kiyonga about us as Parliament showing support by dedicating a week to be spent in the affected communities to mobilise and sensitise the people there about the dangers of FGM. I would like to add that Parliament should unanimously support that proposal, having provided the necessary leadership in addressing this issue. Usually, those communities mark their culture days around 30th November every year; we could look at a week leading to that date for Parliament to move there and show solidarity in the fight against this practice.

I would also like to support Dr Kiyonga’s other proposal of giving a token of appreciation to the communities of Kapchorwa for their effort in handling this issue. I am saying this because the district council passed an ordinance outlawing female genital mutilation. I think Government must appreciate that kind of effort by thanking the district leadership and other players who have been very active on the ground, so that everybody gets to know that when you do a good thing your effort can be appreciated in form of a reward.

Finally, there was concern that Government is not usually very enthusiastic about implementing and enforcing laws which come through Private Members’ Bills. I would like to urge Government to treat all laws equally no matter whether they come from the Executive or as Private Members’ Bills because that is a constitutional right, which all of us enjoy by virtue of being Members of Parliament. Laws that come from the backbenchers should not be treated as –(Interruption) 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Baryomunsi for giving way and I am sorry for interrupting while he was making a very sound presentation. However, I thought I should put the record straight in regard to the assertions that have been made on the Floor of the House that Government has not been seriously pursuing the implementation of provisions – and this was stated by hon. Okello-Okello – coming from Private Members’ Bills when they are passed into law. 

I would like to point out that the Budget Act, which Government and all of us are using here, originated from a Private Member’s Bill. It is one of the most important pieces of legislation that this Parliament has had. We also have the Parliamentary Act. Hon. Ogalo moved several Private Members’ Bills here. All I know is that this legislation,, which was passed by members originating as a Private Member’s Bill has, in the NRM spirit, been put to good use. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is also true that we do not hear much about the Copyright and Neighbourhood Rights Act yet it came in the Seventh Parliament as a Private Member’s Bill. There has also been a big battle to implement the Disability Act. So there are some success stories but there are also areas which are not working well. Please, conclude. No, Minister, let hon. Baryomunsi conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I think the point is that Government should treat all laws equally irrespective of their origin.

I would like to thank the committee chaired by hon. Lagada for the good work that they did to traverse the country, carry out consultations and come up with a very good report. I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your personal interest in the subject and for the commitment you have shown to the women of this country. (Applause) 

I would also like to thank the President of Uganda because he has also shown his commitment. On 1st July this year, he accepted to preside over celebrations in Amudat where we launched a national campaign for total eradication of female genital mutilation in Uganda. He is personally interested and is following what is happening in regard to legislation on this matter. I would like to register my appreciation for his personal effort. In some countries, presidents have feared to publicly commit themselves and pronounce themselves on the issue of FGM. Our President, however, is very clear on what he thinks should be done and is in full support of the ongoing campaign against female genital mutilation.

I also want to thank a civil society organisation called LAW-Uganda headed by women lawyers particularly our own hon. Dora Byamukama, who has been very pivotal in the drafting of this Bill. She is away in the Netherlands on similar work but we would like to register appreciation to her for the interest, commitment and professional work she has done and the entire LAW-Uganda organisation which she heads. 

I also want to thank REACH, a civil society organisation which has been referred to and is based in Eastern Uganda. It is chaired by Madam Beatrice Chelangat who is up here in the gallery; that lady who you can see is a graduate of statistics and completed her degree in Makerere. She refused white-collar jobs in Kampala and decided to go back to Kapchorwa to fight this FGM practice –(Applause)- as a volunteer even when she was not being paid. She refused all the good jobs, and as a statistician she had the opportunity to work in many offices, and went back to Kapchorwa. Whatever achievements we are talking about are actually from her work and the rest of her colleagues in the area. We would like to appreciate her commitment, efforts, enthusiasm and hearty spirit in addressing the question of female genital mutilation in Uganda. 

Related to that, I also want to thank the Sabiny Elders Association. Elders are usually the custodians of culture but in the Sebei community, the Sabiny men particularly formed an association as elders to champion the cause of campaigning against FGM. I think somebody made reference to Mr Cheboron who is the chair of the Sabiny Elders Association; we have Mr Kamlony who is the adviser and former CA delegate in this House, and the entire team. We would like to thank you, the Sabiny Elders Association, for the great work that you have done in championing the cause against FGM. 

We thank the Kapchorwa Local Government and the UN agencies, UNFPA and UNICEF, and the other donor agencies that have supported the Government of Uganda and the communities to address this matter. Talking of that, when I was in Kapchorwa – this is my last comment - the communities felt that it was the UN agencies and NGOs that were championing this. They are making a call that Government must be much more visible in the campaign against female genital mutilation. 

We want to thank you greatly for the creation of a budget line and we want to thank the finance ministry and Government for providing resources. I think from the debate, it is very clear that Government must allocate more resources and must consider affirmative action for the affected communities, particularly in ensuring that the social services and other infrastructure services must be extended to the communities in Kapchorwa, Bukwo, Amudat, Nakapiripirit and the rest of the communities which are affected by this cultural practice. I want to implore the entire House to unanimously support the motion that I moved and pass this Bill here and now. I thank you very much

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill 2009 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PROHIBITION OF FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION BILL, 2009

Clause 1 
MS BEATRICE LAGADA: The committee has an amendment on clause 1. First, allow me to apologise as chair and on behalf of my committee. We were not in the House because of what I think was a breakdown in communication between us and our clerk. For the last two days, we have been battling with local government who are reviewing the decentralisation to ensure that they engender the budget in decentralisation. I am really sorry but we were not aware that the House was sitting at 11 O’clock in the morning.

In clause 1, we would like to delete the words, “to practice medicine, surgery and dentistry” in the last line of the paragraph. The justification is that the words are redundant.  

Secondly, we would like to insert a new sub-clause (g) to define the words “Person in authority” as follows: “A person in authority shall mean a person having power and control over other people because of his or her knowledge and official position and shall include a person who exercises religious, political, economic or social authority.” The justification is that it would ease the interpretation of clause 14 (2). I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that all? Yes, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Arising from the debate in plenary, I also propose that (f) be amended to say, “Minister means the minister responsible for Gender, Labour and Social Development.”

DR EPETAIT: Thank you. I would first like to seek reconciliation between 1(d) and 1(e). My proposal is that the whole of (e) is redundant. This is because 1(d) says, “A health worker means a person qualified in the promotion of health, the prevention of disease and care of the sick and who is registered and enrolled under the Dental and Medical Practitioners Act, the Nurses and Midwives Act and the Allied Health Professionals Act.” Now, 1(e) singles out medical doctors or practitioners who are themselves actually health workers and are already defined in 1(d). This is why I beg to move that the whole of (e) be deleted because it is already catered for under (d). Maybe we first dispose of that before we move on. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the mover agree with that? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: It sometimes becomes very useful if we consider the interpretation section after looking at the contents of the Bill. The reason we brought out the medical doctor or practitioner alone is that in countries where legislation has come into place, there is a risk of medicalisation of female genital mutilation. People run to health workers and this being a surgical procedure, you find medical doctors get involved alone. That is why we had pulled it out. I think it would have been important if we read the provisions where this one comes out and then we appreciate better why we are separating it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you want us to defer it and consider the other areas so that members can understand it? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just wanted to propose that we start with part two and when we conclude, we can then come back to the interpretation phase. It would then become easy to relate the terminology to where it exists in the provisions. 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: I am seeking clarification from hon. Baryomunsi. Under what circumstance would FGM be medicalised because whether medicalised or not, it is still FGM which we are outlawing?  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. Traditionally, female genital mutilation is carried out by these local mutilators. I want to warn you not to call them surgeons because some of us who are professionally qualified feel offended to appear like we are surgeons like those women. In some countries, when parliaments or governments outlaw FGM some people now discreetly go to medical workers, to the hospital, to have the mutilation done by qualified health workers. That is what we call medicalisation of female genital mutilation. 

Even when you later read about aggravated FGM, we are saying that health workers should not do it because there is no medical benefit associated to it at all. My point was that if we went through the various provisions and you see how health workers come in, it becomes much easier to appreciate why we are defining health workers and medical doctors in the way we have done so. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, can we stand over it and come back to it later? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes. Otherwise, I concede to the other proposals from the chair and also the Attorney-General.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mine is on the new (g). I want it to read, “A person in authority means…” rather than, “A person in authority shall mean…” This means we remove the word “shall” and then we continue and say, “…includes…” If we say “shall”; shall, from when? 

MR RUHINDI: I have just been advised, and I thought as much because we had thought about it, that these ministries do change, they metamorphose many times. Accordingly, the focal thrust is on social development for the administration of this Bill and so it should read, “Minister means the minister responsible for social development.” 

In addition, I would like to support the drafting proposed by hon. Okello-Okello because when the Bill is passed and it is operational, it becomes an Act and then you read into the provision, “shall mean” as if it is now in future when in fact the law is being implemented. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: I think postponing this is not really a big thing but if we have to keep (e) as it is, just to avoid repetition we would amend (d) by deleting, “the Dental and Medical Practitioners Act” because then it is covered under (e). I do not know whether my colleague, the mover of the Bill, is seeing it. Otherwise, as it is now, (e) would be redundant now that you have mentioned the Dental and Medical Practitioners Act in (d).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am engulfed by doctors from both sides of the House. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think I have no big problem. The reason as to why I had put “medical doctor” on its own was really for emphasis because of the role doctors play in surgical interventions. However, I can concede since I have no problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you think it should be deleted?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Yes, I think it should be deleted because even those surgical procedures done by the doctors, if at all they are FGMs, are also outlawed. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think there is a misunderstanding. If you read 3 on aggravated female genital mutilation – that is why I had wanted us to first go through - we are saying a person commits the offence of aggravated female genital mutilation where, when you look at (e), female genital mutilation is done by a health worker, medical doctor or practitioner. That is why medical doctors are health workers but for emphasis I just pulled them out. However, if it is the wish of the House, I can concede since I do not have a big attachment to this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed variously.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS LAGADA: In clause 2, we wish to insert between “imprisonment” and “of” the word “not exceeding”, so that it reads, “A person who carries out female genital mutilation commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 10 years.”

MR TOSKIN: Well, we are supporters of this motion but on the question of the offence, I want to beg this House not to make it so high –(Interjections)- I am saying this because this is a social problem and it will take time. If we make the punishments so high, we may actually fail the law. So, I want to persuade this House to accept, “not more than five years” -(Interjections)- especially for this particular case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Toskin, when we say “not exceeding”, it can be one year, three years, nine and a half years or even one day. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, in the morning we went through the trauma and all the associated negative consequences of this phenomenon of FGM and we told ourselves we were so late in rescuing our population from this bad practice. Therefore, I think the spirit of the law is to try to create a deterrent provision to make it as unpleasant as possible. Actually, I thought that my good brother in the Lord, hon. Toskin, was going to provide for an amendment to revise it even upwards so that nobody imagines that they should go and mutilate any other person. So, I pray that we stay the provision as amended by the chairperson of the committee.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Chairperson, thank you so much. I also come from a community where this is practised, that is, Bugiri District. It is practised in a full sub-county, Iwemba sub-county, and in some parts of Buluguyi and Kapyanga sub-counties. Two years ago, I saw a young girl who went through genital mutilation. She was pregnant when they did it to her and she died. So, when we talk of a punishment of ten years, actually I want it to be a minimum of ten years because you have caused the death of somebody or disability for life. So the ten years, I suggest, should be the minimum.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is that we should have a minimum punishment rather than just fixing a maximum punishment. As you have rightly pointed out, you said that it can be one year, two years or whatever. In order to make it really deterrent, I think we need to fix a minimum punishment so that we make it at least five years’ minimum sentence in jail and a maximum of ten years. That is what I would propose. We have to be specific and we have to be strong so that this practice ends.

I would like to move an amendment that we put a minimum sentence of five years and we leave it as maximum ten years. I thank you. 

DR KIYONGA: Madam Chairperson, I support what hon. Mugyenyi has said because the amendment by the chair is really removing the bite. The committee had put ten years but the chair is saying not more than ten years. As hon. Alaso has just said, it will depend on the judge. If the judge is like hon. Toskin, he may give one month. (Laughter) So, we either leave the ten years or we prescribe a minimum as hon. Mugyenyi has said. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would strongly urge the House to look at this issue in a manner that is not so vindictive of -(Interjections)- I am sorry to say this. It is not good legislative practice for us to put those minimum and maximum punishments. For maximum, it is ok; actually, I do not find any problem with the way the clause is phrased as of now - “liable to imprisonment for ten years”. So, leave room for the judge to assess the circumstances. 

Discretion of the trial judge or magistrate is very important in looking at all the circumstances. It would be unfortunate if we tied the hands of the judge and said, “No matter the circumstances, it must be five years minimum”, without any option of a fine or anything -(Interjections)- there are always mitigating factors in each and every case, whether it is murder, rape or defilement. There are mitigating factors in all these cases.

So, Madam Chairperson, I would strongly urge the House to retain the clause “… liable to imprisonment for ten years” as it is, so that we leave that room. Let us trust that the magistrates and judges who will handle the matter will also appreciate the gravity of the matter -(Interjections)- I strongly urge the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Shadow Attorney-General, if the judges had already appreciated the gravity of this matter, we would have had some convictions. Have you ever heard of any FGM case taken to court in this country? It is because they are not sensitive to it. They are not sensitive to it. In Mbale where these instruments are sold in the market, the markets have never been closed. Those stones and gadgets are sold in Mbale in broad daylight. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to differ and I tend to agree with the Shadow Attorney-General, for once. Let me tell you; if you make it so rigid and so hard to the judge, he can decide to acquit the person and what will you do? There is no sufficient evidence. 

I think first of all, we cannot dismiss completely what hon. Toskin is saying. We are evolving from a particular practice in a cultural setting and we need to keep that at the back of our minds. 

There is also the flexibility issue. If you look at all our penal laws, practically all of them rarely provide minimums. It is always “not exceeding”, so that you do not actually tie the hands of the judge, after assessing all the circumstances and hearing the evidence, to take a particular direction within that range. So, I think we need to maintain that position even in this one. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, are you objecting to the amendment by the chair saying, “not exceeding 10 years”? That was her amendment. 

MR RUHINDI: The “not exceeding” is okay but not the minimum. 

DR ARAPKISSA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think I will agree with the committee chairperson that it should be “not exceeding ten years”. As I had said earlier, this is a social problem. Read that clause together with clause 6, which says, “anybody procuring, aiding, abetting …” In this case of female genital mutilation, you even get the candidate going to look for the surgeon or even the parents going to look for the surgeon -(Interjections)- yes! So, if you make it so rigid, you will drive this practice underground; nobody will report anything. 

I think there should be some flexibility because you are going to imprison the father, you are going to imprison the surgeon and eventually the final thing is nobody will report that anything has happened. So, I think they should accept the proposal by the honourable chairperson, “not exceeding 10 years”, so that the judge decides what to do.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Chair, we all know that legislation is not enough and we know that because it is a cultural issue, there must be other efforts taken to stop this practice. We know that we can have the law in place and people can go underground. Therefore, that is why we have taken up the effort of sensitising the communities and getting the communities to own this process. However, making a law and leaving it open like this, knowing the harm that this has caused to women, is not helpful. 

For your information, Madam Speaker, we invited all the Speakers of Africa in the Pan African Parliament about two months ago where we have launched a campaign against this negative practice that is affecting African women. I want to congratulate Uganda because Uganda had already taken the initiative and now we are about to pass the law. Many other African countries have not done it and yet you have countries where 90 percent, sometimes 99 percent, of the women are being mutilated. Uganda has gone a long way and we are ahead. I must congratulate our Parliament, but let us not make a law that will leave some space for this practice to continue. We know that the law alone cannot stop the practice so there must be -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, we are now at committee stage. With due respect to my colleague, I thought she would now rise up and give a proposed amendment rather than take us back to debate.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Chair, I am still trying to defend my amendment where I said that there must be a minimum. I am worried that we are going to have a law, which is supposed to stop this terrible practice on women, that is left so open and cultural values are going to manipulate it. You will find that those who are doing it will continue to do it and the judges will let them free. If we fix the minimum punishment, we can reduce it from five but at least people will fear to conduct this practice knowing that if they are caught, the minimum they will be in jail will be five years or whatever but at least put a minimum sentence.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, now that we have moved amendments, why don’t we dispose of these amendments by voting on them so that we proceed because we are now actually at the second reading stage as observed by hon. Epetait. Why don’t we move by voting on the amendments and then we decide?

MR ODIT: Madam Chair, having been ably guided by the legal minds here that it is ridiculous to put a minimum but that the maximum penalty is already clearly articulated, what is the point really of voting on this matter? Perhaps it will be the first time that we are putting a minimum and maximum in terms of penalty in a law like this; I think it is not humane. 

We should not pass a law when we are already angry. We should be fair. This is a process; changing culture requires a lot of effort. Even the law should be flexible. Next year we shall be back here if this minimum is not working and if the maximum is not working. Parliament will not be dissolved; we shall be here again to review it. So for the start, I think let us move by this provision. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we persuade members to go with the chairperson’s amendment, “not exceeding 10 years”, so that the courts can give one day, two months, three years et cetera? I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS LAGADA: Madam Chair, I have an amendment in clause 3(d) to delete the word “AIDS”. The justification is that it is redundant because by the time somebody is infected, AIDS itself may not be manifesting but HIV will be there and the victim is infected with HIV as a result. The infecting agent is HIV and not AIDS; AIDS is a result of HIV. So, we should delete “AIDS”.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, during the second reading I raised an issue regarding clause 3(d) about aggravated female genital mutilation to include transmission of HIV. My argument then was that as it stands now, it would presuppose that the victim or the person on whom female genital mutilation has been meted on has to be proven HIV negative before the exercise; who is going to have that burden? 

My opinion is that whether there is HIV transmission or not, for as long as FGM has occurred, that is already aggravated FGM. So, I would even see no harm in deleting (d) because with or without transmission of HIV, it is still a problem. We would lose nothing if we deleted the whole of (d).

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, like I said, the purpose of this Bill was to create offences and in section 2 we are creating an offence of female genital mutilation. Like you heard from the debate, there are severe forms where you get severe and life threatening consequences and that is why we have created a different offence of aggravated female genital mutilation. We have defined what constitutes that aggravation - if the offence is committed by a guardian, a parent or a person having authority, if there is permanent disability suffered, if there is transmission of HIV during the action or if the offence is committed by a health worker.

We are borrowing very heavily from the work in this Parliament where we amended the Penal Code to provide for offences related to defilement. I personally do not see any problem, and you can see the sentences we are providing are different. For female genital mutilation, we are giving 10 years and then aggravated female genital mutilation, life imprisonment.

Otherwise, I concede to the amendment by the chair to remove the word “AIDS”, but I want to persuade my brother, hon. Epetait, to appreciate that we should retain the aggravated form of female genital mutilation whose consequences are much worse than the first offence of FGM

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: I think the honourable member here raised a very important point about how you are going to ascertain whether transmission occurred within the operation or it had occurred even before.

MR RUHINDI: Unless there is some further clarification from the chair of the committee or the mover of the motion, I think hon. Epatait is highlighting a grey area that needs to be clarified. This provision is obtained from the Penal Code (Amendment) 2007; where we actually said – in fact there was a heated debate here on whether we were going to agree to compulsory testing of the offender and it was carried. 

In that particular law, it is the offender to be tested. Testing the offender at the time of the commission of the offence can certainly give you a clue or evidence that the victim, if found with HIV, could have contracted it from the offender. But in this particular case, it is a bit more complicated because you are actually doing an operation and after the act, how are you going to relate this female genital mutilation to the – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But Attorney-General, I want you to consider the manner in which these people operate. Take what they call the age set; suppose you find that soon after circumcision, all the girls aged 14 in Kaproron village were diagnosed with HIV/AIDS, wouldn’t that be a pointer to this quack operation? That is what they do. 

MS LAGADA: Madam Chair, I want to give a scenario. In Kapchorwa, we found a case of a woman in a wheel chair. She was cut on the same day with three other women and all of them developed the same complications. The other three have already died and the surviving one is in a wheel chair. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think their nerves were injured.

MS LAGADA: And I also wanted to add that we must remember also that when these mutilators are going to cut, they drink the whole night. So, the chances of cutting themselves and infecting the girls or cutting the wrong nerves are very high. Thank you. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, first of all, it is true that there is a risk of HIV infections through this practise. I think that should not be in doubt. Hon. Bayigga, you are a medical doctor. You know that we can scientifically establish when you got infected using scientific biomarkers. So, I think there is no problem and like the chairperson said, if you just use a knife on five girls, you can infect all of them. If one of them complains that she got infected during the practise of FGM, it can be traced and linked to the person who performed the FGM and that is why we are putting this provision. 

What the chairperson is saying is true that there are women who were cut in 1976 using the same knife and all of them got paralysed. The problem was that they got an infection, which affected the sciatic nerve and all of them got permanent paralysis. So, it is true that infection can be transmitted through this and that is why I strongly feel that we must have this provision. It can be established from the scientific point of view. 

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give is that in the recent Burundi constitutional amendment, the mention of HIV/AIDS in the Constitution to prevent those who infect people either innocently or maliciously was provided. So, in our case, this provision makes those people more careful so that even if they make one mistake while cutting, they should know that if they do it carelessly so as to lead to the spread of HIV, they will be punished. So, let us provide for it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: I still have a matter to propose on clause 3(e). First of all, it is a pity that we stood over the definition clause – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We deleted those that you did not want. 

DR EPETAIT: For that matter, consequential amendment under (e) is to delete “medical doctor or practitioner.” It is consequential because they are all covered under “health workers.” But in addition, for avoidance of doubt, I want to insert the following phrase, “female genital mutilation is done by a health worker for non-therapeutic reasons.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that there are reasons why they can do it? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: It is fully defined in the interpretation clause. So, you do not have to repeat it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about his proposal for deletion?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, he is saying that since we deleted the interpretation section on the issue of “medical doctor and practitioner”, then we can delete it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Clause 3(2) says, “A person who commits the offence of aggravated female genital mutilation is liable on conviction life imprisonment.” I want to make an amendment here to insert the words “a maximum of” between “to” and “life imprisonment” because the issue of putting a maximum sentence gives the judge the discretion of either giving 20 or 30 years or fixing a particular amount of years to be convicted. 

DR EPATAIT: I would like to appreciate my colleague’s proposal but in my opinion, this word “liable” gives latitude and discretion to the trial judge or magistrate. I think that we should leave it as it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TOSKIN: Madam Chairperson, as we have already done in clause 2, I think we should amend this one too to read “not exceeding 10 years”, as has already been done. It is consequential.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, we were guided by the Attorney-General that the word “liable” has been subjected to court interpretation. And for maximum sentences of life imprisonment and death sentences, “liable” means the judge has discretionary powers. But for other lighter sentences and for specificity, it is important that we put “not exceeding” and therefore we agreed that from section 4, it will read “… to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years” and then that will consequentially apply to all the other provisions where we had provided the years. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the word “not exceeding” will apply across the board from clauses 4, 5 and 6?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, I seek your guidance. What are we trying to cure when somebody who has already done self genital mutilation and she has to be imprisoned? What are you trying to cure by putting punitive measure on that one also?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a deterrent to others. I put the question to the amendment.
 
Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 8
MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that clause 8 be amended by inserting the word “husband” in the second line of the provision between the words “guardian and/or”, so that it reads that, “Where the offender in sections 5, 6 and 7 of this Act is a parent, a guardian, husband or a person having authority ….”

MR KYANJO: I am a bit puzzled by the way we are proceeding on parents and guardians. This is a country that does not take direct responsibility for families. I wanted, after this sanction to put the responsibility of looking after the families on the part of Government -(Interjection)- Yes! You want to imprison the mother, the aunt who has been taking care of these children but the rest of the children are at home?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kyanjo supposing that the parent is a thief and he steals cows in the village and he is arrested, what happens?

MR KYANJO: I agree that person would be arrested but I am raising a serious issue. Do you want the children to remain at home because you have fulfilled your obligation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Answer what I have asked you, supposing that parent is a thief and he is arrested for stealing cows, what happens?

MR KYANJO: If this is a single parent the presumption is that the state is going to take care, but it is not provided for.

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, I really want to beg hon. Kyanjo to consider this: most of these girls are mutilated not because they want but because the person in whose care they are decided that they be mutilated. Consider this is an orphaned girl and she is being looked after by somebody and this person ensures that this girl is mutilated probably making her lose her life! Most of these girls are minors; they are 9-13 years. Don’t you think they ought to be protected? Must we just leave because there other children?

MRS MUGYENYI: Instead of using the term “husband”, I would propose that we use “spouse”. Supposing the couple is not yet married and the boyfriend demands that in order to marry you, you have to undergo genital mutilation? That category does not apply to a husband. So we can find a term say “spouse” or “companion”. We know that men have authority over women even before they are married to them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about clause 6, which we have passed; of a person who counsels, procures, induces, aids, abets and coerces? 

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Chairperson, I am referring to the amendment by the committee on clause 8 where they are proposing that we insert the word, “husband” and I am saying that the husband is not comprehensive enough because the young people could still be girlfriend and boyfriend in which case the boyfriend for example could demand that for them to get married the girl must undergo genital mutilated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is under clause 6. That would be a question of evidence to prove that this one is my boyfriend, he kissed me under the other tree and all that. Attorney-General, can you help us here?

MR RUHINDI: I would like to agree with you, Madam Chairperson, because the proposal by hon. Mugyenyi makes it very fluid. First of all, I do not know whether a boyfriend can properly be called a spouse. I really do not think so. I do not think a boyfriend would be a person having authority or control over a girl. I think her case is covered under other sections. Maybe she is worried about the level of punishment but maybe that is where it should fall.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MS LAGADA: We want to delete “and”. It should read, “Therefore, consent of the victim to female genital mutilation shall not be a defence under this Act”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.
         
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is a new clause 11.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I beg to move that a new clause be inserted to read that, “A person who discriminates or stigmatises a female who has not undergone FGM from engaging or participating in any economic, social, political or other activities in the community commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding 5 years”. I beg to move.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, as we heard from the debate, one of the challenges in the communities is that the girls and women who do not undergo female genital mutilation are subjected to social pressure within the families. The girls and women are stopped from milking cows, climbing granaries and -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Even collecting water; they cannot collect before the real women have collected.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Also mopping the floor. So we did agree with hon. Betty Amongi that, that is a substantive provision, which is very important for this law and as a mover, I agree entirely with her proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that a new clause 11 -

DR ARAPKISSA: I think the proposal by hon. Amongi should not only be limited to stigmatising the women. Even the men who force their wives to go and get circumcised are stigmatised by the community. So if it is like that, let it also apply to men; anybody who stigmatises women and men should pay that fine. Many of the men who make their wives undergo that circumcision are stigmatised by society.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want another clause to deal with the men?

DR ARAPKISSA: Yes, I am adding an additional clause that stigmatising men should also be stopped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot join the two.

DR ARAPKISSA: Okay, then I will move another clause later for protecting the men.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that a new clause 11 be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR ARAPKISSA: Yes; that any person who stigmatises any male whose wife or children are not circumcised also stands to be penalised.

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Madam Chairperson, I think instead of separating these provisions, let us take care of both sides of the proposals by putting the word “person” instead of female so that it applies to all of us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the stigma is different. For the woman, they won’t allow you to collect water or climb the granary and when you die, they break the walls to take your body out, yes!

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Yes, I am aware of that but there is also a situation where a man is stigmatised because his wife or sister or relatives have not been circumcised; so we also have to take care of this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why they should be separate.

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: If we put the word “person” which is the proposal of hon. Amongi, it will take care of everybody.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, don’t bury the other stigma, there are two kinds.

MRS MUGYENYI: I am commenting on the amendment moved by hon. Dr Arapkissa Yekko that society has the same force over men and women. What he is trying to say is that if you are a man and your wife or children have not been circumcised, you are going to be stigmatised by your community. Therefore, the men also have to get protection by the law so that they can be able to abide by this law that we are trying to pass. So I think he is right to move it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you give us the formulation? You can write them? Okay, I put the question that a new clause 12 be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a new clause 13, which is now the present clause 11. Okay, the old clause, now 13.

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, we would like to insert the words “under the Act” between the words “offences” and “committed” in the first line of the paragraph so that it reads, “The Act shall apply to offences committed outside Uganda where the girl or woman whom the offence – this is the original 13 - “This Act shall apply to offences committed outside Uganda where the girl or woman upon whom the offence is –

MR RUHINDI: Let me help you, I read your amendment. Madam Chairperson, I think her proposal is, “This Act shall apply to offences under the Act committed outside Uganda where the girl or woman upon whom the offence is committed is ordinarily a resident in Uganda”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, we want to introduce a new sub-clause 14(3) to read as follows: “Any person who threatens, harms or in any way inhibits a person who is reporting or about to report an offence under this Act commits an offence and shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine of 12 currency points or imprisonment for six months or both”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable Minister?   

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want some help before I can propose an amendment by the use of “any person”. “Any person”, as I understand here, is also covering children. Children in this case are – because of the traditional nature of this matter - my father and my mother both are accomplices in this matter. So, this is obliging me as a child who is under the care of these terrorists to go and report to the Police. Are we not likely to have a problem here?

MR WADRI: In Uganda, the age of criminal responsibility is 12 years. Therefore, when any child is above 12 years, he is due to be liable for his actions or omissions. There is no way you can expect a child of 15, 16 or 17 years to exonerate himself or herself that, “Because I am child of this man, I cannot go and report”. The age of criminal responsibility is 12 years. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if it is the intention of the parent to take the child for FGM and the child gets wind of it that he is going to his auntie to do such and such a thing, he can report his father. He should be able to report his father. 

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you Madam, Chairperson, for giving me this opportunity. Mine is just an observation about the use of the term “surgeon”. It is not in this Bill because when the doctor was talking about local surgeons –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this clause first? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.    
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

MS AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I do not understand 14(2) because it says any person who knows that a person has committed or intends to commit an offence under this act blah, blah up to that. How will people know that I knew about it? How will court establish that I knew she was going to be mutilated?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Akello, you know the season for cutting is well-known. Supposing I arrive with my tools as a surgeon from Kenya and reside in that village and we start preparing? Isn’t that intention? Don’t I know that there is an intention? I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 do –    

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: Madam Chairperson, we want this law to help us. We want to implement it expeditiously. So when we say an ST (statutory instrument) is made and should be approved by Parliament first, we may be delaying a process. I propose we put approval of Cabinet?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we just leave the minister? Hon. Attorney-General, do we need Cabinet to approve the instrument? Do we need Parliament to approve the instrument? Regulation 15 -  

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this matter has been recurring here. We need to put it to rest. The purpose of delegated powers is to expedite work. The moment you begin subjecting statutory instruments to approval of Parliament then you will never see most of this legislation getting into force. 

On that note, I wish to report that the Copyrights and Neighbouring Rights Act, which was passed in 2006, is fully operational now because the enabling regulations to operationalise it were signed by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs sometime back. The law is fully operational. 

If you were to ask the Minister of Justice to bring the regulations here for approval; given our schedule of work and legislative programme, you cannot do much. Let us delegate.

In some jurisdictions - your technical staff could actually look at - in some jurisdictions in parliaments, there is a specific committee on delegated legislation to scrutinise legislation, which is delegated so that legislation is not ultra vires. Actually some ministers, with all due respect, and some bodies to which we delegate powers, sometimes make laws which ultra vires the Constitution. Sometimes that kind of committee can provide checks and balances on its own without coming back to Parliament. But for us to subject ourselves to approving statutory instruments –(Interjections)- is an immense task. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so I put the question that clause 15 – 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I had included that because we had observed cases where Parliament gives powers for subsidiary legislation to ministers. However, we had also observed some cases where instruments are developed and offend the parent law. So we thought Parliament should be in the know. By the way, we could take the proposal from the Attorney-General that in future we could look at where we can give powers and link up with the committee of Parliament. But for this case, I concede we can –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Perhaps we could improve it by saying that the minister shall lay the statutory instrument in Parliament after? Okay, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

The Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Schedule do stand the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand title to the Bill.

MR SABILA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to include from a number of literature that I have read or come across, female genital mutilation/cutting just for clarity and inclusiveness. That is my justification. Then it will be a consequential amendment.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, remember that during the general debate, I had asked to be given an opportunity to defend this position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To do what? I ruled you out of order. No! Hon. Amuriat, I thought you were contributing to the title. I ruled you out of order during the day. (Laughter) No, do not mix up issues. What do you have to say about the proposal? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the literature on female genital mutilation like – can I be protected? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! The mover is responding to the proposal on the Title. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: The literature provides various nomenclatures: female genital mutilation, female genital cutting and female circumcision but female circumcision has been abandoned in order not to confuse this practice with male circumcision, which is beneficial. So, female circumcision is no longer –(Interjections)– yeah, male circumcision is beneficial. I am explaining to you why we are using “mutilation”.

Two, there are those who have been using the words “female genital cutting” particularly where the practice is still strongly cherished and for cultural reasons; they see “mutilation” as something derogatory and so they use “cutting”. But “mutilation” goes to emphasise the abuse of the human rights, the torture, and the cruel and inhuman treatment. 

And I have looked at various laws including the one of the US; the one of UK; the one of Italy; the one of Kenya and all the laws which have been proposed and passed as female genital mutilation. So, there is no need and value added by putting the word “cutting”. So the way it stands is consistent with the other laws. (Laughter) I just want to persuade my brother, hon. Sabila to just maintain the word “mutilation”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 

5.10
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

5.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.) 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PROHIBITION OF FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION BILL, 2009

5.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009,” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PROHIBITION OF FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION BILL, 2009”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to thank you very much for this long journey; it has taken long; it has taken a lot of energy and campaign. I want to thank all the participants: UWOPA, hon. Baryomunsi, the minister and the President of the country for his efforts; now what remains is implementation. 

I would also like to urge the Leader of Government Business because during the debate there was unanimity that the leaders of Kapchorwa, especially the District Council, should be given an award by the government for their campaign against FGM. So please, Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance take it up - plus funding for the implementation. 

5.12
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I direct the Minister for Gender to make proposals and bring them to Cabinet. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. We have done a lot of work today. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.13 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 December 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 
