Tuesday, 13 December 2011

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:
Brenda Nabukenya

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations hon. Nabukenya Brenda and welcome to Parliament. I handover to you a copy of our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 (as amended). These are the tools that will enable you to participate properly in deliberations in this House. Welcome to this House, I hope you find your feet soon enough to begin deliberating and representing your people effectively.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

Honourable members in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, former leader of DP and former leader of the Opposition, 1980-1985, as well as former MP for Busiro County. Join me also in welcoming His Worship the Mayor for Jinja Municipality and National Chairman of the Democratic Party.

Also, join me in welcoming hon. Matthias Nsubuga, Secretary General of the Democratic Party and he is also former MP for Bukoto South. Also in the gallery is the Lord Mayor for Kampala, hon. Elias Lukwago, former MP Kampala Central. Also with them is the Deputy Lord Mayor, Suleiman Kidandala Sserwadda. 

Honourable members, this is to also inform you that the Parliament health week was held between to 5th-8th of this month. It registered very good results. We had 1279 turning up for the voluntary counseling and testing for HIV/Aids; 375 including members and staff of Parliament were circumcised. I am sure none of them is attending the House today because they could have been forced to dress differently. Two hundred and thirty two units of blood were collected, and 305 women screened for breast and cervical cancer. The Parliamentary Commission appreciates your participation in this exercise; we hope this will go a long way in improving your health and the health of some of your voters.

Honourable members you have seen the Order Paper; five Bills have to be read for the first time today; you remember our earlier resolution that we bring forward Bills that had gone with the Eighth Parliament. We adopted them and made them as our own and our subsequent Order Papers were made to the effect. Some of these Bills need to be reprinted and, therefore, re-introduced to this House so that we could move forward. One of the Bills has come this year, but the rest of the four Bills, we are going to seek further consultation on them and then we will be dealing with them tomorrow. So, for today, only one Bill will be presented and that is the Anti-Pornography Bill of 2011. The Order Paper will, therefore, be amended accordingly. 

Secondly, honourable members, you recall that last week, we had received answers to oral questions from the honourable ministers, but on the Order Paper today, we see that one particular question is not presented. I will be amending the Order Paper to allow the answer that was laid on the Table last week by the hon. Nekesa, Minister of State for Karamoja, also to give it to the person who asked the question and to this House this afternoon. The Order Paper will, therefore, be amended accordingly in those two aspects. Thank you very much.

3.06
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative Nwoya): I rise to give notice for the motion I intend to bring in this House for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to devise a mechanism to expeditiously address the plight of the people of Nwoya District arising from damage caused by elephants in the area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Notice accordingly received and the clerk is notified to schedule this matter urgently to be resolved by this House.

3.07
MS NYAKIKONGORO ROSEMARY (Independent, Woman representative, Sheema): I rise on an issue of national importance. On 25 October 2011 there was an outbreak of Anthrax in Sheema District, and since then, there has been closure of livestock markets, restriction on sales of livestock, stoppage on slaughter and even on sales of milk.

Farmers were encouraged to vaccinate their cattle through the help of the Local Government. However, when they approached the Ministry of Agriculture, they were informed that the ministry does not have the vaccines for Anthrax and, therefore, the district was advised to go and seek private service deliverers of those vaccines. So, the district got the vaccine from Cooper Uganda Limited, which also eventually run out. So, the vaccination that had started, stopped for two weeks.

Cooper Uganda Limited had to go and get vaccines from South Africa. What arose from this is that:

1)	Quack doctors began to vaccinate the cattle with fake vaccinations;
2)	Farmers deliberately refused to vaccinate
	their cattle because it became very expensive;
3)	There was lack of extension services because the officers lacked the equipment to use; and
4)	Mobilising the farmers was very difficult and during that process some cows died without even testing the samples. We do not know whether they died of Anthrax, save for the few cases that were tested by a doctor who was picked from Queen Elisabeth National Park.

So, what is likely to come is that anthrax will continue attacking this district. One of the issues of concern is that when the carcass is buried, the bacterium hibernates. Because of the heavy rains, they are likely to resurrect and even the people will be affected. Now that they were targeting cattle only, the goats and sheep were not vaccinated.

Therefore, we are at risk of being continuously attacked by Anthrax. Members, you may not know the magnitude of this Anthrax, it kills within two days and it kills badly. Two people died after eating the dead cows and that is when they rushed in to bring that doctor from Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

The district is now constrained by resources because they were targeting mass vaccinations; they do not have the capacity and the price of vaccine is high because it is being got from a private company, Cooper Motors Limited.

I would like the ministry to look into this issue of Anthrax because we are not selling milk and that is the source of income for our people, and people need to take back their children next term. There is a ban on sale of livestock and my people are not going to eat meat on Christmas. This means that they are likely to continue importing meat illegally from other districts and this issue is likely to continue rolling out.

There are cows that were allegedly vaccinated by quack doctors and there was no mass vaccination. This means that we are at risk and we need immediate attention from the Ministry of Agriculture, but more so, this is an epidemic and a disaster. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness should come in to assist the people of Sheema so that we do not die of Anthrax.
 
3.14
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Nyakikongoro for raising the matter. I just want to raise an additional point for clarification from Government.

In the health sector, with regard to human life, we have a mechanism of regulating drugs and other supplies; we have a National Drug Authority, which is responsible for looking at the drugs that come into this country.

We also have the National Medical Stores that is responsible for procurement, but also, the logistical management of the drugs and other supplies, and these are Government institutions. But when you look at the veterinary services with regard to drugs and vaccines, these are left to the private sector and, therefore, the quality cannot be controlled. This is partly responsible for the poor growth of the sector. 

 I want to inquire from Government, as we strengthen the area of agriculture production and animal husbandry, what plans does it have to take over this service of procurement and management of drugs and other supplies within the veterinary sector rather than leaving it to the private sector all the time. We will get problems like hon. Nyakikongoro is raising. So, I seek guidance from -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when are you going to make the statement. 

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Thursday this week. 

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ministry was informed, but the ministry informed the district officials that they don’t handle vaccines for Anthrax, and they referred them to private service providers. They told them to go and buy from Cooper Uganda Ltd. When they informed them that they needed mass vaccination of all the animals in Sheema district, it became very expensive for the Local Government, which did not have funding for that specific vote. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister respond. Honourable minister, would you like to respond to this. My 15 minutes are up, please wind up on this subject.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): As I said, that is why I am seeking for ample time to get specific answers to your questions. 
		
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is, are you in charge of the ministry? Do you have to wait for a Member of Parliament to come and raise an issue from your ministry as if you don’t have officers in the ministry? You should be in charge and you should monitor what is happening in the country. You have been on the Floor and it looks as if you don’t know what is happening in the country and in your ministry. It is very unfortunate. Can you clarify to the House whether you are really in charge?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you in charge? (Laughter)
 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Yes, I am fully in charge and that is why the honourable MP mentioned that our officers were in contact with the local authorities and tried to cause some remedial measures. So, I am in charge. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let’s close this subject. We will hold the minister that in the meantime while we wait for your statement to be made on Thursday, some actions should start taking place. You now have the information; we cannot wait for Thursday; there are things you should do while we wait for Thursday.
 
3.19
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance that concerns this country. Much as we are all aware that there are reasons why we have had electricity load shedding, I would like to get the Minister of Energy interested in our hospitals.

I would like him to think or plan or ask Umeme to have selective load shedding because when somebody is on the operating table in the theatre and is being prepared for an operation or surgery, whether it is a woman in labour or an accident victim or a man with a disease that needs an operation, when power goes off, that means there is a catastrophe on the life of the patient on the table. 

I was in Mbarara Hospital yesterday as part of my work as a Member of Parliament. I talked to the director of the hospital and I came out with very shocking news. For example, although they have a standby generator, I would like the Ministry of Health to understand that the fuel that had been budgeted for was not supposed to be for a 24-hour standby service. Consequently, even the generator in the hospital does not have fuel. That means, therefore, that when power goes off, even the generator that is supposed to be useful cannot help the situation in the hospital. 

We also have a blood bank in the hospital and when you have a 24-hour outage of power, the consequences to the blood bank are very catastrophic. 

I would, therefore, like to ask the Minister of Energy, if can he liaise with Umeme to plan for selective load shedding so that throughout the country, our hospitals and health centre IVs, which deal with lives of people, babies, mothers and fathers, are not loadshedded at all. I would like the minister to take interest in this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable member; you have raised the point. I do not see the honourable Member from Mbarara Municipality. The matter has been raised; it is the same matter; we cannot speak over it, over and over again. Unless there is a new matter, I will ask – I do not see the Minister for Energy or any Minister of State for Energy.

Honourable Simon D’Ujanga, you have to hit the Floor running. I hope you were listening. Please, can you give some answers to this?  

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, when the question came I was outside, but I have been briefed. The question is to do with load shedding in major hospitals. For major hospitals like Mulago Referral Hospital and the regional referral hospitals, we had a discussion on this matter two days back and it will be possible to cover major referral hospitals and exempt them from load shedding because of the configuration of the network feeding them.  

I would like to repeat this. A hospital like Mulago has got a dedicated line; so, it is possible to exempt it from load shedding, but it may not be possible for Mbarara or Mbale for that matter. But not all hospitals technically can be exempted from this, but as I said, this matter came up for discussion only three days ago and possibilities are being looked into to see how this idea can be effected. I will be informing the House of the progress. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want clarification. Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital is near the main grid that serves Rwanda as a country. We are exporting electricity to Rwanda and it bypasses Mbarara hospital that is having mothers. This is a hospital that is serving the whole of Western Uganda and you cannot manage a hospital like you are managing a road. For a pothole, you can spend about one month without covering the pothole and people can still dodge it, but for a life in theater, if a mother is on the operating table and you have already sent her to sleep and power goes off - Mr Speaker, surely, you are a parent and almost every Member here is a parent - What do you do? 

I seek clarification from the Minister of Energy. Is there a possibility for you to give us electricity and connect us on the grid that is going to Rwanda so that Ugandans can benefit before you give to outsiders? I thank you very much. 

3.26
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with my colleagues who have raised the issue of hospitals and I am adding on this sector, not because I don’t care about people who are in hospitals, but also because in my constituency, we have the Namanve Industrial Park. The manufacturers and investors are saying - and this is their simple request - that load shedding is here to stay, but at least Umeme should be predictable. When you switch off power without notifying them since we don’t have a load shedding roster, they lose both material and equipment. 

In the past, they used to have a roster where we would know that this particular place will not have electricity today and other places will have electricity. Even with the issue of hospitals, Mr Speaker, for example, some of the operations in the theater are planned; the doctor would know that we will not have electricity today, but even the simple thing of notifying the public about the pending load shedding is not done by Umeme. So, I am seeking clarification from the minister as to why even that simple act of notifying the public about the schedule of load shedding was done away with. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will have hon. Fungaroo and then ask the minister to make a response and we close this because we have a long day today. 

3.28
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you. I rise on a matter of national importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the rules. Kindly resume your sit. I thought you were contributing to this debate. You are a senior member of this House. 

3.29
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to put to your attention a matter of national importance concerning Siamese twins from my – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we just allow the minister to make a response and we close this particular one? Honourable member, you did not talk to the Speaker; so you cannot raise any matter of urgent public importance.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said about Mbarara hospital specifically, we will be looking at this given the fact that we have had some generation of recent in the region. But I would like to correct a misconception that the grid to Rwanda is from Mbarara. On the contrary, this country imports as a net import from Rwanda. So, it is not true that we are exporting power to Rwanda and denying Ugandans power. On the contrary, we are importing power from Rwanda through Kisoro. 

The other export to Rwanda, which is through Katuna, has an origin in Kabale. So, the grid to Rwanda is not from Mbarara, but anyhow, we will still look at this Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital as I said, together with the other regional referral hospitals and see what we can do and then I will be coming back to update the House. 

On the issue of the Namanve Industrial Park, ordinarily, load shedding is predictable as it comes after people are notified, but we should not mix up load shedding with ordinary faults. For Namanve and everybody else, there is a roster for load shedding and especially the large industries. There is constant discussion with large industries, in fact more so at this time, when we have to schedule the load shedding in reference to other commercial areas. For example, Mr Speaker, during the day, preference is given to the Kampala Business District and then at night, preference is given to the domestic area and, therefore, when this is being scheduled, the large industries are brought on board to discuss this thing, but I will still check for the specific case of the Namanve Industrial Park and then I will bring back a report. 

I would like to inform the House that this load shedding is not a permanent feature of the network, but for the time being, I am afraid it is going to be there; but all is being done to make sure load shedding is a thing of the past. Thank you. 

3.33
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I wish to put to your attention a matter of national importance concerning Siamese twins from my constituency, that is Ngora District. These twins are currently admitted at Mulago hospital, Ward 6A, and the parents are Mr Onyait George and Ms Margaret Akol.

In view of the current economic situation coupled with the absence of expertise to handle the matter in Uganda, not forgetting the fact that these parents have no means to shoulder the treatment and operation costs for these twins I, therefore, request - first of all, I would like to thank the government for the previous attention they accorded to the Siamese twins from Kabale District. But I also appeal to colleagues and Government, especially in terms of having special training for doctors, who can handle these cases because they are increasing in Uganda.

I also appeal to Members and Government for your support, especially for this case. I would like to request the Ministry of Health to expedite the process and assist these parents because these Siamese twins have taken almost a month in Mulago and when I visited these twins on Thursday last week, the parents were begging for Nan milk because the health workers tell them to buy Nan milk yet these are people from the village, and have stepped in Kampala for the first time. I think this would be of help to Uganda if we passed a resolution for Government to train someone special to handle such cases in Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, you remember we had a debate on this issue when the honourable member from Kabale raised this matter. We had comprehensive coverage on this subject. I am going to ask the government to say something and then we close this matter. The request is that these people are in Mulago and they need assistance.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS AND ICT (Mr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I fully share the views of my sister, hon. Amongin, about the condition of these Siamese twins. It is true that the previous Siamese twins have been handled and they appear to be in good condition. Government will do whatever is possible to ensure that the Siamese twins currently being talked about are given maximum assistance. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is clear. That is a commitment from the government. We need to follow up on the timeframe. Hon. Amongin, you need to follow up with Government on this issue. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am respectfully standing in search of guidance in terms of procedure. One of the main duties of every Member of Parliament here is to ensure that we check Government on accountability issues so that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a procedural point?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I am seeking guidance on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, last week it is on record that the Prime Minister promised that as soon as possible - Tuesday - this Parliament would be briefed on what is going on in regard to the honourable Minister in charge of National Guidance and the Presidency, hon. Kabakumba Masiko.

We all attentively listened to that statement in terms of promise and Tuesday has already come. In terms of guidance, I am seeking guidance as to why up to now, and since we started, the Prime Minister has not delivered the promise? A promise is a debt and they are quiet as if they have forgotten.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this was not reported to me. I was the one chairing Parliament that day. I asked the House. The Leader of Government Business then came and made a request that he should be allowed to bring a report today. The debate went on and I asked the House whether the request of the Prime Minister was acceptable and the House said, no. I am the one who then asked the Prime Minister and said, you still owe it to the House, even if the House is not interested, some kind of report. So, when you feel it is time to give it, then you give it. The House rejected that proposition here in my presence, hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi.

I am, therefore, very surprised that you are raising it in that way when you were here when you were making that rejection and the Speaker put the question to you and you said, no we do not want a statement from the Prime Minister. Thereafter, I had to amend the Order Paper to allow the hon. Kabakumba Masiko to make a personal statement. That is what happened that day. That matter is closed, please we are not going to debate that matter. Please let us not debate this matter, we closed that matter, we are waiting. When the Leader of Government Business is ready, he will come with a statement as requested by the House. We did not give a timeframe.

BILLS
FIRST READING

ANTI-PORNOGRAPHY BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said earlier, there are issues with the Plant Variety Protection, the Uganda National Meteorological Bill and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Bill, which we need to resolve tomorrow morning and then have it on the Order Paper tomorrow. There are issues, which are still outstanding. So, the only Bill that could properly come before this House is number four.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, you know the rules; this is not the time for asking for objects of the Bill. This is First Reading of the Bill. The Bill stands committed to the committee responsible for this matter. It is, therefore, accordingly sent to the committee and you know under the rules, we have a 45-day rule within which this Bill should come back for Second Reading in the House.

MR EKANYA:  Thank you very much. May I request and seek your guidance that under our rules, the Bill is supposed to be accompanied -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is a straight forward thing. Is the Certificate of Financial Implication there?

MR LOKODO: Mr Speaker, the Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implication as required under the relevant law and our Rules of Procedure. It is hereby laid on table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, read the number and hand it in; on the microphone please.

MR LOKODO: This is to satisfy that the Cabinet memorandum CT on, The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2009 has been examined as required under Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001. It is not indicated here unfortunately. I lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the clerk look at it and extract the number there. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, just hold. Can I be advised? Honourable minister, would you like to read the number on the letter there? The certificate?

MR LOKODO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reference of the Bill is 56/64/01 dated October 29, 2009.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister - Let us just clear this. Honourable minister, is it dated 2009? Did you say that? What date is that letter, honourable minister?

MR LOKODO: Mr Speaker, this Bill was due for laying on Table here in Parliament in 2009.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the certificate letter dated 2009?

MR LOKODO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we have had two budgets since that day; that would not be appropriate. So, the Bill is not yet committed properly. We will ask you to do it again when you are better organised.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COTTON SECTOR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a motion; a substantive motion that we debated here for more than two hours. We only deferred decision on this subject and I see it coming back on the Order Paper under item 10. That motion is still coming back. I have a ministerial statement on the same subject. How do we handle it, because we are not going to allot two separate times for this House to discuss the same subject.

If then the government brings that ministerial statement, I will bring forward the debate on the motion for cotton, which was raised by hon. Akena, and then the statement and motion are debated together. Is that correct? So that we do not spend twice the time we are going to discuss on the same subject. Honourable minister, statement. Do we have copies of the statement?

3.48
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): I sent a copy to the Office of the Clerk for duplication. I do not know what they have done. The copies are coming, they are here. The record will be heard.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we expect Government to be serious. Knowing that our Rules of Procedure are elaborate enough to demand that before a ministerial statement is read out, the Members must access copies. Is it in order for the minister to continue reading his personal statement in the absence of copies circulated to the Members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister is not continuing; he has not even started reading the statement so he cannot be accused of continuing to read a statement he has not started to read. Do we have copies? I have a copy myself. Please confirm if there are copies. In the meantime, next item.

PETITION BY THE FOUNDERS, MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE, TEACHERS, PARENTS AND PUPILS OF KIWANGA UMEA PRIMARY SCHOOL SEEKING FOR INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT IN MATTERS CONCERNING THE PENDING DEMOLITION OF THEIR SCHOOL LOCATED IN KIWANGA NANTABULIRWA PARISH, GOMA DIVISION OF MUKONO MUNICIPALITY

3.50
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are the founder members and members of the school management committee, parents, teachers and pupils of Kiwanga Umea Primary School of P. O. Box 23, Mukono presenting their petition and humbly wish to make the following prayers - (Hon. Buchanayandi rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are going to come back to your statement, so please, do not go away. Hon. Nambooze, proceed.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the prayers of the pupils, teachers and parents of Kiwanga Umea primary School are:

1.	Your petitioners pray that Parliament prevails over the parties that are threatening the existence of their school.
2.	That Parliament orders the government of Uganda through the Ministry of Education to settle outstanding requirements, if any, for the school to fully own the four acres of land on which it is located.
3.	That Parliament gives any other remedy it considers necessary in the circumstances to ensure the smooth-running of the school and the provision of UPE in the area.  They so beg to pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Lay a copy of the petition on the Table and we send it to the appropriate committee.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the petition by the said petitioners.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such and the appropriate committee, please, you know the period granted to a committee to handle these matters and report accordingly back to Parliament. It is sent to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I) THE UGANDA Nutrition Action Plan (UNAP), 2011-2016
3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I wish to present and lay on Table a copy of the Uganda Nutrition Action Plan, 2011-2016; the scaling up of multi-sectoral efforts to establish a strong nutrition foundation for Uganda’s development. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. Thank you, honourable minister.

II) THE REPORT OF THE 125TH INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION ASSEMBLY 
HELD IN OCTOBER 2011 BERN, SWITZERLAND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo Emmanuel is not in the House.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 02/1/09

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nambooze acting on behalf of hon. Alaso.

3.54
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): 
(i) 	Would the Minister explain to the House the progress made in the Karamoja disarmament exercise?

(ii)	What measures have been put in place to stem further incursions by the cattle rustlers into the neighbouring districts? 

Mr Speaker, I am acting on behalf of hon. Alaso and the question is Q02/1/09.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague hon. Alaso posed the following questions:

(i)	Would the Minister explain to the House the progress made in the Karamoja disarmament exercise?

(ii)	What measures have been put in place to stem further incursions by the cattle rustlers into the neighbouring districts?

Mr Speaker, since the disarmament started in 2001, significant achievements have been registered. There is relative peace and security in Karamoja as manifested by secure roads, free movement of people and peace generally enjoyed by parts of Uganda neighbouring the Karamoja sub-region. The specific achievements could be summarised as follows:

1)	The Army and security agencies have to-date recovered approximately 30,000 guns from the warriors of Karamoja.

2)	As I said, while in the past, to go through Karamoja we had to form convoys and these had to be accompanied by security agencies, now people do travel without the need for these convoys.

3) 	There is generally, restoration of law and order in the Karamoja sub-region. Police can now arrest warriors and other suspects and bring them before the courts of law. 

Part 2 of the question, Mr Speaker. Hon. Alaso wanted to know what other measures have been put in place to stem any further incursions into the neighbouring districts. The following measures have been taken:

1)	There is deployment of a Police Anti-Stock Safety Unit along the borders of Karamoja and the neighbouring districts of Uganda.

2)	There is general increased deployment of the Uganda Police Force in Karamoja. In other words, at point X, we had a certain number of Police, but there is a programme to increase the number of Police in that sub-region. For example, before, we used to have one regional Police division for administration of Police in Karamoja. Now, we have two because we think we need more concentration in that part of the country.

3)	There is deployment of the UPDF unit in strategic places within Karamoja.

4)	The Army has recruited LDUs from among the Karimojong people in order to beef up the Police and UPDF.

5)	There is strengthened administration of justice in Karamoja sub-region. A number of warriors have been arrested and prosecuted in courts of law. Courts of law have re-opened in Karamoja and this has had a deterrent effect in the minds of law breakers in that part of the country. Just to demonstrate this point, Mr Speaker, there was a time you would go to Karamoja; you are travelling on a road and you would just see people walking up and down with guns, but now, people know that unless you are legally authorised to walk with a gun, it is illegal and you can be arrested.

6)	We continue to hold meetings; there are meetings by stakeholders to carry out dialogue among elders and among the youth in Karamoja so that they can see that there is another way to life other than this criminal pathway.

7)	There is regional cooperation in handling proliferation of small arms under the East African Community arrangement.

Bi-literally, we work with Kenya and  with Southern Sudan, in order to reduce and actually curtail the proliferation of these small arms which are being used to carry out this criminality.

Finally, what will eventually bring sustainable peace in Karamoja is to carry out development on a sustainable basis, and Government has put in place the Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme.  Under this, there is security, and there are interventions by Government for service delivery and development programmes. We think, once this takes root, then Karamoja will be fully integrated in the economy of the country and these incursions into the neighbouring areas will be a thing of the past. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Defence for this response. I also want to thank hon. Betty Nambooze for stepping in for me.

I have three more supplementary questions. Out of curiosity, I would like to know from the honourable minister where the 30,000 guns that were collected are, because history has it that those re-circulate. So, I would like to know where the guns are after he had collected them.

Two, I would like to know from the minister whether Government ensures that areas where people were pushed away by the armed rustlers and, therefore, abandoned those places near the border - whether those areas have been restored to the people who previously occupied them. A case in point is the Moroto-Katakwi border. When the rustlers chased away the Itesot from that corner, have you helped the Itesot get back to occupy those areas?

The minister also said that they are showing the youth of Karamoja another way other than the gun. Does this apply to the fact that you bring out the raw materials from Karamoja to process in Tororo instead of giving Karamoja an opportunity to get jobs? Is this the other way that the Karimojong are being helped rather than to carry gun?

Finally, the question of the border; we understand that most of the guns originate from Southern Sudan, parts of Ethiopia and parts of Kenya because of the porosity of those borders. I would like to know whether we have the UPDF or whoever is stationed there, to ensure that the area is not re-armed across the border. Thank you.

4.03
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague, the honourable Minister of Defence for the answer given. I wanted to ask this supplementary pertaining to the arrangements - bi-lateral arrangements, regional arrangements -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question directly.

MR FUNGAROO: What are the activities that Government of Uganda has agreed should take place in our neighbouring countries to control this problem of arms proliferation? Ours is disarmament, and we can be checked on this because UPDF is deployed in Karamoja, but what is done in Southern Sudan? What I want to know is –(Interjections)– what arrangements do we have with the neighbouring countries to avoid guns moving from their countries into our country?

4.04
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the Minister - the LDUs were forbidden from holding guns, but in your statement, you told us that LDUs have been armed to help restore peace in Karamoja. Why is Karamoja an exception?

Secondly, we are not faraway from Karamoja, but we still see incursions of the Karimojong raiding our neighbouring areas like Sironko. What measures have you taken to make sure the Karimojong do not raid these places?  

4.05
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Can the minister clarify what constitutes the way of life in Karamoja; is it the animal husbandry sector or the crops sector? Are you introducing crops or  sustaining the animal sector?

4.06
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one question for the minister. Honourable minister, are you aware that the Government delayed to disarm the Karimojong to the extent that the neighbouring districts lost all their animals? Now another scenario is coming in; Government is delaying to settle the border issue between Katakwi and Napak, and the Karimojong are –(Interjections)– Are you aware that the Karimojong are again grabbing land from Katakwi?

4.07
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the colleagues who have asked these questions. When we recover guns from anyone handling them illegally, in this case the Karimojong – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have four minutes.

DR KIYONGA: We examine the guns. There are those that are obsolete and others that are not of much value. These are burnt publicly, and I am sure colleagues have seen pictures of that in the press. For the guns that are okay, they are taken into our armoury and are used by our forces whenever necessary.

Hon. Alaso, it is true that a number of people got displaced as a result of the Karimojong incursions into Teso. I know for certain that a number of people have returned to their areas. I think there are only a few areas where people have not yet returned. 

With regard to the border between Moroto and Katakwi, this is a subject that is being handled by the Minister of Local Government. I believe that a solution will soon be found. 

On the question of how we can work with the neighbouring countries on this problem; in Kenya, we established liaison offices. There is an officer of the UPDF who works with the forces on the Kenyan side and there is an officer from the Kenya Defence Forces in Karamoja, so that we can exchange information. We also have regular meetings, not just about disarmament, but on the whole process of carrying out development in these pastoral communities. 

In the case of Southern Sudan, as you all know, they are just settling down and we do not have a neat arrangement as we have with our colleagues in Kenya –(Interjections)– Let my sister hold on a bit. When I give my answers, we will discover if we still have gaps. 

This question of how we work with our neighbours, which was raised by hon. Alaso, goes on to answer what hon. Fungaroo asked because the modality is the same.

Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, whenever we are in an area which has security difficulties of a chronic nature, we work with the population. Under that arrangement, we take in local people to work with the Army. In the case of Karamoja, the Karimojong made a case that for us to improve our intelligence, it was important for us to work with their sons and daughters. So, it was under this arrangement that we took these LDUs. Once the work is done, they will either be integrated in the Army or they will go back to the population.

On their way of life, the department responsible for Karamoja, as you may have seen in the press, is doing a lot of work - valley dams, introduction of crops. As far as the animals are concerned, Karamoja holds the largest number of cattle, sheep and goats. I am glad to tell the House that over the last ten years or so, the Karimojong are now bringing these animals to sell for money, whereas in the past, they were satisfiedwith just looking at their big herds. So, there is an economy here to take advantage of in order to give alternative employment –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I give you one more minute to finish. 

DR KIYONGA: On the question of the delay in disarmament; cattle rustling was in Karamoja even before the colonialists came. It was there through the colonial period up to Independence. So, I accept that over time, bringing the Karimojong warriors to order has delayed; I accept that. People have lost animals to them, that is also true, and that is partly why there has been a programme for restocking in the Teso area and I believe this will continue. 

Within the time you gave me, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– Hon. Wamai, I had already answered that we have taken measures to curb this and you remember hon. Alaso asked, “What other measures have you taken to ensure that this comes to a complete stop?” There are still some incursions going on and we continue to make efforts. When we get them, we apprehend them. However, as I said, finally, what is sustainable is changing the way of life in Karamoja. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, allow me go back to item 7.2 and allow the honourable commissioner, hon. Dombo, to present that paper. 


LAYING OF PAPERS
4.13
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, rule 29, I wish to lay on the Table a report of the parliamentary delegation to the 125th Assembly and related meetings of the Inter-Parliamentary Union held in Bern, Switzerland, between 16th and 19th of October this year. 

This delegation was led by the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. Like you see in the annexes, it constituted mainly of Members who are delegates to the IPU and Members of Parliament of the preparatory committee. As you know, the Parliament of Uganda will host the 126th IPU meeting next year in April. This delegation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are laying papers; please lay them on the Table and we move from there. It is not a presentation of a report. 

That is my ruling. In case you want to cite another provision of the rule -(Laughter)- you are stopped. Please, lay the document on the Table and we proceed.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I wish to oblige, but I just wanted the Members to appreciate the context of the report. At an appropriate time when we have the opportunity to debate it, I know Members will have the full explanation of what happened. I just wanted to give that as a background in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. But I accept, Mr Speaker, to lay this report on the Table for Members to consider it at the appropriate time whenever it is given. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Dombo. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 10/1/09 
TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

4.16 
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): “Section 5(1) of the Atomic Energy Act, 2008 obliges the minister to appoint, with the approval of Cabinet, members to the Atomic Energy Council.

i) 	In view of the aforementioned, when does the minister intend to operationalise the provisions of this law?

ii) 	Is the minister aware that the continued absence of the Atomic Energy Council undermines the development of the atomic energy sub-sector?”

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable members, hon. Obua, MP Ajuri County, raised a question for oral answer to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. The Member wanted to know the following:

a) When does the minister intend to operationalise provisions of Section 5(1) of the Atomic Energy Act, which obliges the minister to appoint, with the approval of Cabinet, members to the Atomic Energy Council? 

b) Whether or not the minister is aware that the continued absence of the Atomic Energy Council undermines the development of the atomic energy sub-sector? 

I wish to respond as follows: The Atomic Energy Council was established as provided for under section 4 of the Atomic Energy Act 2008. On 6 July 2009, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development appointed council members after the approval of Cabinet as per section 5(1) of the Act. The following are the current council members: 

1. Dr Akisopheri Kisolo - chairperson
2. Dr Rosemary Kusaba Byanyima - member 
3. Dr Joseph Brown Kigula-Mugambe - member 
4. Eng. Bezalel Kirya Kabanda - member 
5. Dr Maxwell Otim-Onapa 	-member 

Since the appointment of members, with the support of my ministry the council formed committees and held several meetings. The council has so far accomplished the following: 

i) 	Recruitment of key staff  who are running the secretariat. The secretariat is headed by a secretary who is the chief executive officer. The other staff are: 

•	Two radiation protection officers for inspection; 
•	Radiation protection officer, dosimetry – one; 
•	Office administrator – one; 
•	Records officer – one; 
•	Office assistant – one; and 
	Driver - one. 

ii) 	Prepared budgets and work plans for 2009/2010, 2010/2011 and 2011/2012. 

iii) 	They have acquired office space and partitioned it.

iv) 	Acquired some inspection and monitoring equipment.

v) 	Conducted inspections of various facilities. 

vi) 	Issued licences to some operators.

vii) 	Started compiling and updating the national inventory of the radiation sources and operators.

viii) 	Started a national radiation safety awareness programme for stakeholders and the public.

ix) Completed drafting of Atomic Energy Regulations, 2011 to be gazetted in October 2011. This question for oral answer came in September, so I guess this has now been done. 
x) 	Acquired 11.5 acres of land for establishment of a radioactive waste management facility.

xi) 	Participated in international meetings and handled important International Atomic Energy Agency and other missions.  

xii) Organised short-term and long-term staff trainings. 

xiii) Drafted human resource and financial 	manuals.
 
In view of the foregoing, I affirm that section 5(1) of the Atomic Energy Act was implemented in July 2009 and the Atomic Energy Council is in existence to play its role in the development of the atomic energy sub-sector. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Obua, any supplementary questions?

4.21
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I have three supplementary questions to the honourable minister.

Apart from forming committees and holding several meetings, preparing budgets and acquiring office space, I want the minister to inform this House what this council has so far done in meeting its legal mandate as stipulated in the Atomic Energy Act, 2008? For the information of the minister, I chair the science and technology standing committee of Parliament.
 
Secondly, I want the minister to highlight to this House - he is saying the council has conducted inspection in various facilities, can we know, as the House that passed this law, some of the facilities that were inspected? This is just a blank statement.

Thirdly, the minister said this council has completed drafting of the Atomic Energy Regulations 2011, which were due to be gazetted in October 2011. This is now December 2011. I would like to know from the minister - much as this response was prepared in September – whether the draft Atomic Energy Regulations 2011 were gazetted in October 2011. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any supplementary questions? 

4.23
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, on top of the questions stated, where is that land located? Where is the title and at what cost did you acquire that land? What is the title number? It is easy to talk and it becomes –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

4.23
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Mr Speaker, it is important for us to know the location of the land because of the sensitivity of the waste.

4.24
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the minister what plan there is to dispose of the dangerous substances that have increased the number of cases at the Cancer Institute in Mulago. I am asking this question because the issue in mind is that this country has become a dumping place – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your question?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Old fridges and computers have been dumped into this country increasing cases of cancer. What is Government doing about that? Also, what plans are in place to dispose of atomic dangerous substances in this country?

3.26
MS LEMATIA RUTH ONDORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to pose additional questions. I am glad that among the people appointed, there is an officer in charge of dosimetry. I believe these gadgets should be given to people who are working in the field of atomic energy to detect the amount of radium absorbed by them. The question is: Have we put in place adequate provisions to protect the people of this country from acquiring cancer as a result of absorption of radium? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Honourable minister, you have only four minutes within which to respond.

3.27
THE STATE MINISTER FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable members for the supplementary questions. 

I would like to say that the council is just two years old. Hon. Hamson Obua asked a question to the effect that apart from meetings, what else has this council done. I would like to say that in my statement – see (i) - you will realise that there are quite a number of activities that have been done. There has been recruitment of staff, the preparation of the budget and so on. However, most importantly, I would like to say that acquisition of inspection and monitoring equipment has also been done. There has been the handling of issuance of licenses to operators. All these are activities that have been done as stipulated in the law.

There was a question on what facilities have been inspected. I would like to mention that the facilities inspected mainly include Lacor Hospital in Gulu and St Anthony Hospital in Tororo.

Mr Speaker, I want to mention that I am afraid to answer the other subsequent question to do with the draft atomic energy regulations. I will come back to that question after checking whether it has been approved.

On the land, I want to inform the House that this land is found in a place called Mpooma in Mukono District. It measures 11.5 acres. I obviously do not know the serial number of the title, but if the House insists that I provide it, I will do so. I also do not remember how much was paid, but again if the House would like to have these figures availed, I can still do that.

There was a question on the plan to dispose of the old fridges. I think we have a law against old fridges in this country. However, I would like to add that when we talk about radiation, we mean high-level radiation because radiation is actually everywhere, including in our bodies.

A Member asked a question on dosimetry. My sister is quite right on that. A dosimeter is that little gadget that those who are exposed to high radiations wear on their overcoats while on duty. In that regard, I am glad to inform the House that we have acquired a number of these and they have been distributed to all those who are exposed to that level of radiation. However, I want to repeat that radiations are actually everywhere and that it is only after one has been exposed to a certain level that they become of concern. Thank you very much.

3.28
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I have another supplementary question. Members will recall what happened in Japan - a nuclear reactor disaster - and this country has continued importing vehicles from Japan that come with radiations to which our people always get exposed. What has this country done to save Ugandans from such radiations? (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, please allow the minister to respond.


4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr John Mutende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to give some updates on what Government is doing, in an effort to answer questions raised by my colleague.

Yes, there may be shortages to dispose of wastes; however, the most important measure for us to take is to prevent the importation of products with particles of radioactive material. I am saying this because what is generated locally here is actually very low in terms of radiations, as my colleague has mentioned.

Under the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, we have set up mechanisms for us to do pre-inspections of goods, particularly those from Japan. This is because our biggest imports from Japan are used vehicles. That is why Government is planning to intensify pre-inspection. However, because we do not have the full capacity to do it, that service will be outsourced. (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) Mr Speaker, can I complete my submission before he comes in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Member holding the Floor has to accept to take your information; the rules say so.

MR MUTENDE: Thank you very much. As I was saying, the idea of doing this is to ensure we minimize on importation, particularly of products from Japan believed to have nuclear components. So, we should not be alarmed by any statement of that nature. 

As I speak, these services are being outsourced with vehicles and other imports being pre-inspected, which we think is more important because that is where the biggest problem is likely to come from. It is not the locally generated radiations that are the problem now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we have the next item?

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 07/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE
4.32
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Masindi): “During the LRA insurgency in Northern and Eastern Uganda, the Ministry of Defence authorized the recruitment of people into para-military groups namely: Arrow Boys in Teso, Amuka Boys in Lango and Frontier Guards in Acholi sub-regions.

i)	How many guns and other military hardware were released to these para-military groups?

ii) 	How many guns and other military 	hardware has the UPDF withdrawn and returned to its custody since the war ended?”

4.33
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Sam Otada made the following statement before asking his question: “During the LRA Insurgency in Northern and Eastern Uganda, the Ministry of Defence authorised the recruitment of people into para-military groups namely: Arrow Boys in Teso, Amuka Boys in Lango and the Frontier Guards in  Acholi sub regions”. The two questions that followed are: How many guns and other military hardware were released to these para-military groups? Secondly, how many guns and other military hardware has the UPDF withdrawn and returned to its custody since the war ended?

In answer, I would like to inform the House that these para-military groups worked under the command of the UPDF and indeed in the course of their duty, they were given equipment. On discharge, the properties given to them by the Army and used by these forces are returned to the Army, except in situations where some of these para-military groups are absorbed and become formal members of the Army or the Police. 

In the case of Lango, Acholi and Teso, these groups used, in total, close to 22 AK-47 guns when they were curbing the insurgency. In the course of their work, some of these people defected and some disappeared with the guns that they had been given. When that happens, they are followed up so that they are charged and the equipment is recovered. 

As I speak, I would like to assure this House that more than 95 percent of the equipment that had been issued to these para-military groups has been recovered and the search for those which are still missing is ongoing. Thank you. 

4.36
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the honourable minister for his response. I have two supplementary questions. 

I would like the minister to confirm to this House whether all those who participated were paid or compensated for loss of life as they so demanded. 

Secondly, I want to thank the minister for being honest. In his response, he did not indicate how many uniforms and related hardware were given out. So, I would like to ask the minister whether he is actually aware about the uniforms that were given out because I would want to put it to him that the military uniform has been greatly demystified. 

4.37
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two questions to the minister. The first one is: Why has Government not compensated the people of Teso, especially the families whose children were abducted? Up to 3,000 children were abducted by LRA – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that question is not related to the issue.

MR AMURIAT: Secondly, whether Government has compensated people whose properties, especially houses, were destroyed during aerial bombardment of especially Amuria – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, both questions are not relevant to the subject we are covering now. 

4.37
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole):	My question to the Minister of Defence is: Whether you are aware	 of the trauma these members of Amuka, who went back to their homes, are going through? What is the solution that you have for these people? Thank you.

4.38
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to acknowledge or deny, if he wishes, that his failure to collect these guns from the LCs, former Arrow Boys and the former Amuka group has contributed to the increase in the number of illegal arms in the region and, therefore, insecurity in those areas. Thank you.

4.39
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to know from the honourable minister what happened to the Army officers who mismanaged the payment process of the Arrow Boys. Where has the case reached? In any case, Lieutenant Oumo and Maj. Musana are the two culprits at least. Thank you very much.

4.40
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Based on the level of insecurity which has increased, and the festive season which is coming, although the honourable member has spoken about the ongoing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question.

MS ABABIKU: Okay. What other methods are we going to have in place based on the increased insecurity caused by the illegal possession of these arms? Thank you.

4.41
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern):	Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one Arrow Boy who was shot. Fortunately, he survived, but up to now he is struggling with treating his arm. He is unable – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question.

MR OGWANG: My question is: What strategy does the Ministry of Defence have to help those who were causalities during the LRA incursion in Teso? Thank you very much.

4.42
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister of Defence - Apart from the monthly payments that were made to the Arrow Boys, they were also promised one lumpsum resettlement package when they were disbanded; to this date, it has not been paid. I want to know whether it is going to be paid and if so, when? Thank you.
	
4.43
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank colleagues who have posed these questions. I would like to inform Parliament that we put in place a fairly elaborate mechanism to pay the auxiliary forces that worked in Teso, Gulu and also Lango sub-regions. We have volumes and volumes of registers where payments were made, where signatures were given, and we have been interacting with honourable members from those areas. Where there are cases where people have not been paid, if there is confirmation of such, we have been continuing the payment. Otherwise, we finished the payment, but we remain open in case there is a deserving case that was not attended to. 

Yes, some people not only escaped with guns but some also escaped with uniforms. So, when we are searching for this equipment, the uniforms are also included. 

When the Amuka Boys, the Arrow Boys and other auxiliary forces that participated in this war were being disbanded, what Government put in place was that through the Office of the Prime Minister, these brothers and sisters who participated in the war would specifically be targeted so that they benefit from programmes like NUSAF and PRDP, in order to help them resettle in the population. I do believe that is ongoing.

Those guns that we have not yet recovered, no doubt, and most likely, must be contributing to some illegalities going on in these areas. That is why we work very hard to ensure that we recover all that equipment. 

There were some Army officers who made mistakes during the time that we were making payments. These were brought before the courts within the Army, but I am not in position now to give specific details of officer by officer and what actions were taken. If this is strictly required, Mr Speaker, I can return and give those details. 

Wherever there is insecurity, Government works hard in cooperation with the people as a general principle. If there is someone who worked with the auxiliary forces and sustained injuries which have not been attended to, if I get the details, we will do our duty and attend to that brother or sister. I think those are the questions, Mr Speaker, and there ends my presentation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Alaso, the Order Paper was amended to allow you ask the question that was pushed from next week to the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs.

MS ALASO: Sorry, Mr Speaker, I do not even see it on the Order Paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was orally amended here. 

MS ALASO: What is the number of the question? I really have no idea.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question was already before the House. Can the honourable minister then just make a response? 

MS ALASO: Which one is it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter came last week and we even received an answer that was laid on the Table. That is the reason I amended the Order Paper to allow the minister respond. Honourable minister, proceed. 

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA, PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Ms Barbara Oundo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Alaso, for your concern. The copies are being distributed immediately. 

The question was very particular; the honourable member wanted to know what the Ministry of Karamoja is doing about the increasing number of street children in Kampala City particularly. From the information I got from the Members last week, especially the Leader of the Opposition, he said he has particular interest in this matter. So, I went ahead to provide Members with what the government is doing in addressing the pull and push factors – those factors that are actually responsible for our children coming to the streets. I think I will go straight ahead and give a brief background on what the government is doing to address these factors before I give the honourable member the interventions the ministry is doing. 

Mr Speaker, the government, through its respective ministries, has tirelessly endeavoured to address the push and pull factors that drive the Karimojong children from their homes to the streets of Kampala and other urban towns of this country. The government, through its former Karamoja Integrated Disarmaments and Development Programme – the one the honourable Minister for Defence has been talking about - with the help of the UPDF, joined hands in the disarmament efforts, coupled with the intra district peace meetings, and these efforts actually resulted into calm. 

Calm has returned to Karamoja as a region. That is why recently, during one of our PRDP meetings, we sat down and resolved that we shall now transform the framework of KIDDP, since calm has returned to the Karamoja region, into the Karamoja Integrated Development Programme. That is an indication that insecurity, which was one of the factors why our children were running to the streets of different urban centres, has been addressed. 

Karamoja was also perceived as a non-productive region. My brothers and sisters in the region had given up on food production and had accepted famine as part of them. Mr Speaker, this had also created a demeaning vice in them that man can only feed by relief food. Government, through the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs, using the then KIDDP, which is now KIDP, started the tractor hire scheme. Over the past two planting seasons, 6,000 acres of land were ploughed and subsequently, we also ploughed 8,496 acres. Seeds were given to the communities for planting and this was to show them that agriculture was possible in Karamoja and that Karamoja should start to be looked at as a land of opportunities. As I present this paper, the Karamoja community is now busy cultivating and since then, the dependency syndrome on relief food has reduced from 70 percent in 2009 to 40 percent now, in the region. 

Government has continued to address the low level of education in the area. Through its affirmative action, Government, for instance in 2011, offered 100 State House scholarships to the children from the Karamoja region to higher institutions of learning like universities. It is also embarking on strengthening the formal education in the Karamoja region, despite the fact that we have ABEK in existence. Actually, ABEK helped us to prepare our children who have been kept busy taking care of cattle. It helped prepare them for the formal kind of education we want for the region, which is actually happening in all other regions. 

To ensure formal education in Karamoja, permanent settlement is a must. To ensure this permanent settlement, we have gone ahead to engage the Karimojong youth, who have been trained in the use of hydraform technology, to put up structures for the vulnerable persons. Actually, those who are non-vulnerable - who can really put up their own structures - have also followed suit and have started putting up their own permanent settlements. This has actually enabled us as a ministry to provide permanent settlement for this region and change the nomadic lifestyle to having Karimojong who are agro pastoralists. 

Mr Speaker, there are other projects running, which are being implemented in Karamoja. There is the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund commonly referred to as NUSAF, which has the community empowerment and peace building components. It is intended to kick-start the income generating projects for the youth, and also provide livestock and farm implements to women in a bid to empower them. 

Mr Speaker, I have just been giving an insight on what Government is doing, which interventions we are putting in place to address the various push and pull factors. Actually, we have also covered the food security issue, and all these answer the question of the pull and push factors. 

Let me go right ahead and provide the necessary or direct interventions that the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs is doing about the supposedly increasing number of street children in Kampala. Looking at page 2 of my response, there is a table which clearly shows us the statistics. This table is from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, a ministry that we all know has the mandate and responsibility of the management and welfare of the children in Uganda. Looking at this table, we shall all agree that since 2009, there has been a general decrease in the number of street children on the streets of Kampala. 

We can vividly see that in 2009, 2,101 children were collected from the streets of Kampala and looking at 2011, only 431 have been removed from the streets. So, generally, this statement that there is an increasing number of street children on the streets of Kampala is unfounded and not correct. I am talking about statistics from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and not just hearsay; these are figures. 

As I proceed, I would like to bring it to the attention of Members that as the ministry responsible for Karamoja Affairs, with the mandate of ensuring affirmative action for that part of the country, we have also partnered with our sister Ministry of Gender and taken keen interest in the problem of addressing this evil of street children and particularly those from Karamoja. Together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as I earlier on mentioned, UWESO, UNICEF and GIZ, we have come up with a comprehensive approach to address the challenges of both children and adults, especially mothers living with their children on the streets. 

Through short, medium and long-term interventions, we have steadily started addressing this problem. In August this year, the first phase of the removal of street children was launched; we were assisted by the Uganda Police Force and staff from Kampala Capital City Authority, to take these children to Masulita Transit Centre for transmission to Koblin Children’s Centre after its completion by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Meanwhile, these children shall be provided with psycho-socio support services, skills training or education for the young ones. When the Koblin Centre, which happens to be in its final stages right now, is complete by early next year, we expect that it will be ready to receive these children. This will enable us intensify the withdrawal of particularly Karimojong street children from the streets back to Karamoja. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, these street children are not only from Karamoja, but from all over the country. This is why we shall continue to call upon all leaders at their various levels, not only MPs, to join hands with Government and eradicate this evil from our country. It is with joint effort that we can achieve this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, having listened to the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, and having used the prerogative that you have to amend the Order Paper so that the hon. Alaso could ask the question, I would also like to request that you use your prerogative, Sir, and allow Members to debate this as a ministerial statement or more like a ministerial statement. This is because it is a very comprehensive report and I do not think that letting it attract only supplementary questions will be doing justice to this very comprehensive report. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I decline to use my prerogative to alter the procedure. This is a question for oral answer and I will stick to that. Hon. Alaso, do you have supplementary questions? 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am holding my breath because I am trying to understand why the minister chose to answer one part of my question. I got the note transmitting part B of the question, specifically saying, “What plans does the ministry have to give those children, whose hands are stretched like this everyday, a meaningful future?” I see that the minister has decided to read what they prepared for this House other than answering my question. I am very disappointed by the decision of the ministry to avoid my question.  

Mr Speaker, if it will help the process - since I am not very satisfied and debate cannot come now - will you please allow us, at some appropriate time, to come receive a detailed account, in form of a ministerial statement, of what this ministry is doing with the children of Karamoja in the streets of Kampala? 

Childhood is a phase; you cannot take them to Masulita and confine them while you are waiting for Koblin to be repaired in a year, and you think that is a meaningful future for the children. So, Mr Speaker, you have to help me out on this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do I take it that there are no supplementary questions on this issue and we see how to move with it forward?  Do we have supplementary questions from other Members? 

4.59
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Since the children are coming from all over the country, are there any plans for this House to receive a detailed report or data detailing the children district by district? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.59
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only one question and it stems from the table on page 2. The honourable minister makes a statement that from 2009 to 2011, the number of street children on Kampala streets has reduced from 2,101 to 431. However, in the table, it is very clear that the 2,101 and the 431 include adult males and adult females. My question to the honourable minister is: Why are you including adults among street children? 

Secondly, I am sure that there are very many Karimojong adult males and females who once in a while visit Kampala City; how do you differentiate ordinary Karimojong adults who visit Kampala from those adults you have been categorised as street children? 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for her question. I thought that the pertinent question raised by hon. Alaso regarding the street children, whether they are coming from Karamoja or from any part of the country, is an issue for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, where we have the minister in charge of youths and children affairs. It can also be an issue for the Leader of Government Business to come and inform this House on what Government is planning regarding the street children. 

Whether they are coming from Karamoja or any other part of the country is an issue which Government has to come and explain to this august House. To put it to the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs narrows the problem to mean that it is only Karimojong children who are on the streets. There are other children who are also on the streets. So, I thought that, Sir, the issue is wider than what the Minister of Karamoja handles. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, our Rules of Procedure provide for different approaches to handle matters that come to the House. If the Ministry of Gender thought they needed to make a statement, it is their prerogative to do so. However, as for now, this Parliament has been moved by questions raised by the hon. Alice Alaso on the street children from Karamoja. We have no authority, without her permission, to enlarge this question unless the House deems it fit towards the end to request for a statement from the Ministry of Gender. However, as of now, the question is related to street children from Karamoja and the reply was supposed to be to that effect. That is what we are dealing with right now. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think this is an important matter. I do appreciate the Rules of Procedure of the House, but aware that child sacrifice is rampant and the House is concerned about the issue of street children, can’t we have an entry point into requesting the minister responsible for children – the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development - to come up with a statement rather than wait for another motion? Can’t we use this motion on the Floor now, to request the minister to bring to the Floor of Parliament, probably next week, so that we can look at the totality of what Government is doing concerning the children, because we are really concerned about the rampant child sacrifice. We do not know how many children are lost on the streets. It is a serious matter. Can’t we use this as an entry point, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Let me finish with the supplementary questions. If some Member wants to raise another substantial issue, as we draw to a close, there is no prohibition to that, but let us finish with the supplementary questions.

5.04
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is related to the table provided by the minister. It shows a decline in the number of children received at the centre. The question is, does that reduction in the number received at the centre really imply a reduction in the number of students on the streets? 

5.05
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple question to the minister. Are you aware that as these children sit on the streets, there are some adults alongside them who are struggling to make them remain up? Secondly, what punishment are you putting in place for these adults who are forcing the children to put their hands up? (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have to limit this now; supplementary questions. Arising from the number that has risen, I will stop with hon. Amongin and ask the minister to respond. We have to move forward.

5.06
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs is: Are you aware that it is always the same children that keep coming back to the streets of Kampala? And I would also like to ask; what strategy have you put in place for children especially, rather than looking at the programs that you were talking of? The children we are talking about are from a few months old to 15. Majority of them are very young and I do not think they really go into these projects that you are reading for us. I need clear information on that.

Finally, how do you monitor the children you remove from the streets? Some are taken to Kampiringisa. There are many sites for children, but what is the monitoring strategy that the ministry has put in place? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Strictly, supplementary questions.

5.07
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I know from the minister the criteria used to give out State House scholarships? Noting that her presentation has noted that many other street children come from other parts of the country; can I know the criteria of accessing these State House scholarships?

5.08
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the minister is: Is Kampiringisa a dumping centre for Karamoja street children? They have always taken children to Kampiringisa where there is nothing like food, water - there is nothing. They dump those children there today and the following day you find them on the way walking back to Kampala.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question.

MS NAKAWUNDE: So, what is the strategy? Why do they dump those children in centres where there is nothing to feed on, nowhere to sleep and there is nothing for them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now you have asked the question.

5.08
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much. I thank the minister for the answer. About three or four years ago, there were serious allegations that politicians in Karamoja are the ones bringing these children to Kampala. Since the minister has done an analysis of the push and pull factors, would you tell us whether you found out that this is one of the factors in order to clear the name of the political leaders, including Members of Parliament from Karamoja? I thank you very much.

5.09
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My questions are two. One is: To what extent can the honourable minister assure us about the competence and skills of the Police and KCCA in handling children with the background of respecting their human rights?

You are also talking of settling the children in Masulita. Can I also know whether there are other possibly better alternatives, for instance, working with the local leaders to ensure that priority is given to settling them within their homes? Thank you.

5.10
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is simple. I would like to know from the minister if there are sustainable activities within those camps that may produce productive citizens of Uganda like how it is done in China, such that they are developed as manpower to develop the nation, to work in industries? They could be taught entrepreneurial skills, life skills and the like. We would like to know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Can I have the honourable minister make some responses and we close this? You have four minutes.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE) (MRS BARBRA OUNDO NEKESA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will do it very fast. The questions are very many and they compose another paper. Even though my brother from Mbale Municipality has not asked his question, I know it and that is why I said that in a bid to address all this, we are waiting for Koblin to be fully constructed by the Ministry of Gender and once we have resettled the ones in Masulita at Koblin, we shall intensify the process of withdrawing all the others from the other urban centres. That caters for Mbale as well.

One of the first questions was: What meaningful future do we have for these children from Karamoja? I would like to let you know that the best thing anyone can ever give to a child is education. We are doing this; the withdrawal of children from the streets. We are putting up structures, we have been postponing the transit of these children to Koblin because we also want the Ministry of Gender to put up structures and study centres for education like classrooms and staff quarters where the teachers are going to be permanently settled and actually, take these children through their education.

So, we are planning to have study centres for formal and informal education at Koblin and in that way, we shall offer these children education.

Another thing that we are doing in the meantime is that while at Masulita, they are taught day-to-day skills where a person can do activities even without having to go to school and graduate into something. These include weaving baskets, mats - anything that they can teach them.

Another thing that is actually going on is brick-making at Masulita. Fortunately, we found that they had already put in place machinery where they burn bricks. So, we have told them to actively teach them how to burn these bricks. Another thing is rearing poultry that they are also being taught.

We know with all these interventions and the programmes we have running from Government, we shall be able to offer them -[Hon. Wamanga-Wamai: “Information”]- I am informed, I am a minister and that is why I am informing the House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Another thing -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the minister who has been on the Floor aware of the Children’s Charter of the UN? And she comes to this House and tells us that these children are going to be involved in brick-making and burning? It is against the UN Charter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order, honourable member.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The point of order I am rising on is to ask the minister whether she knows the UN Charter on the rights of children. Is she in order to come and mislead this House that they are going to involve children in burning bricks? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wamanga-Wamai is ruled out of order for rising on a point of order and giving information but, of course, the information might be valuable to the honourable minister. Please wind up.

MRS OUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just as I had said that I know how best to inform, let me inform the honourable colleagues that these street children, just like you heard the Members put it, even include men and women. So, we have different groups of street children. There are those who are young - actually those who are below the age of 18 - and there are those who are above the age of 18. So, there are different ages. That is just one of the interventions we are giving to a different group of children.

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda defines a child as anyone below the age of 18 and our minister is fully aware that men are never referred to as children and women are never referred to as children. It implies that they have qualified to be in the age of maturity and, therefore, they have ceased to be children. Is the minister therefore, in order to repeatedly say and insist that she knows that we have street children who are even men? Is the minister in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the definition of a child by our Constitution is a person below the age of 18. It does not matter whether you are 25 or 15. Even if you behave like a child, you do not qualify to be called a child under our law. (Laughter) So, honourable minister, please be advised that, do not refer to mature men and women as children. You will be offending the constitutional provisions.

MRS OUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I actually withdraw that particular word. (Applause) Let me go ahead and finish up very fast because my questions are many.

Another question was: What is the detailed plan we have in place since these street children are coming from all over the country? This is why I said during my presentation that since we have Karimojong children as part of street children in Uganda, we should not forget that there is a ministry solely responsible for this. As a Ministry for Karamoja, we know that the Ministry of Gender as the Members have put it, will come up with a paper for the House to show its strategic plan on handling the children from all over the country. What I was giving was only specifically for Karamoja as a region.

Honourable members, why do we have adults as part of my table? I have seen and the Members have seen these adults; some of them are on these streets. I do not know what point they are trying to prove, but they are also there. So, when we are trying to remove these street children, we usually also take away the adults who come along with them and most of them are also from Karamoja. They sleep on the streets with them; so we treat them the same way. They also need the special attention that we give to the children.

The same children keep coming; which plan do we have in place? After Koblin in Karamoja is complete, we are going to work with the Uganda Police Force to ensure that they tighten up all the exit routes from Karamoja. We have already sat with the Minister of Security; we shall have roadblocks on every exit route from Karamoja and it will have to help us in one thing. Vehicles come from Kampala, they ferry children to Kampala without anyone asking where they are going. What we want the Police to do for us is to ensure that whosoever moves out of Karamoja region with a child or two, explains whether he is the parent, whether this child knows the person he or she is moving with and where they are going.

With the Police Force we have in Uganda, Mr Speaker, I would like to assure this House that we shall actually achieve this. That is one of the strategies that we are putting in place.

There is also a tendency - hon. Baryomunsi said that some Karimojong leaders – it is assumed that they are involved in this; assumed, accused or alleged that they are involved in the trafficking of these children to Kampala. 

When I was making my presentation in August, when we had to withdraw a group of 70 children from Karamoja, the Ministry for Karamoja actually involved these Karimojong leaders who have been harbouring these children in suburbs of Kisenyi around Kampala here, and Nakulabye. We involved them in a dialogue and we called upon them to join hands with Government to ensure that this process is a success.
 
What used to happen is that the withdrawal would go on, but without the consultation and personal efforts of these leaders who keep them here in Kampala. So, we have engaged them as a ministry and they also promised - in fact, they helped the Police Force and KCCA in withdrawing the 70 children that we withdrew to Masulita. So, we know with personal involvement of these leaders, we shall be able to effectively enhance this programme and ensure its success. 

One honourable member also asked which criteria are being used in awarding the State House scholarships that I mentioned. As a Minister for Karamoja plus my senior minister, all we do is lobby for our region. We all know that Karamoja as a region is a region that has experienced a lot of set-backs as a result of the wars that existed in the North. This is why we go an extra mile as a sign or as an effort of affirmative action to call on the government sometimes just as it did, to award our children from Karamoja regional scholarships at university. 

We are doing this because many NGOs are now operating in Karamoja because of the peace that is prevailing there, and our Karimojong children are usually left out on the basis of qualifications.

So, we have talked to Government, as a way of offering this region affirmative action, that is why we called on them to award these scholarships and pay special attention to a region that needs special care –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Your time is up. Please, resume your seat.

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 106 SEEKING TO INTRODUCE 
A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL - THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2011

5.23
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand here to move a Motion seeking leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2011” and I move under Rule 106(1) of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS tobacco use is the leading cause of preventable deaths worldwide causing more deaths than HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria combined, and also substantially increasing the risk of TB, Cancer and death from TB and other related diseases; 

AND WHEREAS smoking has been proved to impair the functions of lungs of children and also leading to debilitative and respiratory infections in infants, meaning that children who live in households with smokers are twice as likely to develop acute respiratory complications;

NOTING that smoking does not only affect smokers, but also exposes non-smokers to second-hand smoke at the work-place or at home to a 25 to 30 percent greater risk of heart disease and 20 to 30 percent greater risk of lung cancer; and a 2007 study showed that in Uganda, one in every five students (20 percent) lived in homes where others smoked. And nearly half (45.6 percent of students) were exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke outside their homes;

AWARE that Uganda is a signatory to the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control of 2002, which seeks to protect the present and future generations from the devastative health, social, environmental and economic consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke by providing a framework for tobacco control measures to be implemented by the parties to the convention at the national, regional and international levels, in order to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence of tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke;

NOTING that with the ratification of the convention, Uganda is obliged to develop action places for public policies such as bans on tobacco advertising; tobacco tax and price increase; promoting smoke-free public places and workplaces; and placing health messages on tobacco packaging;

AWARE that the Tobacco Control and Marketing Act of 1967 does not ensure that Uganda meets its obligations as provided in the framework convention on tobacco control, or protect the health of the individual, in light of the conclusive scientific evidence implicating tobacco production, use and exposure to tobacco smoke and tobacco products in the incidents of debilitative illness, disease, disability and death; 

FURTHER NOTING that the National Environment (Control of Smoking in Public Places) Regulations 2004 forbid the smoking of any tobacco product in an enclosed, in-door area of a public place. Smoking is also banned in public transport, airports and owners of bars, theatres and other public places are mandated to place ‘No-Smoking’ signs on their premises.

HAVING IN MIND that tobacco is one of Uganda’s most important cash crops employing over 600,000 Ugandans, and further depending heavily on taxation of tobacco products and that this fact has compromised the enforcement of these regulations;

AWARE that this Parliament needs to recognise, promote and protect the right to life as well as the right to health as guaranteed by the Constitution, and further reflect on the status of efforts to control tobacco use and thereby cutting tobacco deaths in Uganda;

RECOGNISING that there is need for a comprehensive law domesticating the framework convention on tobacco control, regulating the manufacturing, selling, advertising, distribution, promotion, use and consumption of tobacco products in Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House accepts the introduction of a Bill for an Act entitled: “The Tobacco Control Act”, that I have attached to this motion - and I hope Members have got copies of the draft Bill – “and also do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the first reading.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member – is the motion seconded? Okay, the motion is seconded by Dr Bitekyerezo. The motion itself is elaborate and I do not think you need to speak to this motion. 

Honourable members, the Member is seeking the authority of this House to be granted leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill on that subject. The only limitation would be if there was conflict with the provisions of the Constitution. And up to now, I have not heard any objections being raised to this effect. Therefore, I think the motion is properly before this House and if there be any objections, this would be the appropriate time to raise them. 

In the absence of any objections, honourable members, do we need to debate the Member’s request? I put the question that the Member be granted the leave so desired.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion granted and the appropriate steps will be taken. The Government will assist the honourable member to produce the Bill. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXPEDITIOUSLY INTERVENE BY ASSISTING COTTON FARMERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you heard earlier on, on the Order Paper, the issue of a ministerial statement from the Minister of Agriculture. I have taken a close look at the statement and it should not have qualified to be listed as a ministerial statement because it is actually a response to a motion moved by hon. Akena urging Government to intervene in the cotton buying price. 

I will not, therefore, allow this particular statement to be presented to this House as a ministerial statement because it does not fall within that. It is a response to that debate. We had two hours debating this matter; we had started going clause by clause to see if this motion could be adopted as such; now the honourable ,minister has come with a response to the motion itself. 

I am going to ask you to conclude on this debate and then I will ask the honourable minister to make his response to the motion and then we will take a decision on that matter. Honourable minister, your request for a ministerial statement is, therefore, denied because it does not qualify and we will treat it as such. 

Debate continues on the subject of hon. Akena’s motion on cotton. We had reached a state where we were doing state by state approvals. If there are contributions, they would be appropriately welcome at this stage.

5.32
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that when this motion was brought on the Floor of Parliament, I was not around to make my contribution on that day. However, I beg the indulgence of the House and that of the mover of this motion to allow incorporation of other factors, which will help us to draw a holistic conclusion to this motion.

First of all, almost every year, when we debate the budget of Agriculture and more specifically CDO, a number of issues are raised. I have followed the debate through the Hansard and there is one particular issue I would like to bring to the attention of the Members of Parliament. 

In 2000/2001, we had a cotton crisis created by CDO because that year, CDO decided to tax farmers Shs 150 when the price was Shs 350. But CDO decided to impose what is termed as seed cotton levy or an illegal tax by legal definition. From that time, Parliament got very concerned and requested Government to stop the cotton seed levy. We are aware and Parliament is aware that CDO is allowed to levy what they call cess levy on lint produced every year. I am a cotton farmer, so please, bear with me if I give you unnecessary details. I think it is important for you to know.

Every year, Government allows CDO to levy tax on lint, but CDO is not allowed to levy tax on cotton which our farmers sell to the ginners. This is important. There are two different things. What happened last year is that the international price was very good. Some farmers got Shs 2,000 others got Shs 2,500. In some areas, particularly those who sold their cotton late, they even got Shs 3,000 – Shs 3,500. Farmers were happy. What happened was that CDO levied a tax of Shs 600 per kilogramme which farmers sold to them.

My concern is that nobody has been able to account for that money. The Budget Committee is not aware. We are not sure whether the Ministry of Finance is aware that that money was transferred to the Consolidated Account. We have not formally received any information on the Floor of Parliament. Therefore, that money must be accounted for. 

The reason CDO gave last year for levying Shs 600 per kilogramme of seed cotton sold was that, that money, once collected from the farmers, would help the government establish a stabilisation fund. A stabilisation fund is very important and the Committee on Agriculture has always requested the government to establish the fund to support cotton farmers when the prices fall. In this particular case, CDO smartly entered using the advantage of a lucrative price and levied Shs 600 per kilogramme. 

Aware of the fact that last year, Uganda produced 77 million kilogrammes of seed cotton and CDO levied Shs 600 per kilogramme; that comes to Shs 46.6 billion collected by neatly cutting it from the farmers. 

That is where I want to start from. I know the Ministry of Agriculture is going to stand up and say, “This motion of hon. Akena has financial implications, therefore,” – this is what I think. I do not know. I cannot read your mind. Forgive me, Mr Minister, but I think, naturally, you would say that. We have been told that, many times. 

I am saying fine, while the government is thinking of how to raise money to supplement or beef up the price or what we call subsidy – if the Government finds it difficult to raise a subsidy - and I know the government may come up with that argument – can the farmer, at least, get his money back from CDO?  Shs 600 per kilogramme which was collected neatly in cash and is with CDO. Can we have it? Shs 46.6 billion. And of course, after one year plus some months, it has generated some interest. Probably, we are talking about Shs 50 billion. If we are to include the excess, it comes to about Shs 5.6 billion. When you add what was collected from the farmers, it comes to over Shs 51 to 52 billion. Of course, we did not raise it. We can talk about Shs 60 billion.

I am raising this so that the government has somewhere to start from. You do not have to go looking for money; the money is right there. Can we start from our own money? I am a cotton grower. Right now, I have 100 acres of cotton. I want my Shs 600 per kilogramme back, this year. That is where to start from. 

I have read the auditor’s report. Every year, we are questioning the integrity and the corporate governance of the leader of CDO. Whether you call her CAO, Managing Director, whatever – we have been questioning her. It is not Mrs Ogwal questioning, but everybody standing on the Floor of Parliament has asked why one person sits in an office for over 20 years and cannot be touched. Every year, people are complaining of mismanagement of the corporation. 

We are asking, if you can ignore the concerns of the Members of Parliament, you cannot ignore the auditor’s report. Mr Speaker, the message in the auditor’s report on CDO, page 44, talks about the mismanagement of finances of CDO. It says that organisation that gets money every year through the budget has failed to comply with Section 8(6) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. It has failed to establish an internal audit department to follow up its own integrity and spending regulations within the organisation.

Looking further, you find that, that particular department is manned by one person, who reports to one individual, who happens to be the managing director. So, what other evidence do you want to prove that this organisation is being managed, not in the interest of farmers, but in the interest of an individual? (Applause) If we do not take action, it means we are supporting the intransigence of the government as far as the plight of the farmers is concerned. 

I wish to move an amendment to hon. James Akena’s motion to say in the Preamble 3:

“AWARE THAT in the cotton season of 2010/2011, Uganda produced 77,643,775 kilogrammes and CDO levied tax of Shs 600 per kilogramme realising a total of Shs 46.6 billion;

AND NOTING the Shs 46.6 billion was for the establishment of the stabilisation fund which had earlier been recommended by Parliament

THEREFORE be it resolved that Government releases to Parliament  Shs 46.6 billion collected on its behalf by CDO by way of Cotton levy and deposited in the Stabilisation Fund Account.”

That is item number one, in which we are asking Government to release that money to the farmers. That does not put a burden on the government. This is to circumvent rules 55 and 108.

In bullet two, it should be written that Government reviews the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation in view of the auditor’s report on the poor financial management. I beg to move those amendments, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon.  Akena, do you have anything to say about those proposed changes?

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, I do not have any serious objections, only that what I was envisaging on the review of the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation, was a far and greater look at it. This is because I also mentioned in the preamble that the target set by the Cotton Development Organisation was to reach one million bales by the year 2006. Right now, this has not been realised. So, dealing with the report of the Auditor-General is okay, but the wider scope is that it has not met its objectives. So, we need to review it wholly.

5.46
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukoli County North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by hon. Jimmy Akena. In Bukooli North County, the area I represent in this House, there are two sub-counties, which have been traditional growers of cotton. They also used to be very active in growing cotton during the 1970s and early 1980s.
 
But when the price of maize rose, the cotton growers in those sub-counties temporarily abandoned cotton and got into maize growing very actively. But as I speak, I have a very delicate situation in the sub-counties of Iwemba, Nabukalu and Buruguyi. When CDO and other cotton traders gave an indicative figure of Shs 2000 per kilogramme, all these people abandoned the growing of maize and went for cotton. In fact, sometime early this year, when I went there, I realised there were no more maize gardens. And when I asked some people, they told me that they had gone for a better deal – expecting big monies from cotton. I also got happy because I thought my people had got an opportunity to raise some to solve some of their problems.
 
However, on a daily basis, I have been receiving calls from the people saying that even the Shs 2000 they expected had not come to pass; that a kilogramme of cotton is now being sold at only Shs 800. They actually threatened to come and stage a demonstration at my office. However, when they heard that hon. Jimmy Akena had tabled this motion, they cooled down, but warned that they are waiting for me to talk more about this issue. (Laughter)

Therefore, I wish to first of all ask this House to support this motion by adopting all the amendments as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Government must be seen to act, having given our people the wrong indicative figures. We cannot allow this to continue. If they do not do that, we will also take on the very stance of our supporters, who are threatening to demonstrate because this is hoodwinking the farmers.

As I speak, my people have nothing to eat. They had hoped to get money from cotton to buy – because if one gets 1000 kgs of cotton, that gives them enough money to buy Dduma, which is maize in English. But now, they cannot even afford a bag of maize to keep them until the next season. The situation is very bad. I wish to urge this House to support this motion with all the amendments as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Thank you.


5.49
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Aleptong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion with all the amendments as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I represent a rural constituency, which also grows cotton. But I must add that I am also a product of cotton production.

So, I would like to put it emphatically clear to the Minister of Agriculture, who is being engaged at this moment by the Minister of Defence – that I want to know the reasons why it is always cotton prices, year in, year out? Why always cotton? That is my fundamental question.

Secondly, I strongly believe that the response you are going to give will be full of nothing but actions that are geared towards restoring the hope of cotton growers. Mr Speaker, I have always believed that the last thing I should lose is hope and that the last thing I should sell is my conscience. The hope and aspirations of cotton growers, especially those in Lango and other parts of Uganda, are slowly but surely dying. So, Government should not just sit. We have a social contract with the people of Uganda, including those cotton growers. We need to act. 

Mr Minister, you must know that we have sat on this issue for so long; we are breeding an uprising. When farmers put down their tools that will be a vote of no confidence on the part of the NRM Government. Why don’t we come up to help our farmers? This is their means of survival; that is how they send their children to school; and that is the money they use to construct their houses and get medical care.

Recently, while representing this Parliament at the Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament in Bujumbura, I had to spare some time to engage with the cotton growers in my constituency for about one hour on teleconferencing, in which I gave them messages of hope. I assured them that when I returned, I would join the likes of hon. Akena in advocating their plight. I am happy that today, I got that opportunity.

Honourable minister, you are a senior citizen; please give us messages of hope and action areas such that can restore the hope and aspirations of our cotton growers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and the amendments as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Honourable members, as you may know, right now, we in Butaleja District are going through a difficult situation. We have been attacked by heavy rains. The area is now flooded with all the crops swept away.

The only hope that my people had was based on cotton. Many of them thought they would sell this to get some money to buy food because we are now approaching the hunger period. They also expected to sell their cotton to buy more seeds for planting when the floods subside.

However, as I speak, a kilogramme of cotton in Butaleja is at only Shs 800. My voters are now calling me; they are all looking at me; they all think that I am the one to bring the answers.

I am now also looking at the government and the minister and requesting them to please be kind enough and “human”. People are dying of poverty and we as the Movement want people to move away from poverty. But how can someone move away from poverty when you are paying him Shs 800 per kilogram? What will that help? It will do nothing. I am calling upon the government and the honourable minister to get a price. Let it not even be Shs 1,200. My people are starving. They are being affected by floods. Shillings 1,200 is not enough. And if you realise, the whole country was affected. So, at least, let us get a reasonable price that we can give to our farmers and encourage them to grow cotton. Let us get a standard price. Let us advertise it and let us know and debate about it. But Shs 1,200 is not enough for our people. Thank you very much.
 
5.55
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some few issues to raise about the motion. I definitely support the motion by hon. Akena. In Bukedea, cotton is as cheap as Shs 500 a kilo. In the sub-counties of Malera and Kolir, the chairman then had a serious campaign in Bukedea that everybody should cultivate cotton first and then food later. I would also move and say, please let us grow more food because there is market in South Sudan and Kenya. 

What am I trying to say? The plight of a farmer in Bukedea leaves a lot to be desired. My honourable sister here says the price in her place is Shs 800. I would request you to come and buy some of the cotton from Bukedea because it is too much. 

The market environment for a rural farmer is not really conducive. It does not give a farmer any hope. The Ministry of Agriculture, through the CDO should come out and talk to farmers because you gave a message: “Please, go and grow more cotton”. People have grown cotton but now, they are not able to access any market. 

I would think that Parliament would really address the challenges that farmers face. Even at the time of cultivating this crop, a farmer lacks inputs, but he has to struggle, through his ordinary means, to produce cotton. They produce low quality cotton at times because they lack medicine; they do not spray cotton. The Ministry of Agriculture is seated; you do not come to monitor the farmers. 

How do we promote production? We are saying Ugandans are lazy; they are not producing. When they go and produce, we cannot access markets for the products. What are we doing for our farmers?

I am also saying, why don’t we bring the idea of cotton ginneries? These used to market cotton for farmers. Where are the ginneries? During those days, the early –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the movers and seconders of this motion. If you scan the world price of cotton, as we speak today, from May, you will see a decline of 30 percent in the price. This Parliament and the past Parliament have been urging Government; there is simple economic theory that was taught to us in secondary school, for some of us who did Economics: The stabilisation fund and the cobweb theory. When prices go up, Government should create a stabilisation fund. 

In such a situation where the world prices of cotton and other commodities, which are tradeable and untradeable, keep on declining, what should a prudent Government do? Let me give you a scenario of Ethiopia. 

The Government of Ethiopia having been faced with a similar scenario year in and year out, stopped exports of raw cotton. The Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenawi, stopped the export of raw cotton henceforth. Companies came from Turkey, China and started processing yarn. The Government of Ethiopia was accused at the WTO, but at the end of the day, when they started exporting yarn, profits tripled. 

So, I would urge that we amend the motion; that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, which is in charge of marketing – the Ministry of Agriculture is engaged in production. So, after production, who is in charge of trade and marketing? It is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

We had ginneries like Nyanza, Nytil. If you look at the ginners, the people who are buying and exporting cotton, out of 10, eight are non-Ugandans. They are Indians. We need farmers to form associations; we take charge of the ginneries and I hope in the coming budget, Government compensates the people who bought these ginneries and have mismanaged them, so that we put the ginneries in the hands of the farmers. Government needs to repossess Nytil - Nyanza textile, African Textile Mill and all these other companies so that we start adding value to our cotton; so that we can use the cotton seeds to make oil internally and stop importing oil; and so that we can process cotton and add value to yarn and even make garments. That is what Ethiopia did. 

If Ethiopia can do it, what about Uganda? Under President Museveni, this is possible. Can we unite? For now let us support him because he is in power. Whether you want or not, let us support President Museveni and move a motion to repossess all the ginneries; we repossess all the textiles and stop –(Member timed out.) 

6.01
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were debating the State of the Nation Address, I remember vividly the message that hon. Bako passed over to the Ministry of Agriculture. She said, and I quote, “Looking at your age and what was happening to the agricultural sector that you saw in the good old days, we hope and pray that you will perform to your best.” And I want to tell the Minister of Agriculture that how you respond to this motion will be a litmus test and a book of history written during your leadership. On this, I go to the Cotton Development Authority and its management. 

Mr Speaker, it is very sad to know that we have always cried and talked about agriculture and our farmers, and nothing has been forthcoming from the ministry. If you look at almost all regions of this country - talk about Kasese, West Nile – I travelled through Budaka, a lot of cotton has been grown this season, but what are they expecting? Even the Bible says you do not ask for food and you are given stones. In this case, we expect the Ministry of Agriculture in conjunction with the Ministry of Trade and Industry to do justice and prudence to the farmers. 

The question of the Cotton Development Authority is a menace and a disappointment to this country. From 2006, the little that I remember when I joined Parliament, the whole Ministry of Lands was getting Shs 9 billion for the wide sector of the Ministry of Lands. And for the Cotton Development Authority, Parliament was voting Shs 5 billion painful shillings to give to this Cotton Development Authority. And we expect this Cotton Development Authority to supply seeds; to give our farmers pumps; and to help our farmers; and where does this money go? The leadership of the Cotton Development Authority has been in the Auditor-General’s report for over three consecutive years. So, what are we getting out of this?

Mr Speaker, it is with a lot of pain that I talk about the Cotton Development Authority, and if the appointing authority wants to do justice to the famers, let it work and do something good for the farmers by replenishing and re-ordering the management of the Cotton Development Authority. You will have done the farmers great justice –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Give me a moment, please, honourable members. Last week we had a very sad incident that happened to this country. We had intended as Parliament to make a motion on the subject of what happened last week. I have been advised that the family of the late hon. Akisoferi Ogola is here and they have been here since this Parliament started. It is 6.00 O’clock now and we would not want to increase on the aggrieved family’s bereavement by making them sit in this House all day long and yet we may not be able to move on the motion again if we are to go at this pace. I am going to use my prerogative to hold debate on this matter which may take longer, so that we can have time without rushing through it. 

Given the importance of the subject that is pending, and given the fact that hon. Akisoferi Ogola was a Member of this House in the Seventh Parliament, and given also the fact that last week we had agreed to move this motion, except that the day floated coincided with the day when he was buried - last Wednesday - I am going to use my prerogative to move under rule 22 of our Rules Of Procedure, to at this stage suspend our debate on the motion on cotton and allow the motion, which is under item 13 on our Order Paper, to come forward and we finish with it at this stage, and allow the family go back and then we move from there. If it is agreeable to the Members, I would like to move in that direction. It is agreeable? I thank you very much, honourable members. 

MOTION TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO 
THE LATE HON. OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL

6.07
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, allow me present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael. The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the untimely death of the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael, which occurred on Saturday, 3 December 2011 at Nakasero Hospital;

AWARE THAT the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael was a Member of the Seventh Parliament representing the people of West Budama South Constituency in Tororo District;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael was a delegate to the Constituent Assembly, representing the people of West Budama South Constituency in Tororo District and made contributions to the making of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

ALSO AWARE THAT the late hon. Ogola was a distinguished career diplomat who rose to the ranks of ambassador and served in various positions in the Public Service, including being a permanent secretary;

NOTING THAT the late hon. ogola was a great community mobiliser whose efforts contributed to the building of several schools and health centres in Tororo. He was also the honorary chairman of the Family Planning Association of Uganda for over 10 years; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves that:

1.	It collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the entire country upon the loss of this gallant and industrious Ugandan.

2.	It takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contributions rendered by the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael to this country.”

May God rest his soul in peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Let me ask hon. Fred Mwesigye to make a short statement, after which I will invite the seconder of the motion, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, to make a statement and then I will open for contributions on this debate. If you feel comfortable with what you have said, I will now call the seconder of the motion to proceed with his statement on the subject. Thank you.

6.11
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is my solemn duty to join my brother, hon. Mwesigye, in seconding this important motion where we pay tribute to our departed and distinguished friend and comrade, Akisoferi Ogola. As you have heard, he was a distinguished public servant. He served this country and served the international community. 

I want to point out, Mr Speaker, that in my own assessment, the greatest contribution that our departed brother Akisoferi made to humanity was when he served Uganda at the United Nations Mission in New York between 1967 and 1970, and when he represented Uganda on the fourth committee of the UN General Assembly, which is a committee on decolonisation. At that material time, a number of countries like Uganda had attained their Independence, but a number of countries were still under the yoke of colonialism, racism and apartheid. It required the united voice of the world, spearheaded by the African voice, to mobilise the international community, to mobilise countries to support countries that were still under the yoke of colonialism, and Akisoferi Ogola was an articulate, passionate and committed spokesman, not just for Uganda, but for Africa on issues of decolonisation. 

Actually, Akisoferi Ogola was not just a career diplomat. He went beyond the call of duty of the general Public Service and he exuded a lot of confidence, a lot of conviction, a lot of passion and commitment, and it is that zeal, that articulation, that really contributed to the Independence of Namibia, the Independence of Zimbabwe and the eventual breakdown and collapse of the regime of apartheid. He believed in peoples’ rights; independence of countries and this freedom we enjoy is what Akisoferi believed in and worked for.
 
Apart from working for Uganda at the United Nations, he became our ambassador to France and Germany and also worked for the Ministry of Education. In the late 1980s, he was appointed by the new government of the National Resistance Movement, as permanent secretary in the Ministry of Health. I was very privileged to work with Akisoferi Ogola as my PS when I was Minister of Health and he made enormous contributions in that ministry. And while I was reshuffled from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications, because of his distinguished service, Akisofero Ogola remained there as permanent secretary. (Applause) Issues that came up later are subject to discussion, but the critical point is that although issues were raised in the Ministry of Health and in Government, Akisoferi Ogola was cleared by Government. 

Mr Speaker, let me humbly say that I have had the opportunity to closely work with the late Akisoferi Ogola, and by coincidence, as Minister of Information, I worked with his younger brother, the late Nathan Odoi, who was permanent secretary and who, I must also say, was a distinguished and committed public servant like his very brother, Akisoferi Ogola. And by coincidence, I am sorry to be a little personal, only a few months ago, when I left New York, I was working with Margaret Awino Kafeero, the daughter of Akisoferi Ogola, as a distinguished public servant in the Uganda Mission at the United Nations. There appears to be a genetic –(Laughter)- no, there is no doubt that there is a very positive gene in that family that has made an enormous contribution to Uganda. (Applause)

So, as we have already heard, Akisoferi was a Member of Parliament and a Member of the Constituent Assembly. He made enormous contribution in the making of this Constitution that is our key document as a country and as Parliament.  

In Parliament, Akisoferi was a very interesting man because, although he was traditionally a public servant, he came and made solid and sober contributions in this House. Akisoferi was promoting conflict resolution and was taking positions that would try to unite the House. He was actually a peace-maker consistent with his earlier struggle to ensure that people who were subjugated under apartheid and colonialism, had peaceful transition to their respective attainment of independence. 

It is, therefore, my great responsibility to really pay tribute to this great son of Uganda, to this great patriot and Pan-African, to this passionate crusader for the freedom of people under the yoke of foreign domination, and to pay tribute also to his family that has been able to look after him.  

Actually, Akisoferi got a stroke about three years ago, and I had a few moments to go and interact with him at Mulago. But the family has been extremely close to him; it has helped him and it is this tender loving care that has enabled him survive the years after the stroke several years ago. So, I pay tribute to Madam Ogola and members of his family, for the tender loving care they have given him. They have done this on behalf of the family, but also on behalf of us in Parliament and on behalf of the country, and also on behalf of all those peoples who benefited from the struggle and passionate cause that Ogola presented for independence of peoples and for the decolonisation and ending of apartheid.

May the Almighty God rest the soul of Akisoferi Ogola in eternal peace!  (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Honourable members, the motion before the House is that this House passes a resolution to pay tribute to the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael; that Parliament conveys its deepest condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the entire country upon the loss of this gallant and industrious Ugandan; that it takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contributions rendered by the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael to this country. 

Honourable members, the family has joined us here, as I said earlier, and they have been sitting here for a while. I have been advised that we have in the gallery the widow, Margaret Nakibuuka Ogola, who is up somewhere in the gallery. We recognise your presence. We are also advised that his first son, Mr Ayepa Ogola, is also here and there is also Rachael Ogola, and the rest of the family are also here.  

Please, I now open the debate and I am going to give each Member - I think we have to find a way of dealing with it quickly. I now ask the honourable members contributing to stand up and then we see how to estimate the time. We can then do about 25 minutes. So, I will give each Member three minutes starting with the Leader of the Opposition. 

6.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think it is really a hard time as we mourn Ambassador Ogola. I have heard the seconder of the motion say that Ambassador Ogola was sick for a period of three years. I hope Government managed to go and check on him.  

We recall during the Seventh Parliament, Ambassador Ogola was the chief supporter of democracy. And as he did that, he was one of those who were initially against opening up term limits. During that time, he was convinced beyond reasonable doubt that he would be cleared on some issues in Government and so he made a U-turn and supported the opening up of term limits. When he did so, we believed that Government would do what it had promised, among which was to regularise his money as far as pension was concerned because he had been dismissed illegally and yet he had been a good servant of Government.  That was very bad because he never supported wrong things and yet this government dismissed him on wrong premises. 

We had hoped that he would be paid his money, although I have information that he has never been paid up to now and yet the seconder came here and said, “We love the man; he was good; he did this and that.” Why do you talk about people when they are dead and not when they are still alive? This is very bad! Mr Speaker, I should ask you for some more minutes. I will explain why I am saying all this.
  
This person supported this country and other countries on many development issues. I recall that we used to refer to the late Ambassador Ogola as “PS.” 

On the sale of UCB, he got up and said, “This is robbing Ugandans” and he knew why he was saying that because UCB was called, “The Peoples Own Bank,” and ever since you removed it we are crying. Even the cotton farmers are crying. You removed the Co-operative Bank as well. I hear you saying that he was fighting for peoples’ rights and yet when he said that you shouldn’t sell UCB, you went ahead and sold it. What are these things you are talking about? Moreover you sold UCB on a Sunday, 2nd October - you know the day.  I recall that the Speaker was with us at that time as a very good backbencher, who really made a good presentation on the sale of UCB.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that -(Laughter) 

6.26
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had the opportunity to serve with the late hon. Akisoferi Ogola in the Seventh Parliament. Although he was a little older than me, he was such a humorous character that all the time that we were involved in a debate, you would never distinguish whether he was that old or still a youthful character, because he associated with everybody freely. 

Last week, I had the opportunity to be part of the team that attended his funeral. I would like to thank my colleagues who were there: Hon. Jacob Wangolo, hon. Ekanya, hon. Katuntu, hon. Oboth and others who came in later. This was a demonstration that we really loved and cared for the man who worked for this world for such a long period of time. 

Officially, I would like to say that during the funeral, it took a little bit long and some people complained as to why there were very many speeches. But as one person was complaining, I remembered a statement that was made on the Floor of this House when one of the senior colleagues had fallen that: “Until a tree falls down, you can never tell its real height.” And until Ogola fell down did people tell and appreciate how valuable he was and nobody would appreciate what hon. Rugunda is saying now.

To some of us who are a little younger, who were born soon after Independence, we didn’t know that a Fourth Commitee did exist in the United Nations. I, therefore, call on Government that the people who were around when this country was getting Independence, and who have made a contribution, are progressively passing on, but a lot has not been documented. Can we make an effort by either creating a fund or facilitate people so that the history of Uganda can be documented, and so that our children can read about what Uganda has been. (Applause) It is a price we are going to pay when all of you, who were around during Independence, and who contributed to this nation, can never remember and can never be read about. Supposing Ogola hadn’t died, we wouldn’t have ever known this. It is a pity he has died, but he did contribute to this world and he leaves a fruitful life. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, also join me in welcoming a former permanent secretary and brother to the late Akisoferi Ogola, Mr Martin Odwedo who is also here. It looks like that family was just producing permanent secretaries for this country. 

6.29
MR BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that a resolution of Parliament be passed to pay tribute to the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael, West Budama South.  I come from Bukooli North, which neighbours the constituency which the late Ogola represented. 

I cannot say it any better than it has already been said on his distinguished service in the Public Service, politics and community service. But what I could add, because I have seen it, is that hon. Akisoferi Ogola was an accomplished family man as evidenced in this House. The family is still intact; they took care of him and are here to witness Parliament passing a resolution paying tribute to him. (Applause) Mr Speaker, you know very well that most politicians have problems with their families. (Laughter) But for a man of his calibre, who managed to serve this country at that level and managed to be an accomplished family man, I would wish to really pay tribute to him.

Secondly, I wish to ask a question, because people come and go, but for you, when you go, what legacy are you going to leave behind; a legacy of stealing or a legacy of unaccomplished service?  The other day we attended a burial of a renowned Hajji with hon. Katuntu in Bukooli. Hon. Katuntu told the people that the old man had left a legacy because he educated his children and had an accomplished service in various fields. So, he asked the people what kind of legacy they were planning to leave. I should also ask this honourable House which legacy it wants to leave. We are now talking very good things about hon. Akisoferi Ogola, but you, hon. Baka and the rest of you, what legacy are you going to leave? Are you ever going to be talked about like this or are you going to be remembered as a person who was a thief, corrupt and all that kind of thing? (Laughter)

Finally, it pains me when honourable members leave this House after they have served their term and are not elected back. When they pass on, nothing is said about them. But fortunately, we have talked well about hon. Ogola and we are going to pass a resolution to pay tribute to him. What about those who are never heard about? Let this be a precedent, Mr Speaker, for this House to start a system of paying tribute to our people who served this country at this level, such that when you pass on, we can hear about you. When you are here before us, we bring your casket here and talk all the good things about you, but how about when you are outside this House? Let this be a precedent. I don’t know where we can put it; I don’t know whether it falls in the Rules of Procedure or whatever, but I suggest so and I wish this House could adopt it that Members who have served this country in distinguished positions, especially Parliament, should be talked about in a way of paying tribute to them for their distinguished service to this country. I beg to move. Thank you very much. 

6.33
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. I was privileged to have worked with hon. Ambassador Akisoferi Ogola although I never served in the diplomatic world. But as a politician, I can say that Ogola was a very committed member of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress. (Applause) He was a fantastic mobiliser who mobilised the entire Tororo and the whole of his area. (Laughter) And the unique thing about Akisoferi was that, not only did he win the parliamentary seat and, of course, the Constituent Assembly, but he made sure members of Uganda Peoples’ Congress even enter the local districts, which was very difficult at that time; but he succeeded. So, I think the man had a unique character.

Now, Akisoferi being a diplomat had a very sharp and very rich sense of humour. I experienced it twice and I have not forgotten it. The first time, we thought diplomats are very careful with what they say. But Akisoferi, during the Constituent Assembly debate, made reference to how women in their area respond to courtship. He said in his area, when you court women, they neither say “Yes” or “No” which means women never decide what they want. All the women in the Constituent Assembly, except me, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and the lady representing Soroti District, walked out. Only three of us remained in the House. All the women walked out because they were insulted that they never say “Yes” or “No” when a man is courting them. (Laughter) But some of us thought it was a joke and so we did not walk out. It was a very lively debate.

The second one is when we were going for fundraising in the west and we did not know where we were going because the geography was drawn in a manner that was very difficult. So, at every point we would stop and ask a Munyankole where the trading centre was and they were making the same statement as if they were programmed. They would say, “Haanu haanu” -(Laughter)- and we asked what is haanu haanu. The only person who knew what haanu haanu was, was Akisoferi. He said haanu haanu means, just near there. (Laughter)(Member timed out.)

6.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and pay tribute to a fallen gallant son of this country. While listening to hon. Rugunda pay tribute to hon. Akisoferi Ogola, I wished that this country and this government respect career people. Akisoferi Ogola was a career diplomat and he left a mark at the United Nations where Ndugu has just returned from. But imagine if he was the type of diplomat we have in our missions today, that record would not have been there.
 
The foreign service of today is completely in a mess and in shambles. There are people who cannot represent this country - handpicked. The other time I referred to them in this House as political failures and many who did not make it to this House are waiting to be appointed. There are already many who have just returned from our missions abroad. The situation is so bad. What legacy are we going to leave in the system and in missions? 

Ndugu did very well at the UN, but there are many there in the 29 missions. Out of 29 missions, we have got 28 political appointees. Now, the No.2s are all political appointees. The No.3s including the third secretaries like Margret Awino, the daughter of the late, joined when I was in the ministry. She is growing up in the service and she is going to leave a legacy as a career diplomat.

I interacted with late Akisoferi Ogola when he returned from Paris as an ambassador - a wonderful person. When he served as PS, I used to interact with him. He was a wonderful person. Whatever happened in the ministry, as the Leader of the Opposition referred to, is very unfortunate. That people cannot be recognised for their articulate services, for the commitment to this nation and that when people go, then the good words are all talked, but I would have said the same if late Ogola was still living.

The late Ogola comes from a family -(Member timed out.)

6.39
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo, being the chairperson of the caucus, we are grateful that you have accorded this time for this House to pay tribute to a man who made this world a better place today. 

The late Akisoferi Ogola has left a mark not only in Uganda, but the world over. Mr Speaker, what disturbs my mind is the commitment of Government to keep its word. We were with the President in Rwakitura; the people of Tororo and the late Akisoferi Ogola cried in pain for how he was dismissed in error. I thank hon. Rugunda for accepting that he was dismissed in error and was later on cleared. The President ordered that since he had been cleared, his pension should be regularised so that he gets his full pay. To this day, we are all standing here spending Government money. The government sent Shs 5 million to the burial. 

The late Akisoferi Ogola was in Mulago; we tried left and right so that he would get his pension that is due. May I ask through you, Mr Speaker, that if hon. Ndugu Rugunda you are really committed, you are really mourning a friend; the Minister of Defence, you are really committed, can you go and remind the President that posthumous, we have the pension of a man whom you have paid glowing tribute to, rectified because he has a family and he has a widow.

While on earth, he did not steal. (Applause) He left his treasures in Heaven. Bishop Okille, during the funeral service, said, many of us while on earth want to accumulate wealth around us, but when the minute comes that the heavenly God calls on us, we look onto Heaven. What do you look at? Rotten flies, the oil money you have stolen, masts, money for roads, money for drugs or what do you look at up? But the late Ogola looked in Heaven and God said, “My servant come, you have stolen nothing” but Government has stolen from him.

Can hon. Oboth-Oboth take up this matter with hon. Ndugu Rugunda. Can we have a report in the next two months that the pension of the man we are paying tribute to has been rectified.  May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

6.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the late hon. Akisoferi Ogola was in the Seventh Parliament, he also served as the chairperson on the Family Planning Association and I served with him on the board when I represented the Rwenzori region, Western Uganda, and he was representing the Bukedi region, and we worked together for a number of years. 

The Family Planning Association has since changed its nameto Reproductive Health Uganda, and currently, I am the chairman of the board. We believed in family planning. I do not know how many Members of Parliament still believe in family planning as a method or as an instrument, which can propel this country into development.

When we worked with hon. Akisoferi Ogola, I agree with all the attributes which have been used to describe him; he was a very articulate person, very humorous. He had a lot of skills in management and I also saw him as someone who was incorruptible and he helped a lot to revive the Family Planning Association, which had a lot of conflicts and challenges. 

He was a respectable person; he had a stellar career in his public life. Therefore, I am also shocked if allegations being made that Government did not give him his pension are true; then I think it is time to tell Government that that money must be paid. The members of the family are here - the widow and the children - and I think it is only fair for that money to be paid. 

What is wrong with the systems in Government? If somebody is entitled to payment, why shouldn’t that payment be processed? Recently, an old man almost collapsed in my house because he was chasing his pension and he was not being paid. And there are many like him, as most Members of Parliament, know because we receive our constituents demanding for their pension entitlement. So, I add my voice to those saying that Government should pay his pension earlier. And maybe by the end of the debate, they should explain to us why this kind of situation persists.

Lastly, I think there is an issue with respect to the welfare of Members who leave this House. Hon. Baka raised an issue, which I think is wider – Mr Speaker, you are the Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission and I also happen to be a commissioner. I want to assure the Members that we are doing all it takes to ensure that the welfare of the Members is looked at, both when they are in the House, but most importantly when we leave this House. We would like Members to look like honourable members while in this House, but also when they have left this Parliament. Thank you very much. 

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank you for putting this item on the Order Paper. I want to thank my colleagues for the wonderful words they have said about the late Ogola. 

I did not work closely with him, but I remember him as our Member of Parliament and somebody we often interacted with on various occasions, especially when there were district functions, but most importantly, at the time when we had serious conflicts in the district. 

Hon. Ogola often preached peace; he often preached unity. He told us often that there was no need for us as the children of Tororo – the Japadholas and Iteso - to fight. I remember when we were in Rwakitura - I think it was in 2001 - Butaleja was still part of Tororo. Hon. Akisoferi Ogola rose up and raised very serious issues on how his services were terminated. I was there when the President made that pledge that he should be paid.

Fortunately, I am now –(Interjections)– yes, they say better late than never. He is gone, but he has left a family; the widow is there. I am going to follow-up what was due to him and make sure that it is paid. It is very unfortunate that at the time of this death, I had travelled to Rwanda. I could not be with the family members, but I did follow it up to ensure that Government makes a contribution towards his burial.

Lastly, I want to state that we as leaders should be exemplary like hon. Akisoferi Ogola was. He served this country; he did not engage in any corrupt activities. Therefore, I want to urge all Members of Parliament, especially those from Tororo, not to disgrace him by following in his footsteps, especially myself who is in the Executive. Thank you very much. 

6.50
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you know, I hail from Iki-Iki Constituency which is part of Bukedi region where the gallant son, late Akisoferi Ogola came from. What I am going to say is not to praise the late Ogola, but I am giving a testimony.

I happened to have been posted to work in Tororo between 1979 and 1987. I worked there as the Medical Superintendent of Tororo Hospital, and I was also a District Medical Officer of the Greater Tororo or former Bukedi – right from Busia up to Gogonyo.

After the fall of Idi Amin, that region had a lot of problems and one of the people who really helped me was the late Akisoferi Ogola. He had love for his people and he was an accomplished person. He was not discriminative in any way and he gave me a lot of support.

I can only show this by a project under the name of Kiyeyi Health Centre/ Primary Health Care Project. He is one of the people who brought it up and he nursed it up to the end. That project is on the site; it is providing services and at the same time it is a teaching site for primary health care. He had love for services; if he had not supported that project, it would not have taken root. At that time, there were insurgencies; the Finnish people who had been posted to run that project wanted to run away. It was him, myself and prof. Ndugwa, among others, who worked tirelessly to ensure that those people stay for the project to take root. 

He was later on posted to the Ministry of Health as the permanent secretary as you have heard. But I have never seen a permanent secretary who can delegate and give clear instructions like him. Those were the qualities of the late Ogola.

I am sincerely moved as a son of Bukedi and I am his son because he was my elder and I have told you how he helped me –(Member timed out.)

6.53
MR PHILLIP OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I came to know Ambassador Ogola when he was a PS and I was a journalist. Those were the days when we began writing about AIDS. It had been a taboo initially, you would not write about AIDS like it happened in our neighbouring countries. But we started early. 

The team of Ndugu Rugunda, Ambassador Ogola, Dr Okware and Dr Namara - to me, those were the real heroes in the fight against AIDS. (Applause) They championed writing about AIDS. As hon Twa-Twa said, Ambassador Ogola - because previously, it was the PS to talk alone - but he delegated to Dr Okware and Dr Namara. They would give us information as journalists. Of course, before we began writing about it, we had to go and talk to hon. Rugunda to get clearance. We met Dr Rugunda in Fairway Hotel where you were still staying.

The propaganda work or sensitisation work on AIDS – Ambassador Ogola was quite involved, and so was Dr Rugunda, Dr Namara and Dr Okware. We had medals from wherever. Some individuals have won medals, Uganda has been recognised for the fight against AIDS, but actually, there are those names – maybe like hon. Odonga-Otto said, we do not document some of these issues so that we know the people who have done a lot. So, it is befitting for this House to honour Ambassador Ogola and particularly, we should honour and remember him for being open and supportive to the media in the fight against AIDS. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The motion has received unanimous contributions. There is no diversion from the text of the motion, neither have its prayers been diverted from. I now put the question to the motion -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are talking about Ambassador Ogola’s pension. We need to put here in three, “That Government immediately pays hon. Ogola’s family the gratuity, the pension or up-to-date – (Interjections)- within one week.” If you can pay Basajjabalaba within a day, what about this one? So, should we give it within 30 days? It is a rightful entitlement. I know hon. Kiyonga knows what I am talking about. If they need money now, they can get it. I do not think it is fair of us not to give this man money. So, within two weeks, Ambassador Ogola should be paid his rightful entitlement, gratuity, pension arrears and also akasiimo for the work he did as a partner.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a proposed amendment to the motion. Hon. Fred Mwesigye, do you have an objection to the amendment, being the mover of the motion?

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE:  Mr Speaker, I sincerely support the amendment. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do I need to put the question to the amendment? It has been adopted and there is no objection. I now put the question to the text of the motion to pay glowing tribute to the late Akisoferi Michael Ogola as prayed, and to the specific resolution that, “Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the entire country upon the loss of this gallant and industrious Ugandan.

It takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contribution rendered by the late hon. Ogola Akisoferi Michael to this country and that the government processes and pays to the estate of the late Ogola all that is due to him within two weeks.” 

That is the text of the motion as adopted. I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

Thank you, honourable members, for allowing these changes in the Order Paper. Can we now resume our discussion on item 10? Procedure? Who is raising procedure? Hon. Cecilia Ogwal?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You realise that the debate on cotton attracted a lot of interest, but because this debate has overstretched, many of the interested Members have left the House, including the prime mover. I pray to the Speaker to allow the debate to continue tomorrow. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adjournment of the House as prayed. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I second the proposal, but something very important should be added. You cannot discuss correction of challenges in the cotton sector without looking at trade and industry. If we are to proceed in a way that will help this country - because we have talked about ginning, the seed, the whole value chain - the reason we are having a problem with the farm gate price is that we are not benefitting from the value chain. Can I request that we get the Ministry of Trade and Industry involved if we are to deal with that sector tomorrow, so that we get a comprehensive value chain, the textile policy and all related issues? 

I do not think by only looking at agriculture, we expect anything. We cannot achieve much until we deal with value-addition and other related – Mr Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I urge the government Frontbench to take recognition of the matter raised and take appropriate action. When the House reconstitutes tomorrow, these matters should comprehensively be dealt with.

Honourable members, I have an announcement. The Parliamentary Service Commission has organised an end-of-year party for all Members of Parliament and staff on Thursday, 15th December at the Imperial Royale Hotel from 6.30 p.m. after the plenary. You are all invited to attend, and those of you who wish to come with your spouses should register with the public relations manager by noon tomorrow, so that appropriate arrangements are made for your spouses to attend and be comfortable.

Honourable members, as I always say, it is only that I am limited by the space of my office; I would be giving awards every end of sitting to Members who persist up to this time. But the only reward I can give you is that next time you stand, I will recognise you faster than those -(Applause)- who have not sat here for long. I have observed all of you. So, when you stand, I will be picking you very quickly. House adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 7.04 p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 14 December 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)













