Tuesday, 19th December, 2000

(Parliament met at 11.17 a.m. in Parliament
House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, from the records it appears that there are a number of Bills that have received the First Reading but have not been dealt by the House. And we have provisions in our rules under which we could deal with such Bills that are being delayed in the Committees, but I feel reluctant to apply these rules. Therefore, I am appealing to the Committees concerned to wind up with their work in respect to these Bills. The relevant rule is 114. Normally, we talk about 118, but I am now talking about 114 – (Laughter).  It reads as follows:“(1) Subject to the Constitution, no Bill introduced in the House on behalf of the President shall be delayed for more than three months in any Committee of the House.

(2) Where a delay as described in sub rule (1) has taken place, the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill immediately and all necessary questions shall be put without debate for the purpose of concluding proceedings in the Bill.”  

I do not think Members would like me to sit here and dispose of these Bills, which may be 10 or more, in just one hour because it can be done. So, I would like to appeal to the Committees to please conclude whatever you have to with the pending Bills before you. We should not be forced to invoke this particular rule.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to you, last week I was going to move a motion related to rule 42(1) on a matter of public importance. I was assured by the Speaker that even if I did not move it, he would accord me an opportunity to do the same through an oral question related to that matter of public importance. When I look at the Order Paper today, I do not see any such question.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you did not move it then, you should have come to see me so that I would consider your issue before you raise it. And in any case, a matter of urgent public importance does not require to be put on the Order Paper.  Proceed.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ben Wacha): Mr. Chairman, there were some clauses, which were referred for consideration between the Minister and the Committee. Unfortunately, I have not been around. So, I am not too sure whether the Committee handled those clauses.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: As far as I remember, we had actually almost completed the Political Organisations Bill, save for clause 20 and 24. Clause 20 was in respect of donations or loans from foreign countries, and clause 24 is what was termed the core of the Bill. It was on the kind of restrictions that we have to put in the Bill in accordance with Article 73(2) of the Constitution. The Minister had pointed out the kind of restrictions, and I think it was agreed that he meets the Committee and tries to sort out whatever differences they might have had. So, I am expecting the Minister to report on what he is supposed to.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I met the Committee, but as hon. Ben Wacha has said, he was not present at that meeting although he is the deputy chairperson of that Committee. We discussed clause 20 and the amendments were to be brought by someone else who never brought them, so that I think, is dropped. 

On clause 24, I remember 24 (a), sponsoring and offering platforms, and 24 (b) about symbols, had been passed here.  I wanted to add something by way of amendment, about seminars, offices and public meetings. We discussed that with the Committee and hon. Ogalo, the substantive chairman, wanted to report on what the Committee thought about these amendments. But as everybody knows, he has gone to Belarus and hon. Ben Wacha says he does not know, so he cannot report. So that is it. I have got my own side’s arguments, which I can put forward.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since I attended the meeting and my chairman is not here, and my vice-chairman did not attend, I think there are some records I can correct. When we last met the hon. Minister, it is true we discussed, but then there was a matter he was going to consult Cabinet on. We are still waiting for him to tell us what he got from Cabinet.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Actually, normally I am invited, or should I say summoned, to the Committee. I have not been invited so far, but I will actually inform hon. Kaggwa that as far as the Cabinet is concerned, no change – (Laughter).

MR. BEN WACHA: Mr. Chairman, under the circumstances, the Committee will have to report formerly. Could I ask that this matter be deferred until tomorrow? We are due to meet this morning, but we wanted to give the House a semblance of quorum before we leave this House to go and meet. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have a problem with tomorrow. We were supposed to have started these proceedings at 10.00 a.m, but I was forced to wait up to now. I do not know whether tomorrow will solve that problem. But the indication is that you need some time to make a report. Is that the case?

MR. WACHA: That is right, Mr. Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The report is on clause 24 and not on 20.  So, can we dispose of clause 20?

MR. WACHA: My understanding is that, since the matter was deferred and referred to the Committee, the Committee will still have to report formally.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to you, Mr. Chairman, when you were reporting to the House about what happened with regard to clause 20, I did not hear you mention the interest I expressed in effecting an amendment. It is on record that I had stated that I was moving an amendment in regard to clause 20, and I have already forwarded it to the Committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether I should have said anything about that, because the report I received from the Minister is that somebody who intended to move an amendment to that clause was not there and the amendment was not moved. What else could have I said? But the position remains that the Committee will report. So, you can go to the Committee and do what you want.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and that the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 24 of the Political Organisations Bill, and has referred the matter to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for further consideration and report to the House.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Condominium Property Bill, 2000” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! -(Applause). Please go and start buying property.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUDGET BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isaac): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Budget Bill, 2000” be read a Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Proceed, please!

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, on 26th April 2000, I did come to this House with the Budget Bill, 2000 and moved that it be read a Second Time. The Hansard will bear witness that this House did support this motion and the Bill was read a Second Time. I did introduce the Bill, but the Minister of Finance, hon. Opio, said that since there had been a number of changes in the report, he wanted to have the Cabinet look at the changes before this Bill was debated by this House. The House, therefore, deferred this Bill until the Minister had consulted. I am now informed that the Minister has consulted and we have a harmonised position.

However, I would like to assist the Members to recap the key elements of this Bill. The aim of the Budget Bill is to increase budget transparency and to subsequently amend the budget cycle to allow more time for Parliament to scrutinise the budget process.  

A number of developing countries have undertaken budgetary reforms, which have included greater transparency and increased levels of participation. In established democracies, broad budget reforms adopted in recent years have placed emphasis on the availability of information on the budget process, budget decisions and spending outcomes. Some of these countries have implemented laws that guarantee information flow and participation of Parliament as well as the civil society.  

In a country like Uganda, which has taken a centre stage in budget reform, a budget law can be useful for a number of reasons: 1. Greater flow of budgetary information to Parliament and to the public. A Bill such as this will enable increased flow of information relating to budgets from Government to Parliament, and thereafter to the public. They will know how figures are arrived at, how allocations are made et cetera. 

It allows Parliament more time to scrutinise the budget process and policies of programmes in the budget cycle.

Time and again this House has been stampeded into finishing discussions relating to the Budget in a certain time frame. We have sat late in the afternoons, in the mornings, on Sundays and Saturdays because there is a constitutional deadline by which certain actions or decisions related to the Budget must be taken by this House. This Budget Bill will forever regulate the timely supply of information to this House, and as a consequence, we will be in a position to have a programme in which Parliament will consider papers relating to the Budget. 

There is also the strengthening of checks and balances in public institutions. This is one of the components in the Budget Bill. The Budget Bill enables Parliament and the civil society to be able to impose an obligation for value for money audit and regular reporting from Ministry of Finance on the various activities and the performance of the Budget. This is regulated in the Budget Bill.  

It is on those grounds that the Committee on National Economy did develop a Private Member's Bill, and I have the honour and privilege to request this House to pass it for a second reading. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. So, this is the Committee's Bill, and therefore, what you have been presenting is the report of the Committee. Any comment from the chairperson of the Committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Kiraso Beatrice): Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Finance had already presented its report.  Unfortunately, the report had not been debated when the Ministry of Finance requested for time to take the draft Budget Bill to Cabinet. The contents of the report have been summarised by the chairperson of the Committee on the Economy, and what we have now circulated is the harmonised position between the Committee on Finance and the Ministry of Finance. So, I would like to propose that we just proceed with the amendments to the original Bill. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

MR.OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere county, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support this motion, and I support it more importantly because we are debating this Bill towards the end of the term of the Sixth Parliament. This is one of those legislations that we shall leave for the Seventh Parliament, which will be so instrumental in the management of our budgetary process. So, I support the Bill. 

The first contribution I made on the Floor of this House, around the 4th of July 1996, was criticising the method by which we present budgets. And when I read back, I feel satisfied that this Bill will correct some of the anomalies we see. A budget is a plan, a budget puts in place a programme of revenue and expenditure of an organisation, be it a corporate body or a country. So, the budget process must be transparent, must evolve from the stakeholders, and it must be manageable. 

I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance for having heeded to some of our criticism over the last five years, so now the budget process seems to be more open than when we started in 1996. So, this Bill will only enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in presenting realistic budgets, managing our budgets, and ensuring that we put in place those very important aspects of the budget, for example, the budget being a projection, an estimate, and an anticipation of what would be spent over a given period in 12 months. Some of our projections tend to go beyond our means and we would have to strengthen our revenue generation. 

When I look at the current budget process, it lucks the aspect of a bottom-upper approach. We have 53 districts now, soon we are going to have more districts, we may have 60 districts. All these districts are centres where expenditures and revenue collections would be targeted. So, as we pass this Bill, it will be important for us to look at the capacity of these districts. First of all, we have to generate data at the district level. In other words, we must have district planning units, which are effective and which can generate planning at the village level, parish level, sub county level, county level up to district level.  This is very important. 

At the moment, districts do not have the capacity. Districts have only lists of expenditure, lists of their wants, their wishes and aspirations. These are not well generated in terms of the kinds of figures we need. So, this Budget Bill will also put in place certain aspects, where the district must come up with their district plans and district budgets, so that the sum total of the district budgets now becomes the national Budget, because that is what it has to be anyway. In other words, the sum total of the micro budgets at the district level becomes the macro budget of the country. This is essential, and I am sure the Ministry will look at it in that aspect and this Bill will be implemented. 

Secondly, this Bill will help train the Ministry of Finance in managing the budget process. In my view, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development is too large. We need to have a Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for a fiscal and monitory policy, and a Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, which is responsible for the planning aspect. At the moment the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, with Ministers of State manning these sections, is not enough. The Budget Bill should actually aim at decentralising the planning function from fiscal and monitory functions. 

I would like the Minister responsible for this sector to comment on this later on. We should distinguish between the two, the monitory and fiscal functions of this Ministry and the planning and implementation functions. If this is done, we are going to have a better result. A Ministry that is responsible for revenue collection, fiscal policy, and monitory policy will look at those issues and address them.  

The third point is with regard to the actual expenditure.  Currently, we overestimate - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, the rule of 5 minutes is still operating.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was not aware, but allow me to only wind up with two points. The aspect of budgeting adequately is extremely important. As we speak now, if we were to have an audit, we would find that the current budget estimate has surpassed the first quarter, second quarter, third quarter and even fourth quarter in some Ministries. Soon you will ask yourself whether this was really a budget or just a list of wants! So, these are issues, which should be adhered to when we finally pass this Bill.  

My last point is with regard to the need for the Finance officials to be readily available to Parliament. When important Bills like this one are being discussed, you rarely see the implementers. For example, now we do not see the Secretary to the Treasury here, we do not see the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, and we do not see the key people who manage this sector. We do not see them here and yet this is a Bill, which they will have to implement.  Yes, we have the sector Ministers, but these sector Ministers are politicians and tomorrow they will not even be here if they are voted out. The technicians tend to undermine the work of politicians. I do not know what the chairman of this Committee would say about this, because I know these people’s faces, but as I look around I do not see them here. Nevertheless, it is important that the point be driven home.  

I would like to thank the Committee for this Bill, and particularly the mover of the motion, hon. Musumba, a good Friend and a colleague. I would also like to thank all the members of the Committee for having come up with this Bill. I support the motion and at Committee stage I hope I will make some one or two useful contributions so that we have a very good Bill.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBEDE SETH (Bungokho North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. For long the Budget had been the property of Government, but not long ago we went through decentralisation. Formerly, the Budget was at the centre and everything was centralised, but with decentralisation, we created different power centres. These power centres needed to give input on how the resources would be channelled to them, but they have not had this chance, and this Bill seeks to provide that. 

The Budget has always originated from the Government and it has always been a top-down situation, where the citizens never had a chance to participate. It would be extremely good for the citizens, right from the district councils, to have an input. The civil society should also have an input in this so that any Budget that is developed will be by the consensus of everybody, other than having one arm of Government to blame.  

I believe this Bill seeks to involve everybody who has a stake in this country. In fact, when we involve all these societies, eventually these form an overview of what the country’s budget or requirements should look like. All Members here are aware that we have been involved in passing the Budget, but then it perturbs me for Members of Parliament to come and merely pass it and they cannot change anything. This, to me, has really been a mockery of Parliament because you cannot even question, you only have to pass it. So, this Bill is well intended, particularly for Members of Parliament who come to debate on the different Ministries.

Thirdly, if this Bill seeks to help the Members of Parliament, and probably the public to have a say in particularly the supplementary, I will be extremely glad.  Recently we passed a supplementary here, but you cannot imagine, there was a supplementary of 2000 per cent! You wonder what type of budgeting that is. Where on earth can you pass a supplementary of 2000 per cent, but it was here. If anybody is doubting, I challenge him to go back to the supplementaries that we passed here. Statehouse and President’s office had a 2000 per cent increment. It is ridiculous!  

It is because of those issues that I welcome this Budget Bill, which seeks to involve each and every other stakeholder. We have democratised power and politics, let us also democratise our ways of budgeting for our needs.  It does not really serve a purpose for Mbale, with about 5000 civil servants, to be given less of the equalisation grant than a district, which has merely 500 civil servants. It does not serve any purpose! So, when we involve everyone I think it is going to help us a great deal.

I do not want to be warned about time, so that is the humble contribution I had on this Budget Bill. I really thank the chairman, who has fought to bring this as a Private Member’s Bill first and eventually it will become the House’s Bill. I thank you very much, Sir.

MR. BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo county, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to quote the relevant section of the 15-point programme in relation to this Bill.  It is number five, “building an independent, integrated, self sustaining national economy”. You cannot build a national economy without consulting the people. The Constitution says power belongs to the people. Now the people have elected their representatives, and that is why we are here. So, we must discuss the Budget and take the views of the population who have elected us here.  

This particular Bill is now a way forward to achieve and to make another law, which is in the Constitution, the National Planning Authority. We have not done that. My colleague, Okumu Ringa, said we are passing this Bill when our days are numbered. It is true, and the way forward for Uganda and for this nation is to elect the incumbent here for another five years, so that when we come, we just go straight away to implement what was belated rather than bring new people who –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Butele, you are now campaigning! -  (Laughter)

MR. BUTELE: No, I am not campaigning, Mr. Speaker. I am trying to say that it is not late. Definitely, if I had my will, all of us should come back. Having said that, the Budget in the past would be made by individuals, including the ones in the districts –(Interruption).  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the speaker holding the Floor for giving way.  The hon. Butele is hinting on a point of great importance at a time when Uganda is about to elect its fresh leaders.  I would like to seek some clarification from him. By encouraging people to elect the incumbent leadership, is he saying that those who are freshly elected may not be able to implement what has been mandated if it carries a reflection of the people who have elected them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I said we cannot use this Parliament for campaigning. Therefore, for him to give that clarification would mean for him to campaign, and I have said that this is not the proper place for political campaigns. 

MR. BUTELE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that guidance. I was just pressing for continuity. That is all and nothing more. Having said that, if we pass this Bill, it can now involve all of us in budget making process, including Ken Lukyamuzi from Lubaga South.  I thank you.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi county, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute a few words to this Budget Bill. I would like to urge Members of Parliament to take this opportunity to pass this Bill quickly, because I think it is good business. When we entered Parliament, we were very strong on very many issues, including the National Planning Authority and Parliament’s lack of control over the Executive on the Budget. So, the time is now ripe for us to pass this Budget Bill. 

I would like to ask the Committee for a few questions of clarification. We are going to pass this Budget Bill, but are we going to control the donors when they decide to give us 50 or 40 percent of the money, which the Government will have budgeted for? This is the situation! The law is going to say we must do what the Budget Bill is going to dictate. I think we are entering a situation where even if we make these laws, as long as we are dependent on donors, we will still have the problem of how we can actually control our affairs. The fact that donors contribute a substantial amount of money to the Budget of this country puts us in a very precarious situation. This is an area where I would like the chairman of this Committee –(Interruption)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform my good Friend on the Floor that the Budget Bill, when it becomes an Act, will lay down the basic principle of managing a budget. What you are referring to is the source of funding a budget, and that is not the issue. Our concern is the basic principle in managing our Budget.  

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: That is the area I am worried about.  That is why I was asking the chairman to come out clearly in clarifying this. What you are saying is only 50 percent of what I would expect to hear from the chairman. The bringing of this Bill to the Floor is an indication that this Parliament has really tried its best to serve the interest of the people of Uganda. Therefore, I urge all my colleagues to give hon. Isaac Musumba the necessary support so that we achieve this. Much as it is just the first step in a one thousand-kilometre journey, it is a step, which we must take in order to put the economy of this country on the correct path. Thank you for allowing me the time. 

MR. ABURA KENE (Moroto county, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I support it on two grounds, one, the Bill will create transparency. The current situation is that the Minister draws up his speech and brings it to Parliament and reads it after maybe meeting some of the stakeholders, without Members of Parliament knowing what they have discussed. After he has read his speech, we also call the same people to discuss their feelings and the input, which they thought should have been put in the budget. At times we do not know whether what is being put in the Budget or what is being left out, and this, I think, is a waste of time. It should be better with this Bill. This Bill is the right way of correcting this situation.  

I also want to bring out the fact that this will allow the flow of information between Parliament, the Ministry and the stakeholders. This will help Parliament to make practical proposals that can be included in the Budget early enough. The Bill will also help Parliament advise the Minister to reduce on his supplementaries, which are always a problem, as has already been pointed out. Some items have been going over by 200 per cent, although we had agreed with the Minister that the supplementaries should always be three per cent or less than three per cent.  

This law will also help the Parliament scrutinise whether the allocation has been used properly made. Whenever the Budget is brought in, Parliament does not have time to scrutinise whether the allocations have been used properly, but this Bill will allow us, through the Committee, to go through the analysis clearly and see whether the money, which has been allocated, was used properly.  

In conclusion, this Bill will work properly if the National Planning Authority Bill is brought to Parliament. It is through the National Planning Authority that we will see what has been planned for, and this will help us bring out the issues clearly when we discuss. So, the Bill will work properly if the National Planning Authority law is put in place. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

DR. AJEANI YORAMU (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Budget Bill is one of the most important Bills, which this Parliament has to consider. I represent Arua Municipality, and I continue to say that Arua Municipality was one of the 15 district headquarters at the time of independence, but that district is still as black as anything. The white rhino ceased to be white. It became black because of lack of electricity. The road is still a problem for us. Why? Because people’s representatives have not been involved in budget preparations.  

The construction of the Karuma to Arua road or Sironko to Swamu road or construction of any road, be it in Kisoro, Bundibugyo, here in Buganda or elsewhere cannot be done unless it is catered for in the Budget. Government can come and window-dress, carry out feasibility studies, or even open up an account for it, but until there is a budget, nothing will happen, and we are limited by Article 93 of the Constitution. We cannot come here and say, ‘please increase this money for this and that’. Article 93 has restricted us, but when I come and find ‘peanuts’ for electricity development in Karamoja, in West Nile or any part of this country -(Interruption)

MR.MANZI: Mr. Speaker, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, so that I am able to follow and to internalise what we are discussing. When this Bill becomes an Act, does its being put into effect necessarily mean that the resources of the country will increase and, therefore, the resources will be put in the Budget for various programmes? Or is this Bill intended to help the budget process to be orderly and have timetables rather than the allocation of resources. I just want clarification on that, so that I am able to internalise in case I have to reply.

DR.AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister. I am a teacher and some of my students are here in this Parliament right now. I would like to inform the Minister that if he ever got an opportunity to be in my class, he would know that sometimes I decide to think so highly that if you are not thinking like me you drop out.  I was not talking about the forces which will increase the resources of this country. I was thinking about a process, which will give fairness to the allocation of the resources available to the nation. So, I do not see how I could have been misunderstood here if a student was following. That has really detracted me.  

We have problems and these problems are genuine problems.  The Budget is brought to us here to look at, to debate and to approve. We have been here all the time from 1st January to end of the year. Every year, for five years, we are here but why can’t we be involved in the process of deciding which areas are going to be given more priority in a given Ministry? When we are looking at the budget for Agriculture, for example, why can’t the priorities of Agriculture be made available to us so that we can tell the Ministry that this and this could wait but bring this forward? When it comes to Education, why can’t we be involved earlier? 

This Budget Bill, to me, is very important. I know technocrats are there, but we are people’s representatives! A budget is prepared without Ajeani knowing about it, and the people of Arua will ask Ajeani, ‘how come there is no money for electricity for Arua?’ How am I expected to answer the people fairly and give them Government’s view? I am not given the information before a decision is taken! When the Budget is printed, Article 93 does not allow me to talk about it unless I reduce it to zero. Article 93 allows me to reduce it to zero but it does not allow me to increase it -(Interruption) 

CAPT. BABU: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I wish to inform the hon. Member that the Ministry of Energy did bring a policy statement to this House via the Committee on that sector. In that policy statement, the state of rural electrification was clearly spelt out and the problem throughout all the districts in West Nile was discussed thoroughly. I remember that the network plus the problem of the power plant on River Nyagak was discussed in detail. Luckily, the Chairman of that Committee is here. I do agree that there are problems of getting funds for some of these projects, but I do not agree that they were not explained to the Parliament.  These were brought to the Committee and thoroughly discussed. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. KAJARA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to give some information to hon. Ajeani as a follow-up on the information given by the former Minister of State for Energy. The Committee on Natural Resources did complain many times that there were many programmes, including those from West Nile, which had been included in the Budget year in, year out and up to now those programmes have not been put in place. So, the purpose of this Bill will be to scrutinise those programmes and come out with some input, which will be included in the Budget at an opportune time. 

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am winding up, and I would like to thank the hon. Members who have given me information. This time I am not talking about electricity with them. I was just using that as an example. If you could not see the difference between an example and a straightforward complaint, then you have not got my question. You have failed! You will do a supplementary. I was saying that this Budget Bill would help us come close to the Ministries and to the technocrats so that when we bring the Budget on the table for discussion. It will then be something, which we will have done together. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MR.LUKUMU FRED (Bulisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In supporting this Bill, I would like to extend my thanks to hon. Musumba for this innovation. I remember several times I would inquire from hon. Musumba why there has been a delay in bringing this Bill to the House, bearing in mind that the politics of a country is reflected in a nice budget. Indeed, it is the budget that reflects the country’s politics. 

Given that it is through the budget that resource allocation of a nation is effected, it is important that this process takes into account the interests of all the stakeholders. It was actually a contradiction that under the 1997 Local Government Act, the local governments’ budgetary process was so involving. Currently, under the local government budgetary process, all stakeholders participate as provided for by the Local Government Act. But there has been very little transparency at the national level. Participation of stakeholders in the national budgetary process has really been minimal.  

Under this new Bill, I believe the participation of stakeholders will be broadened to the extent that most of the problems, which have plagued this country, will be solved. It has been said over and over again that regional development disparity has been a major cause of instability in Uganda. With the new budgetary process provided for under this Bill, I believe that these problems will be solved, because the manner in which resource allocation in this country has been done has been rather arbitrary. No wonder we lack an institution at national level that would rationally allocate resources. 

It has already been said that the delay in instituting the National Planning Authority has been a failure by the side of Government. I believe that now with the new budgetary process, which will now take off belatedly though, transparency, accountability and the involvement of a cross-section of stakeholders will help enhance the rational resource allocation in this country. Right now, we must agree that development is greatly portioned in favour of some regions against others. And I believe it is the intention of the mover of this motion to ensure that we put in place a mechanism that will address such disparities.  

If we are going to have a harmonious society, we must reflect equity. Inequity is injustice, because we are condemning a section of society to permanent misery if we deny them resources that they need for the betterment of their livelihood. Although this Bill is late, it will enhance institution building. The legislature will be there with or without the current Members of this House. Even if we may not be Members of the next Parliament, we would like to see resource allocation in this country rationally done. Of course, this is not to say that Members have really expired, I believe that you still have the vigour and the capacity to serve, especially given the experience and innovations that you have demonstrated. I believe that this country will benefit a great deal if this Bill is passed with all the amendments and innovations from Members of this House. I would like to thank the Government for making this possible. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KAJARA ASTON (Mwenge South, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support this motion moved by the Chairperson of the Committee on the National Economy. In supporting the motion, I would like to say that this Bill will provide and regulate the budgetary procedure which has hitherto been lacking. It will also introduce a systematic and efficient budgetary process, which in my view, has been lacking. 

The Budget as defined in this Bill is a process by which Government sets levels of efficient collection of revenue and allocation of spending of resources among the sectors.  If there has not been an efficient way or a systematic way of arriving at that process, then we would as well say that the budgeting process has been wrong all along. Without a systematic, efficient and regulated way of budgeting, I could as well say that there have been some areas that have been cheated in this budgeting process.  

If this Bill is passed into an Act, it will assist this country in what my colleagues have called allocation of resources to sectors to meet national objectives. We know that that the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for equitable and rational distribution and allocation of national resources. Without this Bill in place, I can as well say that there has been misallocation of resources to some sectors. Hon. colleagues have complained about some areas or sectors being suffocated in terms of resource allocation, while other areas, even at the end of the Financial Year, have balances of resources on their budgets. This has really been a very big problem to this country. 

For the first time, the people’s representatives will be enabled to participate in the budgetary process and move away from being rubber stamps. In the past, Parliament was not allowed even to increase a cent in the budgets already provided by the Ministries. The technocrats in the Ministry of Finance would sit down and decide for the people and they would decide in an irrational way. So, for the first time, this information will come to the Budget Committee in time and it will be looked at, it will be scrutinised, and advice will be given. 

They will advise on the allocation of resources and I think in that way this country will achieve a rational and equitable distribution of resources. They will also advise on the efficient collection of taxes, because hitherto, Government brings in policies which the Members of Parliament have not had a chance to advise them on. So, I urge Members to support the enactment of this Bill so that the processes that I have already enumerated can be achieved. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS.BAKOKO BAKORU (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support this motion. It is very important that we have a Standing Committee in Parliament, which is going to look at the budget process. For the last five years, each time we have debated the Budget in this House, Members have been lamenting and bringing out their grievances on the inequalities of the budget allocation to the different sectors. This year, I remember Members discussing the very meagre resources the Ministry of Gender was getting. We also have the vital statistics. In this country there has been no registration of births and deaths, although we have a law to the effect in place, which I believe dates back to the 1930s. The entire system has broken down in this country, and without information and data in this country, we cannot allocate our resources equitably.

We are a proud country. We talk about democracy and a democratisation process, but I believe that when we stand here and pass budgets every year, we do not analyse those budgets. People talk about engendering the Budget, but if you look at the Ministry of Gender or reproductive health in the health sector, how much resource goes there? The mothers are the ones who deliver the future leaders of this nation. How many resources go to the vital department of registration? 

This is going to build capacity in the Parliament. It is going to help Members make decisions during the budget process from an informed position. I also believe that this is going to be a process that will help Members and the country to reduce corruption. Everybody is standing up and politicking on the ticket of corruption. They are saying this because we do not have data. We do not have information flowing down to people so that they are able to understand how the budgeting process has been going on.  Monies have been allocated to Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health, but people down there are crying. They have not received services. So, I hope this is going to create a bridge between the political leadership, the Executive and the technical people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. MUKULA GEORGE (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Bill as the Seconder of the original motion. This Bill is long overdue, and I would like to sincerely thank the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has worked round the clock to Table this Bill and its report before Parliament.  

In political science, lesson number one, which is always quite clear, is that politics is about the allocation of resources. It is about where you allocate the resources, who you allocate the resources to, how you allocate the resources, and at what time.

This Bill answers a major political question, which has been dogging this Parliament. It is quite clear that there have been very serious shortfalls in revenue inflows, but there have also been very serious shortfalls in the allocation of resources. An example of this is in the Ministry of Agriculture. In the last two to three years, revenue inflows in terms of export earnings from fish have dropped. But you would also note that at one time Government and the Department of Fisheries were seeking for about 150,000 dollars just to buy a certain effective, necessary equipment to ensure that the fish sector is handled properly.  

At one point when we had the Minister of Fisheries appear before the Committee on National Economy, we were shocked to learn that it had a very meagre allocation of resources from Government, only Shs. 57 million. The budgetary projections in terms of revenue from the fisheries sector were about US $100 million. You could see the bare disparity and the imbalance in the allocation of resources in a very critical sector. This is where Government would be able to earn revenue in terms of export earnings, and one way or the other, ensure that they would be levelled revenue inflow of foreign exchange to balance the equation. 

It is also quite clear that the placement of the budgetary office in Parliament now helps the various Committees in Parliament to articulate from an informed position. I take note, for example, of the fuel sector where fuel on the international market has dropped from 35 dollars per barrel to now less than 28 dollars a barrel, and yet the reduction on the fuel pump price has only come down by 40 Uganda shillings. This is negligible! It does not reflect the global reduction on the international market and on the amount of foreign exchange that we are talking about. 

If we are tackling production and distribution, which will be centred on fighting poverty, so long as the cost of production and distribution remains high, you will find that it is difficult for us to fight poverty as it were.  For example, in areas like Teso, it has been very difficult to implement the disarmament resolution of Parliament, because the allocation of resources, as Parliament had pronounced, has not been made. As such, we have found it very difficult, especially the Minister of Internal Affairs and the relevant organs of the State like the Ministry of Defence, to ensure that there are enough resources to disarm the Karimojong as it were.

There should be a cross flow and a linkage between the budget office and the planning authority. I play that Government also brings the National Planning Authority Bill so that the circuit can be completed. This would also help, because I now get alarmed when I hear some presidential aspirants promising rivers and bridges where there is dry land. It is very alarming to hear some presidential aspirants making very statements, and promising people and arousing their emotions on issues where revenue has not been articulated.  I see all this as hot air.  

I would like to conclude by saying that we should have a regulated and well planned economy. We should have a budget that can be able to fit the ideals and the challenges of this country, the revenue of this country, and the expenditure. I think this Budget Bill answers that question. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, this Budget Bill has taken some time and we have had a lot of consultations between the Committees. We carried out of consultations with the Committee on National Economy, which brought the Bill, and the Committee of Finance, which was discussing the Bill. We also had consultations with Cabinet, and Cabinet has, in general terms, agreed with most of the provisions of this Bill, except probably clause 18. I believe we shall propose an amendment on that one. But we have agreed on quite a number of things relating to this Bill.  

I do agree and appreciate that when there is general debate, Members may be allowed to say whatever they want to say, but surely, you should not create a situation where things look like they are going out of hand when they are not. For instance, there is an impression being created that when you pass this Budget Bill and it becomes an Act, there will be some planning and actually there has not been any planning at all. I do not believe so, because as we talk now, we are operating on a three-year cycle, and Members are aware of this. So, a Budget is really a one-year piece out of a programme that is on going. And the programme is normally set by the Leader of Government who is Chief Executive. 

In a democratic system, where you have an elected President, the President has a manifesto and has a programme that he intends to achieve in five years. It is that programme that is actually converted into a Government programme for the period that that President is in power. And each year, you take a piece of that programme and implement it. Therefore, there is actually planning. There is planning in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, notwithstanding the non-availability of the National Planning Authority. It is not this Bill, therefore, which is going to create a planning mechanism.

Secondly, to divorce the fiscal and monitory functions of the Ministry of Finance from the planning functions of the Ministry might be reasonable. However, - (Interruption) 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. The hon. Minister in charge of Privatisation is talking about some things of great importance, namely the phenomenon of planning. When we talk about planning, we mean so many things. In the line of economics vis-à-vis finance in Uganda, what is the section of planning doing today in the Ministry? What is its focus?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the relevancy of that here?  Please, proceed.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful for that guidance. You really need a treatise or a whole paper on planning to answer that question. Nevertheless, I said that there is a planning section in the Ministry and planning is going on even now. In fact, even the hon. Member has read all these documents. We have Vision 2025, which is a programme that Government has put across on how we want Uganda to be in the year 2025. Each year we have to take away a piece in order for us to achieve that programme.  

As I said, it is possible and it is important to distinguish fiscal and monetary functions of the Ministry with the planning function, but it is not necessarily the case that the two should be in two different Ministries. I think all you need is to have both of them efficient. Planning cannot really exist without the fiscal and the monitory functions, because the plan must be funded. 

My understanding is that the civil society was being contacted in all our efforts to budget. I know because I have been chairman of the Committee and we have always called members of the public to come and give their views to these Committees. The civil society has been involved through the organisations. If this Budget Bill increases that contact, it will be welcome and it will be very good.  

I am really not aware of what hon. Wambede was talking about, but to make records clear, I wish to ask hon. Wambede to bring in the statistics. I would like him to tell us whether there was any programme in this country, out of the 105 programmes we have in Government, whose budget was given a supplementary of 2000 per cent. Because that means, if that programme had 2/= billion for the year, it ended up being 40/= billion. If it was 5/= billion, it ended up being 100/= billion. I do not remember any such supplementary. 

I have checked the total increases in supplementaries for the last year, and it was 110/= billion out of a budget of 1.8/= trillion, which is less than 9 per cent. Most of this was a technical supplementary. The non-technical supplementary was approximately 5 per cent, which was just one and half per cent, 1.8 per cent above our programme of 3 per cent.  So, for hon. Wambede to come and say that there were programmes, which increased by 2000, we really need figures and that impression should completely be wiped out. Otherwise, the Appropriation Bill, which we passed here, which is now the Supplementary Appropriation Act, shows that the supplementary we gave was 110/= million – (Interruption). 

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, may I request hon. Manzi to give me time. I will provide him with the supplementary estimates vote by vote. Overall, it may seem that we spent 9 per cent, but when you go department by department, they confirm otherwise. So, may I request him to give me time? I will provide him with that.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I really needed the example, because the Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2000 was brought here and debated. I am not going to read it vote by vote, but the total supplementary, both recurrent and development, was 110,513,607,000/=.  Maybe one of the highest supplementaries we gave was to Ministry of Foreign Affairs, because we had to facilitate some staff and we had to pay off some big bills. It was 11/= billion. Now, he said State House was the biggest, but it had a 20 billion budget and the supplementary was 5/= billion. That is 25 percent. It is not 2000 percent.  So, I want to really clear that impression that this Government has been budgeting for a 2000 percent supplementary as if they were oblivious of the actual budget.

Finally, I want to dispel the impression created by hon. Mukula, that when the price of a barrel of crude falls by six dollars, then the petrol companies should necessarily reduce the prices by that much. It is not true. A barrel is 159.3 litres, if you reduce that by six dollars, effectively each litre has gone down by four American cents. Four American cents is equal to approximately 70 Uganda shillings. But that is notwithstanding the transportation from the place where you have got the crude oil and also the processing fee. So, when the price of a barrel falls by six dollars, and you reduce the price by 50 shillings, I think that should be commendable. We should commend the companies that are doing so, rather than say that they should have done a little bit more. I think arithmetic is really very important in matters of finance.  I thank you.

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA (Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank you very much. I want to thank Members of Parliament for supporting this motion. You have heard speaker after speaker. They came out strongly to support this motion, because it is understood that with the passing of the Budget Act, we shall see Parliament being more empowered in matters of both the procedure and substance of budgeting.  

I want to thank the hon. chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Finance, who worked tirelessly to ensure that the aspirations of the Committee are translated into a Bill. I also want to thank Government, Members of Cabinet, the Prime Minister and others on the Front Bench, who thought it wise to support this Bill and who understood that together we should be able to achieve a more meaningful process of allocation of resources.   

Finally, hon. Members, as we go to vote and as we go to discuss the clauses in this Bill, let us know that it is to all those who concern us that we, Members of Parliament, are going to legislate this Act.  It is the biggest victory if it is passed for this Parliament.  I thank you.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. I will now put the question that the Bill be read the Second Time. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUDGET BILL, 2000

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, after realising the quorum, I do not think we should go away. Let us dispose of this business, because if we go away, then I will have a problem with the Third Reading.

Clause 1

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, just for record, I wanted to know whether you are looking at the original Bill or whether you are looking at the new one. There were too many amendments and new clauses, so what we have circulated actually encompasses all the amendments. We have almost made a new Bill. So, maybe for easy expediency, I will –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am looking at the Bill, which got the First Reading and the Second Reading. You may make amendments, but I use the gazetted document. That is the one, which was read here. But you are free to bring in amendments if you so wish.

MISS KIRASO: The amendment to clause 1 is to insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: 
“This Act shall come into effect on the 1st day of July 2001.”

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, this Bill has been slated many times in the Order Paper and today we were not sure that it would appear. And it appears that all Members do not have the original Bill. I seek your guidance as to whether we could proceed without Members having access to those Bills.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First of all, hon. Member, there was a motion for the Second Reading followed by a general debate, and you were the first person who made a contribution to the general debate and you supported it. This means that you understood it. A motion was put forward for you to decide whether that the Bill gets the Second Reading, now it puzzles me when you say that you do not have the Bill for which a Second Reading has been given. I suggest we proceed.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to say something about the date. I am a Member of the Committee, but after reflection, if the Bill comes into effect on 1st July, it means that this Bill will not apply to the next Budget. I would like the two chairpersons to reflect and maybe change the date to 1st April or 1st January 2001. Otherwise, this will make it difficult for the next Budget to be subjected to this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hasn’t the process of getting estimates for the next Budget started? -(Interjection)- I see, the idea is that the process has started, so it may not be for us to implement the provisions of this law. Let the next Parliament deal with this law, but let us pass the law. I think that is the idea.

Clause 1 as amended, agreed to

Clause 2

MS. KIRASO: In this clause there is just a grammatical error. We would like to add “s” to the word “require” so that it reads, “requires”.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 2 – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There could be many amendments, why don’t we dispose of this first?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: It is the only one from the Committee under clause 2 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, it is the only one from the Committee and you have yours, you free to bring it, but why don’t we finish this one and then bring in the other?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Would there be a recommittal, Mr. Chairman? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I have not yet put the question to the entire clause. I am going to now put the question to the amendment by the chairperson of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that in the interpretation clause, we introduce other terms, which have been commonly used by the Ministry of Finance.  For instance, we could have the interpretation for ‘supplementary provision’, and it is referred to under Clause 12 sub-clause (1), (2) and (3). We could also provide for the interpretation of ‘technical supplementary’, because this word has been used many times in our discussions on the Budget. We should provide for it so that whoever is reading knows what a technical supplementary is. 

Lastly, we could provide for the interpretation for ‘Appropriation in Aid’, which is referred to under clause 17 sub-clause (1).  I feel that these are very important terminologies, which would require interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have identified the terms, but have you made the definition of these terms?  

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, those definitions come in the Finance Act. They will come in the Finance Act and not in this particular one - (Interjections)- Yes, they are there.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we are trying to show what this Act is about. It is the Budget Act. That is why we highlight the word ‘Budget’. We did not want to mix it up and bring in all the other terms, which are already interpreted in other laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The problem we have, hon. Okumu Ringa, is that you do not have the definitions, which you want to attach to those terms. So, how can we proceed with the amendment?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, with all fairness, you have not asked me to provide the interpretation. If the principle is agreed on, I will provide interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not for me to do. You are the one moving and therefore, if you move, you come with your amendments.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I beg to move, Mr. Chairman, that ‘supplementary provisions’ means ‘expenditure over and above -(Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I would like us to be coherent.  Clause 2 reads: “In this Act, unless the context otherwise require…” The Budget is referring to this Act.

MR.MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr. Chairman, I appreciate what hon. Okumu Ringa is advancing. It is true that the terms that he is seeking to have defined here have already been defined in other statutes. Now, if we take the interpretation, which he wants us to include now, there is a strong likelihood that there will be inconsistency between what we are putting in this law and what exists in the relevant finance laws. All these terms, without exclusion, are in the public Finance Act. So I pray that he concedes and we proceed. If for any reason he is dissatisfied, we will address it in the parent Act. I thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Well, Mr. Chairman, in view of lack of support for this particular matter, I withdraw grudgingly.  Thank you.

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to

Clause 3

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend clause 3(2) by replacing the words “periods exceeding one year” with “periods exceeding three years”. The purpose for this is to be specific and ensure that there is a time frame.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3 as amended, agreed to

Clause 4

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we would like to propose a new clause 4 (1), which will read as follows: “The President shall, not later than the 1st day of April in each Financial Year, cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament a three years macro economic plan and programmes for the economic and social development in preparation for the final submission under section 3.”  

There is also clause 4(2), which should read as follows: “The President shall, not later than the 1st day of April in each Financial Year and in preparation for final submission under section 3, cause to be submitted and laid before Parliament, indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next Financial Year, including preliminary estimates of Government departments, institutions, organizations and commissions.”  
This is a new clause, Mr. Chairman. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification the difference in between the words ‘indicative’ and ‘preliminary.’  I thought indicative would mean that it is definite revenue but an indication that that is what you are going to use for planning. In that sense, it is also preliminary. Do you need both words? And indicative would be a little more technical than preliminary, which is over used. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, on the timeframe of three years, since this is a law, why are we tying it to a three years macro economic plan? Is there a need to put a time frame or could we just leave it open? Tomorrow if the National Planning Authority comes into place, it may come with another planning time frame. So, I seek clarification on that. Why three years? 

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The three years is based on the medium term expenditure framework, what they call the MTEF, which Government today develops on a rolling basis. Government today has a medium term expenditure framework of three years, and it keeps rolling. As you take one year off, it goes on for another three years to ensure that this programme is carried through. 

So, it is this programme that we want to have access to, and it is this programme that we are going to pit against the revenues available and the budget for a particular year. This is not withstanding the fact that we shall still be entitled to access the broader vision of 20-25, that is the broader planning process from the National Planning Authority, whenever it comes. This is the concrete period in which expenditure for one year is based. That is how we arrived at the three years.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am still not convinced with the timeframe. We could just mention that this will be for a stipulated period instead of stipulating the timeframe in this particular provision. Maybe the Minister should convince us as to why it must be three years.  

Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee: Mr. Chairman, first of all there is long term planning. Long term planning can be for five to ten years, and then you can have a vision, which can be from ten to twenty years.  There is also a budget, which is a one-year cycle. Now, three years is medium term in the sense that you can easily focus on what is likely to take place, given the parameters, within a short period of about two to three years. 

Now if this is 2000, three years is good enough for even Parliament to know what to expect in 2003 and therefore know how to plan the whole programme. In this country, we have got Governments that run for five years. If you talk about five years, then you have a problem, because you cannot change a little bit in the course of those years.  But then, three years gives you three years of planning and a roll of another three years, which comes up to elections and slightly beyond and after that the other Government comes into place and begins its own programmes.  

That was basically the reason and I think it is reasonable for us to have a timeframe. If you do not put a timeframe, then there is no reason why Ministry of Finance should talk about a Budget year and stop there, because after all there is no time frame. I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understand the arguments put forward by the hon. Minister. Unfortunately we have already adopted other provisions in which three years have been mentioned. This is a long-term law!  Supposing in future we adopt other planning periods? I think it is very safe to use this. If we do not want to use the word “long term”, which may mean five years and beyond, why don’t we just use “medium term plan”, so that it is free for anybody who comes within four years or two years to just fit in? We could use that rather than a specified number of years, and somebody in future will come with a different planning period.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now want to put the question to the proposed amendment by the Committee.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I had also suggested that we delete the term “preliminary” but the Madam has not yet responded as to whether it is acceptable to her or otherwise. For the second portion, I move that we use the word ‘medium term’ instead of specifying the years.  

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, you put the question – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have not yet. He is proposing to delete a certain word. Maybe I will first put the question on that one and then when we dispose of it, we shall come to the main amendment.  

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We must be specific. If we are not specific, the purpose and intention of the whole Bill will be lost. In future, they find something which is antagonising them and they will have a right to amend.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I will now put the question to the amendment by hon. Okulo Epak.

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to the amendment as moved by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4 as amended, agreed to

Clause 5

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, the former clause 4 has now become clause 5. So, the clause 5 we are talking about is what was clause 4 in the old Bill, and we would like to move an amendment to sub-clause 2 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe in order not to confuse the Members, we shall assume that what we were dealing with was a new clause, which preceded this one, but we continue with this one and the technical people will definitely renumber. Don’t you think so? They may get confused with what they have in their Bills, but let us understand that we have dealt with a new four. 

MS. KIRASO: The amendment is to clause 5(2) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 5 (2), which is really clause 4 in the Bill. We dealt with clause 4 and we are merely repeating “4” for the purposes of assisting people to follow, but we know it is going to be clause 5.

MS. KIRASO: Clause 4(2) in the book now reads as follows: “Estimates prepared under subsection (1) by any Department, Institution, Organisation or Commission established under the Constitution shall be laid before Parliament by the President under sections 3 and 4 but estimates by bodies established under the Constitution shall be laid without amendments however they may have recommendations made by Government.”  

The same meaning has been retained, but this one is more focused. It shows the difference between these bodies established under the Constitution.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4 as amended, agreed to

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This clause 5 will become clause 6. We know that.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 5, which is now clause 6, we would like to amend sub clause (1) by inserting “preliminary” before “estimates” in line 3. It would now read as follows:
“6(1) Each Minister shall cause to be prepared and submitted to Parliament a Policy Statement of the relevant Ministry on the preliminary estimates by the President under clauses 3 and 4 not later than the 30th of June, in each year.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5 as amended, agreed to.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I had renumbered mine in the old Bill so that it is easy for me to follow. So, we had deleted Clause 6(2) and inserted a new clause to read as follows:
“A Policy Statement made under sub-clause (1) shall be in a form prescribed by the Minister responsible for Finance and shall reflect specific data on value for money and the extent of achievement of the objective targets on money received and spent”.  I started with the justification, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we amend Clause 7(1) to reads as follows:
“The Speaker shall commit the indicative allocations to the Parliament Budget Committee and to each Sessional Committee of Parliament that part of the preliminary estimates that falls within its jurisdiction immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates to Parliament by the President and the Departments.”  

The reasoning behind this was to include the Budget Committee and give the process a timeframe. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I have a bit of a problem with the amendment and with the original provision. I wish to propose that we omit the part, which refers to the Sessional Committee. I think that is something that should be provided for within the Rules of Parliament rather than within the Legislation. 

We could just say, “The Speaker shall commit the indicative allocations to the Parliament Budget Committee immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates by the President and the Departments.”  The Sessional Committee part can come in the Rules of Parliament. That is a process within Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t we say, “Appropriate Committee” rather than “Sessional Committee”? The indication here is that there may be many Committees to which these are submitted, so we could refer to the appropriate committees of Parliament.

MR. RUZINDANA: I agree to “… other appropriate Committees of Parliament”. I agree!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there is an amendment by hon. Ruzindana, to instead put “appropriate Committee”.  I will now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we would like to propose amendments to 7(2), (3) and (4). I think I will read all of them.

Clause 7(2) will read: “Each Sessional Committee shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to it under subsection (1) and submit its report to the Budget Committee of Parliament not later than the 25th day of April”.

7(3) will read: “The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the Sessional Committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May in each year”.

7(4) will read: “In the exercise of their function under this section, Committees of Parliament may call a Minister or any person holding a public office and private individuals to submit their memoranda or appear before it to give evidence”.  

I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have heard you using the word “Sessional Committee”. That presupposes that there will be consequential amendments by the technical staff?  Has that been made with the view that the appropriate staff will make consequential amendments? Because I think we are avoiding the use of the words “Sessional Committee”.

MS. KIRASO: I concede to that, Mr. Chairman. We change that to “appropriate Committee”.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, my amendment was intended to avoid the problem of other Committees reporting to another Committee of Parliament. I think it poses a bit of a problem for some Committees to report to a Committee of Parliament. How do they do it? I thought we should leave all these internal mechanisms to the Rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairperson, what we can do is approve the principle behind your amendments, but on understanding that our technical staff will take into account the amendment which he made, so that we do not have a conflict.  Isn’t that the proper way to do it?

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am a bit worried about leaving everything to the technical staff. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In that case, why don’t we stop here and do it ourselves? I think you want us to do it ourselves.

MR. ONGOM: I was suggesting that, if there is an amendment to be made, it is better for us to make it here. The technical staff may play about with the wording and so on, but the actual substance of the amendment should be made here, so that we are sure of what we are leaving behind.  When it goes to the technical staff, it will never come back to us before it is printed. So, we cannot correct any mistakes made there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, in that case, hon. Members, don’t you think the chairperson will require some time to synchronise what you have said?

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I am yet to fully understand hon. Ruzindana’s concern that there would be Committees of Parliament reporting to others. The Sessional Committee on Agriculture, for example, looks at the Budget for Agriculture and the Sessional Committee for Works looks at the Budget for roads. After each Sessional Committee has looked at this and made its recommendations, the understanding was that we need a central place. 

We are talking about one Budget. We need a central place where we can say, ‘what you have visualised for agriculture is not possible, because works has this view’ and so on. So, we thought that this Budget Committee would be the place for everybody to pool their recommendations together so that they are aligned in light with what is available in the national resource envelope, which can then be sent to the Speaker.

In fact, during the formulation of this, there were a lot of people who thought that maybe the Budget Committee should be constituted of all chairpersons of the Sessional Committees, because you are all making recommendations on one pot or one piece of cake. For each of you to make recommendations without a place to centralise them, will send mixed signals to the Ministry of Finance or to the President. That is why we thought the Budget Committee should be there and all these Sessional Committees, after they have made their recommendations, would go there and each case would be looked at in light of what is available and recommendations would be made.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I see your point, but we are avoiding the term “Sessional Committee” because Parliament, under its internal arrangement, used another committee, which is not a Sessional Committee. You may use a sessional committee or any other committee, and that is why he wanted to use the word “appropriate committee”, depending on internal arrangement. 

Your point is that after these various appropriate committees have scrutinised this, they should report to a one central committee, which should make a final report. In view of this, don’t you think that we need time, maybe an hour or so, to look through this and then find a clear position? But my worry is that if I suspend the proceedings I may have a problem of getting you back - (Laughter) 

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, you do not need to suspend the proceedings. We can leave this Clause and we shall work out the appropriate wording together.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us move on. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, the thrust of the two clauses is that when parliamentary committees have reviewed, scrutinised, and discussed they send back these recommendations to the President by 15th of May. So, I do not think the important thing is really to bring the Rules of Procedure of Parliament into the law. We are trying to say that when they have looked at these preliminary estimates, what happens next? We send them back to the President, before the President reads the Budget on 15th of June. And he has got to be given enough time to see whether the recommendations need further discussion or can be incorporated into the national Budget.  

So, I was going to propose that we do not stay over it, but that the two paragraphs actually be merged and we get one sub clause that would now read: "The comments and recommendations made on the allocations shall be submitted to the President by the 15th day of May each year".  

About how it happened, or who discusses them and who submits them should be left to Parliament. The Speaker would have received them, there would have been discussions, and any recommendations would be made and sent back to the President. Why should we put the procedures of Parliament in this law when they could be comfortably catered for under the Rules of Procedure?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, that is the idea which I had. Once you put it in the law that certain committees submit reports to the Budget Committee, and now that we have seen that we can be challenged in court, once no report has been seen, then we could easily say the other committees never actually submitted reports according to the law. That is the problem I see here.  

Two, what is the procedure of submitting these reports?  Does the chairman of a sessional committee go to this other committee and submit a report like we do here in Parliament? I think these are internal matters, which we can regulate. Let us give power to the Budget Committee and the rest will be done within our own procedures.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, now what do you want me to do with this?  

MR. RUZINDANA: We leave it and we shall harmonise with the chairperson.

Clause 8

MS. KIRASO: Clause 8 has been re-drafted to read as follows: “There shall be presented to Parliament by the Budget Committee the recommendations submitted to the Speaker under section 7(3)”. I beg to move.

CAPT BABU: Mr. Chairman, reading this carefully, I see that it is within our Rules. I really do not see why we should repeat it here, because the Rules are very clear on how Parliament operates. So, I would like to request that clause 8 be stood over and it should be considered with clause 7, and if possible, they should be moved to the Rules. That is the internal working of this House. Thank you.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you read ahead, you will find that even clause 9 is tied up with that because we are reporting to committees and then back to Parliament.  I think the chairperson and those concerned should consider clauses 7, 8 and 9 together, because they are all tied up with the process.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I think we will go by hon. Ongom’s advice and consider them together since they are within our Rules of Procedure.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I think we are losing the major element or the thrust of this law. Among other things, this law is supposed to set a timetable that binds even this House, to ensure timely dealings with matters that relate to the Budget. We want to ensure that the way Parliament has been stampeded before because of late delivery of this documents, even the delay in sessional committees, is avoided. The Speaker comes here and asks whether a committee is ready and the committee is not ready, and as a consequence, we end up having 48 hours in which to pass the Budget or otherwise cause a constitutional crisis.  

This is a timetable where we put dates. The whole thing is based on a timetable that says from this stage, we will go to another stage, which will lead us to another step, which will come by some date, and finally we should be able to deliver a budget by such and such a date. So if you remove this, we will have the same confusion we have been having in the past.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that I want to agree with hon. Musumba, whose name appeared on the original Bill. You remember that there was a lot of oscillation between the Executive and Parliament on this Bill. This was what I considered, one of the contentious issues. The issue was whether to agree on whether we wanted to do things on time, because the practice here is that things are just left to take their own course. 

When we discussed this, we felt that we really needed to timetable everything. Now, my only problem is how to harmonise the wording to ensure that we are not tied down by the technicalities that would take us to a court of law.  Otherwise, I am very comfortable with the timetable. I think it is really critical and necessary for this Parliament to make sure that all of us really work according to a schedule, knowing that time never waits for us. I thank you.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, in that regard, I still go back to what hon. Ongom recommended to this House, that we sit down during lunch time and re-consider the position. We can change the wording so that we are not challenged, but keep the timetable in the law. I do not see any problem with that, because once we put something here, which we cannot implement after today, it is as if something has not happened, then what do we do? So, I propose that we stand over those clauses and we go to clause 10.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that House do resume.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered part of the Bill entitled “The Budget Bill, 2000” up to clause 6 and stood over clause 7, 8 and 9. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a convenient time to allow those concerned to reconcile the provision so that we can move ahead. But I appeal to you and others who are not here to please come back on time so that we can dispose of this particular business. 

I have also been advised that there is a new Member, who has been elected, and he wants to join us and to bring his wisdom to this House. So, we shall adjust a little and administer the Oath and then continue with the business.  So, the proceedings are suspended until 3.00 p.m.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.37 p.m)

(On resumption at 3.34 p.m, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr. Katende Ssematiko Gordon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On behalf of Parliament, hon. Katende Ssematiko, I welcome you to Parliament. You have come when the life of Parliament is about to end, but we hope we shall benefit from your wisdom. You are most welcome. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUDGET BILL, 2000

Clause 7

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I wish to report that the Members who were given the responsibility of reconciling the views of different Members on this issue have agreed to retain 7 (1) as it is. The fears of hon. Ruzindana will be addressed in clause 19 when we reach there. 

So, 7 (1) as previously amended reads as follows: “The Speaker shall commit the indicative allocations to the Parliament Budget Committee and to each appropriate committee of Parliament that part of the preliminary estimates that falls within its jurisdiction immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates to Parliament by the President and the Departments.”  

Clause 2, Mr. Chairman, also remains important. We have removed the word “Sessional”, and it will read as follows: “Each Committee shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to it under subsection (1) and report to the Budget Committee of Parliament not later than 25th of April”.  

Clause 7(3) will read as follows: “The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the Sessional Committees and submit the recommendations to the Speaker who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May in each year.”  

Clause 7(4) will read as follows: “In the exercise of their function under this section, Committees of Parliament may call a Minister or any person holding a public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before it”.  
I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to

Clause 8

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, in the reconciled position, we have also agreed that we delete clause 8. So, I would like to move that clause 8 in the circulated amendments be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we have agreed that we retain clause 9, as we remove the word “Sessional” before “Committees”. So, it shall read as follows:  
“There shall be presented to Parliament by the Committees the reports on the budget estimates that fall within their respective jurisdictions by the 31st day of August in each Financial Year”.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, the clause 10 in the old Bill has been catered for under clause 20, which is the establishment of the budget office. But there is a new clause 10 in the document, which we have circulated, and it reads as follows: “Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after its coming into effect.”  

This idea came up because we have found it hard to implement Bills that we have previously passed here because of the financial implications. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, your motion is to delete the original clause and substitute it with this new one. 

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a bit of a problem with clause 10.  I am not sure that every Bill will land itself into this requirement of indicative financial implications. There are some Bills, which are purely technical, and they may not really need much outlay in terms of money, apart from the drafting of the Bill itself.  Why should that kind of Bill have a requirement to come with some estimates for the next two or three years?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: An example is the Land Act. We passed many good ideas in the Land Act, but the financial implication has been a hurdle, and it has not been effected. If a Bill comes here and there is no financial implication, then we shall say that there is no financial implication. It is only useful for us to know the costing aspect of it. So, there will be no harm really.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is actually important for the financial implications to be analysed, and if there is no financial implication, it will get a nil cost certificate. Even in Cabinet now, if you are going to present a Bill, then you must also pass through Ministry of Finance and get a certificate to show that actually we shall be able to implement it financially.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Chairman, if the position is as the Minister has explained, then we still need this clause, perhaps with the words, “if any” inserted after “implications”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we shall put that. I will now put the question to the amendment to delete the original clause and substitute it with the new one that has been improved on by hon. Etiang.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10 as amended, agreed to

Clause 11

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 11 in the old Bill has been transferred. The functions of the budget office are now being catered for under clause 21. So, I would like to propose to the House that the new clause 11 reads as follows: “Parliament shall analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the National Budget and the economy and where necessary, recommend alternative approaches to Government.”  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I take it that the proposal is to transfer the current clause 11 to somewhere else and insert a new provision, which you have read?

MS KIRASO: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11 as amended, agreed to

Clause 12

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, the Committee recommended that we delete clause 12 in the old Bill and replace it –(Interjections)- there is clause 12 in the old Bill because when we inserted a new clause 4, clause 11 became 12. So, we move that the original 11, which now reads 12, be deleted and replaced as follows: “12(1) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved Budget for that Financial Year without prior approval of Parliament.  

(2) Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.  

(3) Any inter-ministerial or departmental re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation of all the relevant Ministries, Departments, Institutions or Organisations.”   I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you mean three per cent of the total Budget or three per cent, say of a Ministry, because these supplementaries are for different purposes? 

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we have been approving supplementaries, which include technical transfers. That is why we have been specific here. We are saying the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources that are over and above the money, which has already been approved, excluding the technical transfers.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I just want to comfort you. We are talking about three per cent of the total approved Budget. So, when we approve say 800 million, it is three per cent of that that we are looking at. 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, somewhere in the middle of clause 12(2) it reads, “supplementary estimates showing the sums spend.”  It should be “spent” and not “spend”.  

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. I see that this clause is dealing with the supplementary expenditure on budgeted resources. I would like the chairperson to clarify to me where resolutions of Parliament, which have got a cost on the consolidated fund, are catered for in the Bill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, maybe I should read clause 12(1) again for clarity. It says, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved Budget for that Financial Year without prior approval of Parliament.”  

In other words, if in the most likely event the Government thinks it is going to go beyond three per cent, then they will come back to Parliament and let Parliament know that because of the resolution, which you have passed in this Parliament, or because of war, which has broken out in this place, or because of Ebola, or because of whatever reason they are going to go beyond three per cent. That is why this rider is there in the last sentence.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank the Chairperson for that explanation. I am still confused by the implications of clause 12(1) and (2). 12(1) asks for prior approval of Parliament and then 12(2) says that where monies are expended as indicated under subsection (1), the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament. Now I do not understand. If there is prior approval, what then is the reason for laying of the sums before Parliament?

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, I think it is a constitutional requirement that when there has been a supplementary expenditure, within four months of that expenditure being made, it should be reported to Parliament. That is what I am talking about. I am talking about the three per cent.  Instead of waiting for us to pass it after six months or eight months like we did last time, within four months after the money has been spent, this Parliament should have a report on the three per cent, because anything beyond three per cent, Parliament will have known.  

MR. WACHA: Sorry, but I do not have a copy of the Constitution here, but maybe the Minister could help. I thought that the reason for laying the sums before Parliament was because there were instances where supplementary expenditure was expended without Parliament having any input on it.

MR. MANZI: Mr. Chairman, this clause has got two parts.  Part one says that the total expenditure should not exceed three per cent. That is the normal supplementary estimate, which is provided for in the Constitution, and which is laid down on the Table within four months. Actually, the best would have been much less, but the problem is the way things operate.  

The second part of this clause says that if you are going to spend more than three per cent, you should first come to Parliament for approval. But even after that, in order for you to pass a Supplementary Appropriation Bill at the end of the Financial year, you must first lay it on Table, because if you do not, then you cannot pass a Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which becomes an Act, to allow the withdrawal of money from the consolidated fund.  So, I do not see any problem either way. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You said that if you are going to spend more than three per cent you will come for approval. Therefore, if you come for approval for above three per cent, which is the other one, definitely you will have also brought before the Parliament the three per cent. Because you will not only come and say ‘for the three per cent, I will come next time, but for the one exceeding three per cent, I have come to you so that you only deal with excess. So, do not deal with something which falls within three per cent.’ 

I think he is saying, if you are really going to deal with excess, you might as well as deal with the three per cent so that you come and say that the total supplementary we are approving is six per cent, and that will be done once rather than twice. I think that is the kind of argument he is bringing up.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I do not know why this is getting longer than it should –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he is saying that you are duplicating.  If you have come for approval for excess, you might as well cover the other one of three per cent, which you have already spent.

MR. MUSUMBA: You see, you can spend three per cent and you do not need any more, so you will not come back until you have to bring the mandatory Supplementary Appropriations Bill, because all money must be appropriated by Parliament.  In that respect, whether you have expended under 12(1), only three per cent, or you have not, you must come in four months’ time to give this House a report. It is on the basis of that report that the appropriation will be made, but also under (2), if you need more than three per cent. 

All the more reason why you must come to this House and explain why you need more than three per cent and after you have expended it, you again have to lay before this House the same amount for appropriation. Remember that whatever amount is expended must be appropriated by law.  I thank you.  

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that it is really a question of bad drafting. First of all, when you look at 12(1), it really relates to the three per cent and nothing else. The when you go to (2) and you refer to funds expended under 12(1), it means that you are actually talking about the three per cent only. So, really (1) can be changed to state a limit of three per cent, and therefore seek parliamentary approval, and then you re-draft (2) to reflect the normal position, that in any case, all supplementary estimates must be laid before Parliament. I think that is where the confusion is with reference to (1) in sub-section (2).

MS. KIRASO: I would like to propose that (1) remains as it is. And I propose that in (2), we remove the first sentence and say, “All supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR BAKU: Mr. Chairman, I have a bit of difficulty with clause 12(3), which reads, “Any inter-ministerial or departmental re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation of all the relevant Ministries, Departments, Institutions or Organisations”.  

The words “in consultation of”, I think, should be changed to “In consultation with”.

Also, I do not understand the full impact of this statement, because if you talk about all relevant Ministries, departments, institutions, organisations for purposes of re-allocation of any funds, I think it does not really bring out clearly what we are aiming at in order to ensure that funds can be re-allocated where necessary.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, when we talk about these re-allocations, it means that money leaves one Ministry and goes to another, or one sector and goes to another. We are saying that it would be good manners for whoever is affected by these transfers to be brought on board. For example, if the money is going to leave the Movement Secretariat to come to the Parliamentary Commission, both bodies should be brought on board. They should know that maybe because of an emergency in Parliament, because of the investigation by the Select Committee on Defence, or something like that, money has got to leave this section and come to another section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How are you going to enforce that? If the Government changed plans from Agriculture and took them to Ministry of Works, and they did not need consultation, how are you going to go about that?

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I think the word “relevant” is not the correct word. We should use “affected”. So, it should be all the affected Ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. That will be much clearer.  

Secondly, “inter-ministerial” should also include intra-ministerial. So, it should be intra-ministerial and inter-ministerial. ‘Inter’ means between Ministries and ‘intra’ is within a Ministry, because that also happens.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I do not accept that there should be intra-ministerial, because in each Ministry there is one accounting officer. That accounting officer is the one who controls all the departmental funds, and there is normally a budget committee within the Ministry, so really that does not arise as part of this law.  

The other issue I would like to raise is that actually the Ministry of Finance does not transfer monies from one Ministry to the other. That one does not happen at all. Although we discussed this clause and allowed it to go through, it is not really a necessary clause. 

What really happens is that, if there is an emergency and one Ministry has got to spend more, we freeze some others, but that is not the same as transferring funds from one Ministry to the other. There is no documentation of vouchers to show that you have moved the money from Ministry X to Ministry Y. What you actually do is to say that this month the releases have reduced by say 10 billion, and then the 10 billion goes to some other Ministries which have got an emergency. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the Minister and it relates to a recent example, the Ministry of Agriculture. Parliament appropriated certain funds for seeds, and a certain amount for water in the valley dams.  You are now telling us that this accounting officer, without this safeguard we are trying to put up in order for Government to report to us, is free to move this money from one department to another! When Parliament, in its wisdom, appropriated money for the seeds, it was supposed to be used for seeds, but instead of being used for seeds, it was used for something else. 

If this Budget Bill had been passed, Parliament would have initially been involved in setting priorities, and therefore, the seeds would have become a priority. If this accounting officer wants to move it from the seeds sector to another sector, I think we need that safeguard in this proposal. So, would the Minister rather prefer that we are not safeguarded? If it is not there, then you are saying that this accounting officer has that liberty to move monies from one department to another.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Pinto, aren’t you referring to a different issue? Now you are talking about approval of Parliament, which is different from what they are saying. They are talking about internal consultation. Maybe, you want to amend this to say that there should be consultation within Ministries but with approval of Parliament.

MR. PINTO: There was a clause on inter-ministerial and department re-allocation of funds. The Minister said that this clause may not be necessary, and I was trying to say that it is necessary, because, in the example I gave, It had been discovered that the same accounting officer, using his privilege, was able to move these funds from one department to another. Now, this comes in to that this department dealing with seeds should have in fact consulted. When we went to them, they said they never saw this money and how it was used. I was part of that investigation in the Ministry of Agriculture, so I know.  I do not know whether I have clarified my position?

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the Minister’s submission, maybe today there is a lot of improved discipline in the management of our finances as a nation.  But I know for a fact that there is no law that stops Government from sitting to say ‘we have a problem in the Ministry of Health, we have Ebola, we have looked around and there is no more money in Health, let us go and look for some money in Gender, which has not been used, and bring it and apply it to Health.’ 

There is nothing that stops Government. That used to go on in the Ministry before. Today, if the Minister is saying it is not going on, that is well and good. This law is being made to take care of situations where there is such inter-ministerial cross accounting. So, it is relevant, and I want to beg that it be considered in that light.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But now how will you ensure that this concept is followed, because it is really an internal matter? Will the Minister of Agriculture come here and say that money was removed from us and taken to Foreign Affairs and this was in contravention of this provision? Is that going to happen?

MR. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman, maybe we can go back to the basis of this law. The basis is that Parliament is going to sit and make recommendations to Government, and the process of arriving at a Budget will be by national consensus.  If we have agreed in the Ministry and in Parliament that we will allocate so much money for seeds, for example, we as a Committee of Parliament will ask why the 2 billion we allocated for seeds was not made available. 

The Minister or the accounting officer will explain to us that actually he did not get the money because that money was taken to Ministry of Health. It is then that we will ask whether you were consulted and whether it made clear to you that this is expedient and necessary. At that point, we will be able to know who did not comply with the law.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether the Minister can be patient so that he can also take this information –(Interjection)- Thank you. I want to share the impressions given by my colleagues as to the relevance of this provision. And I would like to seek further clarification from the Minister. When he says that should there be any viament - this is the international word used for transfer of money from one section to the other -  inter-ministerialy it does not necessarily require the removal of money from one department to the other, but he says there will be freezing on the other department. This is not, according to him, on an urgent basis, but I submit that the effect is the same. In order for you to spend on this department, you have got to freeze the other one. 

The concern of my colleagues in the House, which is reflected in this legislation, is that we deliberate with Ministries and we approve their programmes to the best of national interest. And we would like to move in symphony, not one by one, so that at the end of the year, the economy and all the social services provided appear to be balanced. And the House, which is accountable to the country, will say on this sector we provided so much, on this sector we provided so much, so that anything that does affect that symphony should be brought to the House for approval. That is exactly how I see relevance of this provision. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it is relevant, because you are the ones who approve and allocate funds. Therefore, if you are transferring funds from Gender to Health, I think the person who approved that allocation originally should be the one consulted. I do not know whether that is the case? But if you really want to control this, I think it would be more effective if it is Parliament rather than the Ministry concerned.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, I really do agree with what they are saying, the only thing we are disagreeing on is the wording. What I am really saying is that, the Ministry of Finance does not write a voucher to transfer money from the Ministry of Health to Ministry of Agriculture. If there are enough resources, you release as per programme. If there is not enough, you release according to what you have. Remember we are using a cash budget, so if there is a shortfall on revenues, you release that amount that is in proportion to every Ministry. Now, the accounting officer re-allocates within his own department, and I think you are very clear about that. How do you enforce this? 

The accounting officer of the Ministry, who has departmental heads under him, may say that this month this department cannot get this much money, we are going to use elsewhere. Maybe he could say that we are going to reduce on fuel and increase on repairs of vehicles, and now you are saying that he should come back to Parliament!  I think that would just be too much, because that is within the Ministry.

I do not understand why Members should say that the Ministry of Finance cannot freeze. If we programme to spend 100 billion shillings in one month, and we have collected 90 billion, there is no way you can actually freeze all the Ministries’ allocations with the 10 billion across the board. However, if there is an emergency in the Ministry, for example, if there is a catastrophe and more food was not readily available in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, then of course, you may freeze some Ministries and let the department of Disaster Preparedness get all the money to be able to handle a situation that has arisen.  

If Members are saying that they do not attend to a disaster because you must give everybody what was programmed, then that is a different issue and that cannot be implemented in the circumstances. That is exactly what we are saying. Nevertheless, we as a Ministry are not saying that we delete this section. We are saying that you leave it there, but of course we know it will not affect us because to us it is just another section that is not being regulated.  Thank you.

MS. KIRASO: I would like to propose a better way of putting it, which I think caters for some of the concerns, which have been raised. I hope the Minister has no problem with this: “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with the affected Ministries, Departments, Institutions or Organisations.”  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, let her clarify to us whether she means re-allocation within the Ministries or between the Ministries.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:I am going to put the question now.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12 as amended, agreed to

Clause 13

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 13 is a new clause contained in the documents, which we have circulated. It is on reports on loans and grants, and it reads as follows:  “13(1) the President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament, information relating to the total indebtedness of the State in that financial year, showing among other things:
 
    (a) the total principal and the sources of the loans and debts;
    (b) the accumulated interest on each loan and debt; 
    (c) provision made for servicing or repayment of each loan and debt;
    (d) the balance on payment under (c);
    (e) the utilisation and performance of each loan or debt, including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets of each loan.

(2) The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament, information relating to the total sum of grants extended to the state and there sources, showing their utilisation and the performance of each grant, including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets of each grant.”  
I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, before I move my amendment with regard to 13(2), I would like to seek clarification from the Minister and the chairperson of the Committee. With reference to Article 159(5) of the Constitution, Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government to enter into an agreement to give a loan or a grant out of any public fund or public account. I would like to know on how many occasions Parliament ever approved, by resolution, a motion on a grant. Have we approved any motion on a grant? If not, is 13 (2) necessary? I would like to have clarification on that before I move an amendment.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, if I understood hon. Lukyamuzi, he wants to find out whether Government has ever given a grant or a loan for monies from the consolidated fund. I am not aware whether the Government has given a grant or a loan from the monies from the consolidated fund to any other entity. I hope he is not mixing it up with a situation where Government has been receiving grants and loans from outside, because these two are different. 

Here, we are referring to a Government authorising a loan to a private sector or some other organisation, which we have not done. Where we have passed on monies under item 8030, contributions to other organisations, that has been provided for in the Budget.  Now, if we have already provided in the Budget that Government in this financial year will probably give a grant to an organisation, or will pay to UNDP, or will pay an organisation, then Parliament will have authorised that at a time of approving the Appropriations Bill.  Thank you.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to support this provision in the new clause, because for a long time, we have raised this issue on the Floor of Parliament, and particularly whenever the Budget is being presented.  So, this provision is very good, it will help us know the source of funds. I support this amendment.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Chairman, on clause 13 (1), instead the expression, “showing among other things”, it would be better if we said, ‘inter alia’ or ‘including’. If you look at the list of things that are going to be included, it is not only objects such as loans and debts, but also decisions such are reflected in (2). So, in 13 (1), in the very last sentence, I would suggest that we say, “financial year, showing inter alia…” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, I will put the question to the suggested improvement or amendment.
(Question put and agreed to)

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: There was a sub-clause (3), which was inadvertently omitted, but which would take care of the concerns of hon. Lukyamuzi. It says: “13(3) The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament, information relating to the total sum of grants, guarantees and loans that it has made to any person or institution of Government.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What does this mean? Isn’t all this catered for? It caters for details, which will include anything, so do we have to put another clause? 

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: I do not know, Sir, but (2) talks about Government receiving grants, but under the Constitution. Government can give guarantees, like we recently did when we gave a guarantee to AES. That is a contingent liability upon Government. We would want to know, on a regular basis, what has happened to this guarantee that we have given? Is it performing? Is it good? And the current (2) does not take care of that. 

Sub-clause (2) refers to grants received by the State of Uganda. The omission we had made, which I am now including, is where Government gives loans or guarantees, because that too must be by a resolution of Parliament. It must be reflected. We must get a return.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First of all, it is a constitutional requirement, which has to be met at any time this is done. And when they seek permission, don’t you think that you will get the information you want? Let us exhaust this.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek your guidance. Even where there is a constitutional provision, the proposal by our hon. colleague would be the enabling law for that constitutional provision to be operationalised. For example, in addition to the guarantees Government gives, there could be a chance, in future, where Government may give grants, donations, and things of this kind.  

I remember that not too long ago, the Government of Uganda, I believe, gave a grant to Mozambique during the floods.  It was $100,000 worth of sugar or whatever. Now, that was the start, but you would have, in future, many other issues that this particular provision would cater for.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to support hon. Musumba on this new provision. Two months ago, we approved an on-lending fund to CDO, of about 7 million. This required Government approval, and that is even provided for in the Constitution. We need to provide for it in here for avoidance of any doubt. I beg to support.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you read the amendment, which you want to put?

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: It is clause 13 (3), and it reads: “The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament, information relating to the total sum of grants, guarantees and loans that it has made to individual companies or other states”.  

The justification is that, if you look at the provisions of the Constitution, Government is empowered to give a guarantee to a company, it is empowered to extend a loan to a company or individual, it is empowered to extend a loan or a grant to another country.  Now, if Government does so, according to the Constitution, they have to come here for approval. Even after we have given approval, in case of a guarantee, for example, Parliament must be kept abreast on the performance of that guarantee. I gave an example of AES, and there are other purchase agreements, where Government has given a guarantee. 

Parliament must know periodically how that contingent liability is performing. Is it going to become real? Guarantee means that it is a contingent liability, if it is not sorted out, that means Parliament will sort it out. We have to know all these things periodically. We have to put it here, because if you do not do that, those Ministers you see there will not do so.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question.    
                              
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 13 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, Clause 14 is about the domestic debt, and it reads as follows: 
“A Government department, self accounting department, institution, organisation or commission shall not take any credit from any local company or body unless - 
    (a) it has no unpaid domestic arrears from a debt in a previous financial year;
    (b) it has capacity to pay for the expenditure from the approved estimates as appropriated by Parliament for that financial year.”

This is to check on the domestic debt of Government departments. Domestic arrears have of late been reducing, and this provision, together with the commitment control system, which was put in place last year by the Minister of Finance, will further reduce on the domestic debt. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You say that the outsiders shall not take any credit from any local company unless first of all, it has no debts and secondly, it has capacity. The question is, if it has capacity, then money is there, so how will the credit come about? You are only saying that Government should never take anything on credit, because if funds are there, then what credit is there?

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr. Chairman, there are times when money is appropriated, it is allocated, but because of our cash budget system, actual cash has not been released, but you know it will be there. In that respect, you can borrow.  What has been happening is that, these people have been borrowing way beyond what has been appropriated. In fact, it has been a way of going round the Appropriations Act. They know they have been allowed to have less money than what they need, so they go ahead and exhaust what they been allocated and for the rest they contract debts. We want to avoid that.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, I have a problem with (a), when they say it has no unpaid domestic arrears. Now, unless you deliberately want to cripple Government, we must provide for a transitional period whereby Government first of all clears the outstanding debts. Today, it is hardly possible to know of any Ministry, which might not have some debt. So, you are actually saying that all Governments should not contract any debt unless they have paid all domestic arrears. But the capacity to pay all of them now is not there. We have got to have some time to pay them.

Secondly, some of the credit is actually not intended, I said some of the credit, I did not say all. Let us take an example. If Parliament budgeted for sittings for 105 days in a year, but because of pressure of work, they end up by sitting for 120 days in a year, the chances are that there will be debt or credit given on water and electricity.  That is also credit, because you will not have the capacity to pay. The budget would have been for power to be used for 105 days, but now you have sat for 120 days, and you have not been able to pay for that credit.  So, the question is, should UEB cut you off for the 15 days, knowing that you do not have the capacity to pay them because you are going to contract a debt?  

I have a problem accepting (a). Unless we provide that when all the current debts have been cleared, then thereafter, no more debts should be incurred.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, practically this will be very difficult to supervise. Who is going to make sure that the domestic arrears have been paid before (a) is implemented?  Which authority within Government or within Parliament will do that? How is this going to be done? It would mean that before this is done, the Auditor General would have had to audit the accounts of every Ministry and Department before it can get any electricity, water or telephone services. I think this is good ideally, but in practice it may really be very difficult to implement.

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr. Chairman, first of all, I want to give information with relation to what the Minister has just said about needing a transitional period. We know for a fact that Government is lumbered with domestic arrears, to the tune of 60 to 70 billion shillings, and they are working very hard to pay it. But the provision here is very wisely worded, it says “previous financial year”. 

The domestic arrears that were accumulated over the years, we know, are warehoused somewhere, and they will be paid one day. But the previous year, in this case, will be the year 2000 – 2001, because the effective debt for this is July 2001. Therefore, we are saying that in the year 2000 – 2001, they should endeavour to clear their obligations, such that by the time we start 2001, there are no obligations arising from their operations in 2000-2001.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, hon. Musumba should clarify one thing. The work of Government continues up to the 30th day of June, and on that 30th day of June, there are still several cheques on transit. The accounts of Government are closed on the 30th day of June, however they are supposed to be submitted to the Auditor General not later than the fourth day of October. At what stage are you saying that this (a) should be implemented? You say unless they have got a debt, but they may not know that actually they incurred debts in the process of issuing cheques. In other words, they will exceed their budget until October.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And we have passed a clause somewhere here, where we have seen that it is possible to re-allocate funds from one place to another. Supposing we have allocated money to a Ministry, but because of the re-allocation, the money which we had approved for that Ministry is not there because there is a freeze? Supposing somebody had contracted a credit, hoping that whatever was approved by the Budget for that Ministry will be given, what will happen in such a circumstance?

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr. Chairman, I think we are overlooking the definition of the word ‘domestic arrears’. When does an obligation become a domestic arrear? When it is current and it is in the process of being paid, it is not a domestic arrear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But it will eventually become a domestic arrear because there is a freeze. Eventually, it will become.

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I want to strongly support the idea of allowing a transitional period, which is at least realistic. We know that our people have been supplying the Government. We know that you cannot run some Ministries on the budgets that we approve. We know that many times, even the arrears that get approved do not come during the Financial Year. Now, what should happen if the Minister of Internal Affairs has prisoners to feed in Luzira? They need posho and beans and yet you are telling them that because you have domestic arrears, you cannot buy that posho.  

Secondly, I beg to differ from my hon. Friend, when he says that the text here is talking about the previous year, and therefore leaving out the other years. When you look at this (a), it says, “it has no unpaid domestic arrears from a date in a previous financial year.” That can be three, four or five years behind. It is not ‘the previous year’.  I think this provision is dangerous, it is making things for Government very difficult, and it is not good even for some of our citizens who could be adversely affected.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, the import of this provision for all us in Uganda cannot be over-emphasized. If we truly represent people, we would know that the business community in Uganda has been virtually crippled by Government failing to pay its domestic debts. There has been an attempt this time, and Government has made an attempt for the past three years to try and pay, but before that, there was a real difficulty. 

We are not making a law for this particular disciplined Government or the administration that is in place now. We are not making a situational law. We are making a law for all time. For whatever law we may be looking at as a way of further clarifying this particular provision, let us keep in mind that the domestic arrears have crippled the business people in Uganda. I think the President is on record to have said openly, that he would not do business with the Government and if you are doing so, you are doing so at your own risk. He said so, and everybody knows it. Therefore, it is important for us, as representatives of the people, to protect ourselves, to protect the nation, and to protect our business enterprises.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But don’t you think that the public may also lose when you make these restrictions?

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, last Financial Year the Ministry of Finance put in place what they call a commitment control system. When they brought in their report this year, this is a system for which they were commended and applauded very heavily. Under the commitment control system, the accounting officers are given funds to spend during that quarter. So, you know what you have in your pocket and you spend accordingly. If there is something very serious and you have to go beyond, I think the Ministry of Finance is then brought on board. So, the transitional period must have started when the Ministry of Finance got committed to reducing domestic debts and domestic arrears, and putting this system in place.  

All the money, which was outstanding as domestic debts, was classified, and they have been paying. I believe they have continued to pay and to reduce that amount of money. Where there is a possibility of an unavoidable expense, and some little money has to be got for a very serious reason, what we are saying is, before we incur more debt, let us go out of our way and clear that money of the previous year. It is just as simple as that. 

If the commitment control system has been working since last year, I now imagine that since last year there have been very small amounts accruing in domestic arrears. I do not see why we should split our hairs on this. Bring the indebtedness of that department or Ministry to zero before you can get more. And this has nothing to do with all these big domestic arrears, which have even not been verified by the Auditor General. If the commitment control system has actually been followed since last year, and this law will come in force from the time we pass it, then surely I do not see any problem. I do not see us trying to stifle Government work and all these kinds of things. Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that we continue.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the argument with regard to maintaining this Clause, but with an amendment. I would like to propose an amendment to (a), to delete the word “no” and instead add the expression “provided for”. I also propose to delete the expression “ from a debt in a previous financial year” from (a).

In (b), I propose to add the expression “evidence of” between “has” and “capacity”  

So, the whole clause should read: 
“A Government department, self-accounting department, institution, organisation or commission shall not take any credit from any local company or body unless -
    (a) it has provided for unpaid domestic arrears 
    (b) it has evidence of capacity to pay for the expenditure from the approved estimates as appropriated by Parliament for that Financial Year.” 

MR. ONGOM: I support everything else that he has said, except that in (a), I would like just to remove the word “a” before “previous” and replace it with ‘the’, so that it becomes “in the Financial Year”. So with ‘the’, it will refer to the previous financial year, rather than ‘a’ which is really continuously backwards.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am now going to put the question to the proposed amendments by the hon. Okumu Ringa as improved by hon. Ongom. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Given that we have taken up that amendment, could I propose an amendment that the opening sentence changes, and we cater for some transitional period? I propose that the opening statement reads as follows: “At the expiry of three years, from the current financial year, a Government department…” The rest will stay the same.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 14 as amended, agreed to

Clause 15

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 15 concerns reports on the exemption of tax. It reads as follows: “15. (1) A person or any authority having power to waive or vary any tax under Article 152(2) of the Constitution shall make a quarterly report to Parliament which shall be on or before the 30th day of September, the 31st day of December, the 31st day of March and the 30th day of June in each Financial Year.  

(2) A report made under subsection (1) shall include inter alia -
    (a) the organisation or person exempted from the tax; 
    (b) the reasons for the exemption; 
    (c) the amount of tax foregone by the Government; and
    (d) the benefits from the exemption by the Government.  

I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you mean that the benefits from exemptions must always be for Government? It could be for the public also.

MS. KIRASO: I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. We can say the benefits from the exemption.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15 as amended, agreed to

Clause 16

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 16 is about reporting on expenditure from the contingency fund. It reads as follows: “The Minister responsible for Finance shall, within 14 days from the date of the authorisation of advances from the Contingency Fund, make a report to Parliament stating the purpose and the urgency of the expenditure and the amount thereof.”  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16, agreed to

Clause 17

MS. KIRASO: Clause 17 is on the report on Appropriation in Aid. It reads as follows:
“17(1) A minister responsible for any vote on Appropriation in Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that vote are expended.

(2) A report made under sub-clause (1) shall reflect specific data on value for money on the involved expenditures.”  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support this new clause 17, but I am seeking clarification on sub-clause (1), where we only refer to a Minister. We have departments and self-accounting bodies, which also operate Appropriation in Aid.  For example, we have institutions like Makerere University and other institutions. I know they will fall under the Ministry, but is there a way in which you can differentiate this, so as we decentralise the responsibility? I am just seeking clarification. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought it is only the Minister who can speak for bodies that are not represented here. So, this is taken in with the understanding that for any vote of that kind, there will be a Minister actually responsible. I think that caters for it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 17, agreed to

Clause 18

MS. KIRASO: Clause 18 concerns liability on failure to meet the requirements under this Bill. It reads as follows: “18(1) Where any department, institution, organisation or commission fails to meet any requirement under this Act, Parliament may compel the relevant Minister to appear before it and give an explanation on the circumstances leading to the failure.

(2) Where it is evident that any officer intentionally or through negligence led to the failure of the department, institution, organisation or commission to meet any requirement under this Act, that officer shall be held personally liable.

(3) Where after the explanation of the Minister under sub-clause (1), Parliament is not satisfied by the explanation given, the Minister may be subjected to Article 118 of the Constitution for incompetence” – (Laughter).  I beg to move.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, we actually disagreed on this clause – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us go bit by bit. Don’t you think we shall solve the problem?  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, we disagreed on this sub-clause (3), although we generally agreed on the first two sub-clauses. The Committee insisted on including it, but I think it is really not necessary to say that when a Minister fails to explain, he may be subjected to Article 118. The two sub-clauses are already very clear. 

Sub-clause (1) says, “Where any department, institution, organisation or commission fails to meet any requirement under this Act, Parliament may compel the relevant Minister to appear before it and give an explanation on the circumstances leading to the failure.”  What happens next should be how they look at it.  

And the second one is for the officers who are not Ministers. So, the third one really is not very pertinent and should not be here in this law. So, I beg to move that we delete sub-clause (3).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I beg to be allowed to introduce a new amendment that reads as follows: “18(3) Where after the explanation of the Minister or official under sub-clause (1), Parliament is not satisfied by the explanation given, this shall be taken as an act of incompetence.”  

The problem we will have, which you have been raising yourself at every point we get, is if this is not done, what will we do. So, we sat and thought that it would be important to very clearly tell this to the Members of the Executive, who are the managers of this programme, because this programme is basically going to be managed by the Government.  

We have said that on this day, the Minister will bring Policy Statements, and on this day you will receive this kind of information. If we do not get that information by that date, the whole programme will be derailed.  Therefore, if we do not have some kind of sanction here, some way making the official submit that information on the due date, we will run into a problem.  

I appreciate that the invocation of Article 118 here could be a little out of the way, but at least Parliament must remain in a position to express dissatisfaction and to sanction a member of the Executive or an official of a commission, who does not comply with the timetable that we have laid down. If not, this whole thing is liable to being ignored, and we shall have no alternative.

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We are all concerned about the inefficiency of Government officers.  But to my understanding, if we use sub-section (2), whereby somebody who fails his duty will be personally liable, whether he is a Minister, a Permanent Secretary or an officer, it covers it all. But when you come in and talk about somebody who is incompetent, then again you are going to refer to Article 118, and it may cause a lot of confusion in the House and in the administration of Government. So, I think sub-section (2) covers it all. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, when you talk about incompetence, you must reach that conclusion with evidence.  Is it your intention in this law? Is evidence of incompetence conclusive? Is that what we intend to do?

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, having listened to the different views, I think we can merge and get something along these lines. If Parliament establishes that the failure has arisen from inefficiency on the part of the Minister, disciplinary action may be taken.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The disciplinary action on the Minister is provided for in the Constitution, and there are well laid procedures of arriving at that. Both parties are involved, Parliament will move and the concerned Minister will answer. So, there is a long process. So, do we now intend to abridge that process and do this? If it is your wish, let us say so.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose the amendment being brought in by hon. Musumba, particularly after we have already deleted sub-clause (3). What is provided for under sub-clause (1) and (2) is sufficient. The rest will be taken care of under the Constitution and under relevant laws. So, I oppose that amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 18 as amended, agreed to

Clause 19.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 19 concerns the Parliament Budget Committee.  It reds as follows: “19(1) There shall be a Parliament Budget Committee which shall be a Standing Committee of Parliament and all Chairpersons of other Committees shall be ex-officio Members.

(2) The Budget Committee shall- 
    (a) focus on the preliminary estimates and the macroeconomic plan and programmes and submit recommendations to the Speaker; 
 
    (b) consider the National Budget and compile amendments and refer them to the relevant Committees. 

    (c) carry on such other functions relating to the Budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament under this Act.”

We added the Chairpersons of the Committees in sub-clause (1) to cater for what hon. Ruzindana had pointed out under clause 7. We put in this law a provision compelling Committees to report to the Budget Committee. So, once the Chairpersons of these Committees are already part of the Budget Committee, then it will not look like one Committee is reporting to another. 

Earlier than that, we were not compelling these Committees to prepare reports. We said that they would report to the Budget Committee, but now we are making them Members of the Committee. They can come and just read their small briefs. They can report by word of mouth as long as the people who are permanently sitting on the Budget Committee are there to get ideas from every Committee. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, I am not very comfortable with the phraseology in sub-clause (1). The Chairperson talked about the Chairpersons of the Committees being ex-officio Members. I thought the idea behind having all the Chairpersons of the Committees of Parliament as members of the Committee was so that we do not have two categories of Members, Members who are elected or appointed in some way, and then Members who are ex-officio. Could the Chairperson clarify as to whether there are going to be two categories of Members to these Committees?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you move an amendment in view of that?

MR. BAKU: I would like to first get what the Chairperson meant and then I can move an amendment.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, we thought that the Chairpersons of the other Committees should not only be limited to Chairpersons of Sessional Committees. In which case, if you are already a Chairperson or a Member of a Standing Committee, you cannot also be a full time Member of the Budget Committee because the Budget Committee will also be a Standing Committee. 

Secondly, since they are already Chairpersons of the other Committees, then they cannot also be full time Members of this Standing Committee, because most of us are already on one Standing Committee and on one Sessional Committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you are already practicing it. There is a position where Chairpersons of Committees are permanent Members of the Business and Welfare Committee. So, this will not be an exceptional case. We can only clear it and say, except for the Business and Welfare Committee or the Budget Committee. So, if that was the huddle, I think it can be explained. But if it is the principle, then that is a different matter.  

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, if you look at the work this Committee is going to do, it is actually going to be even more work than some of the Sessional Committees. Some of the Sessional Committees wait to look at the Policy Statements and after that they do not have much work. But we are saying there should be a Standing Committee and then these people are brought on board only when they think it is necessary, because it is almost a full time job.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But when you say that you are an ex-officio Member, does it mean that you are not a permanent Member?  That was the intention.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, to be able to internalise what this Committee would do, one has got to read clause 21, which we have not yet come to. This Committee is going to provide budget-related information to all Sessional Committees. This Committee is going to submit reports on, but not limited to, economic forecasts, budget projections and options for reducing the budget deficit.  This Committee is going to identify and recommend on Bills that provide an increase or decrease on revenue and the Budget. If this Committee is going to do all that, it is actually going to be full time. 

In some other countries, like the U.S where they have got a budget office, this is one of the busiest committees. It works from day one to the last day. So, if it is going to be really very useful and helpful, even to the Ministry of Finance, it needs to have fulltime Members as a Standing Committee.  

The question of bringing in Chairmen as ex-officials is to increase internalisation and harmonisation of what is being done in their Committees vis-à-vis this particular Committee. Instead of the Committees now writing reports and sending them there, the Chairmen would rather be co-opted as temporary members. And anyway, these are Sessional Committee Chairmen who change every year, so it means that they are not actually permanent. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But are they going to be temporary members because they are ex-officio? Do you mean an ex-officio member cannot be a permanent member? That is what I wanted you to clear. Because, if he is an ex-officio member, it means he can attend any meeting at any time by virtue of his position. That is what ex-officio means. It does not mean that he is not a permanent member of the Committee.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly welcome the idea of forming a Budget Committee in Parliament, but I would like some clarification from the Chairperson. 

One, how do we avoid the duplication of work in regard to both the Committee for the National Economy and the Committee on the Budget? 

Two, are you aware that what you propose as the role of the new Committee can be fully undertaken by the National Economy Committee? If so, how can you allay the fears that the Committee due to be formed will not repeat the responsibilities of the already created Committees?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I do not support the amendment being added to the original text by the chairperson. The original text reads as follows: "There shall be a Parliament Budget Committee, which shall be a Standing Committee of Parliament."  In my view, that is sufficient, because within our framework we have ways on how we compose Standing Committees, so the rest of the details could be administrative. I oppose the amendment by the Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us now put all this to vote. The Committee has suggested that the Budget Committee should also have ex-officio members, namely the Chairpersons of the various Committees of Parliament. 

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, this was a subject of the morning debate, and you deliberately wanted us to internalise it. Hon. Ruzindana was looking at a possibility of areas of conflict if one Chairman of a Sessional Committee had to report to another Chairman. The compromise position was that these chairmen of the various sessional committees have a forum, as the Minister has clearly put it, to internalise and harmonise. 

The only question now is how do we make them ex-officio members and not put other members? I think that is the only area of difference. We want to provide a mechanism with which the sessional committees work with this Budget Committee, so that what comes out is a unified position.  

I actually object to the proposal by hon. Okumu-Ringa.  What we need is to be helped on how to phrase this amendment to include the chairmen of the sessional committees as ex-officio members to work together with the budget office. This is really factional and that is why we need help now, Sir.

MR. KWERONDA: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with having two sentences. One could read as it is, and then you could have a (2) saying, “the Chairpersons of Sessional Committees shall be ex-officio members of the Budget Committee.”  The present (2) would then become (3). I thought that what was clumsy was the phraseology of the sentence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I am going to put the question to the formulation by hon. Kweronda Ruhemba.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, while I am not opposed to the subsequent amendments, before we proceed, I thought it would be prudent for me to get an answer to the query I raised before the chairperson.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understood hon. Lukyamuzi to be asking about the difference between the roles of the Budget Committee and the Standing Committee on the National Economy. 

I will start by saying that the National Economy Committee has a mandate laid down in our rules. The mandate includes two things, to evaluate activities of Government, and to come and present reports on loans and so on. Those are specifically laid down in the rules as part of the functions of the Committee. This Budget Committee is of specific application to budget matters. So, once you take out budget matters, whatever else remains will still remain the function of the National Economy Committee.

Clause 19 as amended, agreed to

Clause 20

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 20 relates to the Budget office and it reads as follows: 
"There shall be a Parliament Budget Office within the Parliamentary service consisting of full time and part time budget and economic experts as may be required from time to time"

Clause 20, agreed to
Clause 21
.
MS. KIRASO: Clause 21 specifies the functions of the Budget office, and it reads as follows: 
“The functions of the Budget Office shall be to provide Parliament and its Committees with objective and timely analysis required for economic and budget proposals and the information and estimates required for Parliamentary Budget process, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing office shall-  
    (a) provide budget-related information to all Committees in relation to their jurisdiction; 
    (b) submit reports on, but not limited to, economic forecasts, budget projections and options for reducing the budget deficit;  
    (c) identify and recommend on Bills that provide an increase or decrease in revenue and the Budget;  
    (d) prepare analytic studies of specific subjects such as financial risks posed by Government sponsored enterprises and financial policy;  
    (e) generally give advice to Parliament and its Committees on the Budget and National Economy.” 
I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

Clause 21, agreed to

Clause 22

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, clause 22 concerns the periods that we have been talking about in this Bill. We have been giving ourselves a lot of deadlines. It reads as follows: “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act for one week.”  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the chairperson. The provision under clause 22 is rather risky, considering the manner in which Parliament operates. Could the chairperson give this House empirical analysis as to the period of one or two weeks?

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, if we are to follow the dates, the programme is so tight that if an extension had to go beyond a week, then everything else in the cycle would be disorganised. So, maybe we could add a maximum of one week.  If it went beyond one week, then the whole thing would be meaningless.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we should use the word ‘reasonable’. We should say, ‘for a reasonable period’, because the nature of the business may require more than one week. If you tie the Speaker’s hands to one week, you may not achieve what you intend to achieve. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there should be some discretion on part of the Speaker.

MR. MUSUMBA ISANGA: Mr. Chairman, why have we got here in the first place? Why have we got to a point of legislating dates? We have got to this point for two reasons. One, the Constitution starts by legislating dates. The Constitution says, by the 15th of June the Budget must be read.  And it says by the 30th of, I think October, there will be no money unless the appropriation law is passed.  So, dates have become constitutional. And those two dates impact on the way budgets are prepared and preparations for budget are done. 

Secondly, we have had to put a date to bring discipline here in this House. In this House we have had occasions where Sessional Committee chairpersons have not submitted reports even after three months. The Speaker has to sit here and adjourn several times and say there is no business, because the chairman of some Sessional Committee has not been here. So, the purpose of this is to bring discipline both ways, to the Executive and to our own House. Once we allow too much flexibility on the period, we will lapse and relax, and say after all the Speaker can extend. Therefore, let us all know that we have a legislative obligation to meet. Thank you.

MR. NSAMBU NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is normal, in every statutory law, to have a safety valve. We cannot expect to have a Speaker who will not know the Constitution or who will not know the other laws. We must give him a gauge to see what is reasonable. But if we remain so rigid, we may find that something that we think should be done in a week has failed and what will you do? Will you just withdraw it from the Parliament? So, I propose that we give the Speaker a reasonable period to decide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the amendment is to give the Speaker a reasonable time. I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22 as amended, agreed to

The Title

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, the new clauses that we have passed, 12 to 22, do not have marginal notes. I would like to the draw attention of the House to that. Marginal notes should be provided as we conclude. I thank you.

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
                        
(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we really have a substantial number of Members.  I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(Proceedings suspended at 5.29 p.m. for 15 minutes)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been advised that we have quorum.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Budget Bill, 2000” and passed it with amendments.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)
                              
BILLS
THIRD READING

THE BUDGET BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Budget Bill, 2000” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

A Bill for an Act entitled, The Budget Act, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we come to the end of today’s business. I appeal to you to maintain the spirit and mobilise others who have not been here to come tomorrow so that we can finalise the business we have before Christmas. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20th December at 10.00 a.m.)

