Wednesday, 13 December 2006
 
Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to request you to join me in welcoming members of Parliament from the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly. They are from the Committees of Gender, Social Affairs, Social Welfare, Youth and Sports. This time, the leader of the delegation is a lady, hon. Lucy Iyaya, Member of Parliament for Eastern Equatoria.  

The other members of the delegation are hon. Thomas Omot, hon. Mary Nyabol, hon. Ahmed Juma, hon. James Nyalok, hon. Samson Oyay, hon. Veronica Dimonic, hon. Monica Nyacut, hon. Umjuma Juma, hon. Deng Chuol, hon. Patrice Bafura and hon. Martin Milla; they are accompanied by Mr John Budda, Mr Simon Ladu and Mr Timothy Amule. As you know they have just set up their government and it is less than one year old, so they are taking the opportunity to come and learn from neighbouring legislatures in the IGAD region. You are most welcome!

Secondly, honourable members, we have a delegation of the members of Parliament from Kenya who have been here comparing notes with our Committee on Budget. They are in the process of setting up a Budget Committee in their Parliament and enacting a Budget Act. They came here to exchange views with us. 

In addition, they are also participating as members of the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank. This is a new network that is being set up in this Parliament. So you are invited for a meeting after this plenary in the Members’ Lounge to meet and discuss issues concerning the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and to elect the leadership so that work can begin. So, when you finish, honourable members, you may go upstairs.

Furthermore, I am personally delighted to be with you again. I welcome you back from the recess. I did a bit of work for the Parliament while you were on recess. I led a delegation of 26 Women MPs to Denmark to study the political situation in that country, deal with investments and handle other issues of a development nature. I also went to do some work for the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth in preparation for CHOGM in the United Kingdom. I am very happy to see you again. Thank you. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I arise on a point of procedure, which has a linkage with a matter of national importance. One and a half weeks back, the Minister of Education was here and she presented a statement relating to Makerere University. We were assured that the sessional committee on Social Services would be tabling its report to this House for us to consider and debate the issue of Makerere in totality. 

Yesterday NRM had its caucus meeting and I am reliably informed that the sessional committee on Social Services tabled its report for discussion in that caucus. On the Order Paper of yesterday, among the issues to follow the issue of Makerere University was to immediately follow the motion for resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow the money that is going to be borrowed this afternoon as it appears on the Order Paper. 

The way Parliament operates, I am afraid we do not have many days before we break off for Christmas. The public is anxious and they really want to know what the fate of Makerere University is. Last week, His Excellency, the President was reported in the media saying that Makerere will resume and open next month that is January. Now, as we go home for Christmas leave, parents and students are expecting us to tell them some news about when Makerere University is going to open. I thought it would have been prudent that before we break off the Sessional Committee on Social Services tables its report and we discuss it so that this matter that is really of public concern is disposed of. I just wish to seek your clarification, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is ready so it will be put on the Order Paper tomorrow. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. The Office of the Prime Minister is organising a workshop at Hotel Africana to discuss the modalities, challenges and issues relating to resettlement in Northern Uganda. I apologise that the MPs had not been informed on this and when it came to my notice I felt that I should bring it to the notice of the members of Parliament as stakeholders that tomorrow at Hotel Africana at 8.30 a.m. we shall start this workshop. 

Chairpersons are coming in from the various districts; the CAOs are going to be there and the donor community who are involved in the actual handling of logistics will also be present. We as the Office of the Prime Minister felt that it would be a big omission if the Members of Parliament do not come in. So, I would like to use this opportunity to invite them for the meeting tomorrow at Hotel Africana. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also have other visitors in the gallery up there. They have come from Sweden and they are visiting the Uganda National Association of the Deaf. You are welcome to Uganda Parliament!

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am sorry, Madam Speaker I just wanted to seek from the Minister for Disaster Preparedness a clarification whether this is the right procedure of inviting Members of Parliament for a function. This is because there are very few members of Parliament at this moment in Parliament who hails from the North and this is a very important matter. 

We think it is very unfortunate for a whole minister and a senior minister for that matter to come on the Floor of the House to inform his colleagues that tomorrow you are invited for a meeting. I do not know whether the Office of the Prime Minister has run out of papers or he does not have secretaries or assistants. I find it extremely unfortunate and insulting. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take note of what hon. Reagan Okumu has said but I also want to point out that this is a House where the representatives meet.  I could not guarantee that if I sent letters, given this short notice they would reach. I expected all the members of Parliament to be attending Parliament today and this was the only way I could reach all of them and those who are not here. I call upon the chairpersons including, hon. Okello-Okello, to alert members for the meeting tomorrow.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, last Thursday Acholi Parliamentary group received a notice of invitation to a meeting that was going to take place on Friday. We received the notice on Thursday afternoon. This is yet another one. I think this is not the way a government should function. We have other things to do so notices should be sufficient so that we can plan. I have already committed tomorrow now the minister is coming in. What do I do? 

I think the minister should re-schedule this meeting and give adequate notice to members if it is a serious meeting that requires our contribution. However if it is something to go and pass time then he can go ahead.  This is not the way we should really move together. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have made your point and the Minister has understood that you are not happy about the mode of transmission of invitations. I hope he will improve in future.

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS $ 30.0 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION FOR FINANCING THE MILLENNIUM SCIENCE INITIATIVE PROJECT

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to welcome you back to the House.  

This motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 29 million from the International Development Association for financing The Millennium Science Initiative Project was which tabled here including the certificates from the Ministry of Finance. I now request the Chairperson of the Committee on the National Economy to present it accordingly.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, this is a motion, so you are supposed to move it and have it supported and then we move ahead. Honourable ministers, are you not supporting the government motion? Okay, two ministers have seconded it.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable members: 
WHEREAS a development credit agreement for special drawing rights SDR$ 20,900,000(30US) is to be concluded between the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of funding the Millennium Science Project;

AND WHEREAS Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

AND WHEREAS in Article 159 sub-section (2) of the said Constitution borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under the Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated financing for the approval and authorisation; 

NOW THEREFORE, I do request Parliament to resolve that Government is authorised to secure the said credit from the International Development Association for financing the Millennium Initiative.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we provided 370 copies of this brief to Parliament and members have gone through it. The Millennium Science Initiative Project is divided into two components. Component number one is a grants funding facility, which has got three other windows that include grant funding for research teams under graduate programmes in science, engineering and private sector collaboration. This will total US $ 14.85 million.

The second component, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is on outreach and policy coordination and this will take US$ 15.15 million. The outreach programme will help some components which will include school visits, some rural secondary school laboratories will be equipped to enable teaching of science, a national science fair will be organised annually and a public performance campaign will also be undertaken to publicise and popularise science and technology in Uganda.  

The second component is institutional strengthening. The third component will be monitoring and evaluation. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded again. Can we hear from the Committee of National Economy? Okay, honourable members, today we are privileged to have very important citizens, the staff and management committee and some of the parents of Shimoni Demonstration School. They are up here in the galley -(Applause)-You are welcome!      

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Kaddunabbi Ibrahim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As already stated by the minister, this loan request was committed to the Committee on National Economy under our Rules of Procedure 152(2)(b) and under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 159. 

The funds to be borrowed are coming from the International Development Association of the World Bank and total to US$ 30 million. The National Council for Science and Technology is the major implementing agency of this project.  

Madam Speaker and hon. members, in the year 2003/2004, the Government of Uganda carried out an analysis of the status of Science and Technology including wide consultations of stakeholders like members of Parliament, the private sector practitioners, research scientists, academia, civil society and the media.  
 
The project formulation process was overseen by the Project Advisory Body, which was chaired by the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. It included the National Council for Higher Education, Uganda National Academy of Science and other educationists and scientists also participated.

This project is formulated within the framework of Poverty Eradication Action Plan whose main aim is to stimulate rapid and sustainable economic growth and structural transformation of the economy. 

In the same vein, the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture is also aimed at transforming agriculture from subsistence to modern farming and this should be done through value addition.  

As you are all aware, Uganda is agro-based economy, and therefore it should focus more on the production process and agro-based industries which add value and minimise the waste and post-harvest handling techniques.  

In executing our duty, the committee held meetings with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the National Council of Science and Technology, Uganda Industrial Research Institute and the World Bank officials.  

We were also briefed on the performance of similar projects across the world specifically Chile and South Africa.  This is so because the two countries were case studies because they had similar Science and technology problems like Uganda in the past. 

The committee analysed the following documents:

1.	International Development Association Financing Agreement (The Credit Agreement); 
2.	Project Implementation Plan and Operational Manual; 
3.	Project Appraisal Document; 
4.	The Status of Science and Technology in Uganda: Training, Application and Future Implications done by Uganda National Council of Science and Technology; 
5.	The Role of Uganda Industrial Research Institute in Industrialisation of Uganda; 
6.	Uganda National Council of Science and Technology Strategic Plan for fiscal year 2006/2007 - 2010/2011 
7.	The World Bank and Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, Focus Group Discussion Reports. 
      8. Uganda National Council of Science and Technology Institutional Profile. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on table the mentioned documents and our committee minutes on Millennium Science Initiative Projects Financing Agreement, Project Implementation Plan and Operational Manual, Project Appraisal Document, Status of Science and Technology in Uganda, The Role of Uganda Industrial Research Institute in Industrialisation of Uganda, Strategic Plan for fiscal years 2006/2007 to 2010/2011, the reports of Uganda National Council of Science and Technology and World Bank Discussion Groups and the Institutional Profile for Uganda National Council of Science and Technology.

This project, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, will be implemented in a period of five years, and has two components, which are the Millennium Science Initiative Grants and Funding Facility and the Science and Technology outreach and policy coordination.

The Millennium Science Grants and Funding Component has got three windows:

1.	The grant funding for research which will fund research groups of senior and emerging researchers with high quality scientific and technological research with the post-graduate training component. 
2.	The second window will fund the improvement, acquisition of research and training equipments or inputs and/or the creation of undergraduate programmes in basic science and engineering at private and public universities.
3.	The third window will work with private sector collaboration aimed at funding activities, which will give greater access to technology and skills as well as linking the two institutions of academia and the industry.

The second component is the Science and Technology Outreach and Policy Coordination: This will carry out a number of activities designed to enhance public understanding and appreciation of science and technology. It will also look at its contribution to the economy. This will include encouraging students who wish to consider careers in science and technology and related fields.  

We were informed that this will include equipping rural schools with laboratory equipments, annual national science week to cover awards of prominent scientists, research conferences for dialogue and interaction with scientists, policy makers and entrepreneurs. They intend to establish model schools, which will be visited by eminent scientists who will give scientific information to help students carry their decisions.

Another major activity to be carried out is the strengthening of institutions involved in science and technology. These are: Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, Uganda Industrial Research Institute. This will be in form of equipment and infrastructure, which will include rehabilitation of analytical laboratories and many other things. The above interventions are expected to lead to increased capacity of the institutions to handle research and promote dialogue with the end users who are the entrepreneurs. 

Project coordination will be the major thing and as I stated earlier, this will be by the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, which will be complemented by Uganda Industrial Research Institute. The committee was informed that there would be a technical committee to evaluate grant proposals and approve projects, which will be due for funding. 

The funding of the project will be US$ 33.350,000 million. The IDA loan is of US$ 30 million while the Uganda Government will provide counter-part funding of US$ 3.350,000. This will take charge of wages, expenses and some recurrent operational costs to the implementing institutions for five years.  

As regards terms of the loan, we have appended the breakdown for ease of reference. The loan is a concessional one and it is in line with the Government Debt Strategy. They are standard IDA with a maturity period of 40 years, grace period of ten years, service fee of 0.75 percent on disbursed funds and 0.5 on undisbursed funds.

The Committee on National Economy made some observations: 

1.	There is a growing recognition that science and technology are important for economic and social development and are the determinates of the country’s ability to compete in the world. It is therefore very important for a country to rapidly and efficiently adopt and utilise technology. Lack of skills and low-level education are seen as a major constraint to improved effectiveness.

2.	We noted that there is no National Technological and Innovation policy. The committee was informed that the draft is yet to be approved by Cabinet.

3.	The most important factor in explaining differences in efficiency is education because productivity of labour tends to increase with the level of knowledge in one’s field. 

4.	There is also lack of linking science and technology with firms in the country to the extent that some firms do not know exactly what their production problems are. This project, through awards, is expected to tap the wealth knowledge of scientists not yet tapped and will also form a think-tank for scientists to address the problems of this country.  

5.	It has been noted that science and technology improves on the productive skills and reduces on the costs of production due to efficiencies and effectiveness. 

6.	We also observed that Uganda needs technology to manage value addition to our agricultural products.  These agro-based industries will not only create employment but also increase the shelf life of some products as well as enhance and improve their competitiveness on the market.  

7.	Uganda is endowed with local artisans who despite lack of formal education have sustained this economy in some areas like the metal fabrication and mining. Members must be aware of Katwe and what they do there.  These do not need a lot of funds to train but a little exposure to add quality to their product. The committee was informed that this project intends to train these artisans as well.  

8.	Ugandan’s hostile political environment led to the drop in the level of people with technological background and coupled with the current salary level still deprives the economy of personnel well trained in science and technology. We do not need to mention the current strike at Makerere and whatever is being discussed. 

9.	The quality of teaching has drastically reduced especially that of science subjects and teaching has gone to memorisation rather than the practical part of it. According to the National Inspection Programme, memorisation accounts for 70 percent of students’ learning method.

10.	There has been a general tendency by students, teachers and parents alike that science subjects are hard. This has worked as a disincentive to potential science students.  

11.	Also technical institutions have not been facilitated enough to develop a pool of labour in artisan works.  Polytechnics had played a big role in earlier days up to today most construction, industrial repairs and the like. 

12.	The committee also observed that the low levels of enrolment of science students in schools is attributed to higher tuition fees, the duration at universities and institutions of higher learning and the cost of training which is higher in some fields of science. Government’s deliberate policy to promote the teaching of science is a clear sign that a lot time has been wasted without noticing this crucial area of input in social, economic transformation of our society.  

13.	Also the materials needed for teaching sciences have tended to be expensive hence the poor concentration on science subjects in most private schools.   In education, therefore, investments have also tended to follow the pattern due to low investment cost in arts subjects as said earlier on. 

14.	The committee noted, however, that government has taken broad action in improving science education at the secondary level and restructuring support for tertiary institutions. 

15.	The committee also noted that the involvement of Parliament in government borrowing after signing these agreements do not give Parliament a chance to be involved and appreciate the purpose of the credit. Parliament does post mortem, which also tends to consume a lot of time on something, which has already been concluded.

16.	Science and technology institutions like National Agricultural Research Organisation, Uganda Virus Research Institute, Uganda Industrial Research Institute are all scattered in various government departments and ministries which makes the coordination a very big problem.

The committee therefore recommends the following: 

1.	That the consideration of National, Technology and Innovation Policy should be expedited. It should address, among others, the science and technology capacity gap, assessing the existing and projected gaps. Government should concentrate resources to teaching and retaining scientists.

2.	Government should strengthen the approach to teaching science education with availing science equipment to all schools and therefore should make deliberate sensitisation programmes to demystify the view that sciences are hard.

3.	Efforts should be put in place to transform the local artisans and empower them with some certificates in order to enable them secure employment in other companies at later stages.

4.	The project should follow up and build on the different research proposals, which have been shelved for the better performance of the economy. Members are aware that almost everybody who gets a master’s degree or a PhD does a research or a thesis, but they are just shelved.

5.	The involvement of entrepreneur is a better entry point for the public private dialogue initiative. This will give direction the science and technology initiatives and improve on the production process. 

6.	Parliament should be involved at some level in the negotiations in order to appreciate the purpose of the loan at an early enough but not only approval or post mortem.

7.	All science and technology related institutes should be brought under one body for ease of coordination to maximise utilisation of research equipments by avoiding duplication of work. In some countries, they have formed ministries of science and technology, and all these are under one ministry.

In conclusion, the committee recommends to this august House the approval of this loan request based on the initiatives it will deliver to the economy in the medium and long term. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This committee has 20 members but eight have signed the report. So, the report meets minimum requirements, you are free to debate.

3.36
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start off by thanking the chairman and the committee for the good and modest report. I support the request by the committee to this House to pass this loan request. This report is modest because he left out one of the most important recommendations; he just stated it but was not put on paper. Maybe we would have suggested to government that government comes up with a ministry of science and technology. Because as from his observations, in most countries that have taken science and technology very seriously, they have an independent ministry managing this sector. 

Hon. Members, to emphasise this point, there is a Council of Science Ministers for Africa and they have declared the year 2007 a year of science and technology. And there are several recommendations, some of which are going to be catered for under this new programme to be funded by this loan. And the emphasis is that science and technology should be popularised to bring about social and economic development.

Madam Speaker, among the issues mentioned was the teaching of science and science equipment. I think something should be said about the National Curriculum Development Centre, which is responsible for the science curriculum at the secondary and primary level. This one is a great determinant of the quality of science and technology in our education system. In some countries like Britain, you find the curriculum development arm of the economy is working with all sectors of the economy to ensure that they produce the right people for the good of the economy.

There was a programme called Science Teaching Equipment Production Unit (STEPU). That one was meant to produce equipments for schools. I think such unit should also be supported, for it is not good to rely on materials that are being imported from outside. It is a tendency of our teachers always to rely on imported materials whereas some of them can be improvised here. Some of them cannot teach static electricity without a godly telescope say imported from outside. Whereas he could have used a simple thing like a pith-bow and he teaches with maybe another body to teach static electricity. So, I think the curriculum and production of items should be emphasised. 

Madam Speaker, this is a straight forward loan and I think since the committee has looked at the implementation part of it, as Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology, I think it has been long overdue we should pass it without spending a lot time on it. Thank you Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for having given me an opportunity to contribute on this motion, which as my colleague has said is a straight forward motion because it goes far to address our major concerns as far as the country is concerned.  We are trying to change the whole outlook of our education system. Hitherto, we have been emphasising the so-called easy subjects. 

Now it is a challenge to us to say enough is enough and we have got to go the hard way as they say. Whereas actually we have been told that sciences are hard, where they have been made easy by way of teaching, it has been found to be quite easy. Look at our schools, most of our schools do not have laboratories. I have a school called Kyezimbire Secondary School in my constituency, it has a very tiny room called a laboratory, yet recently we got one student who made it to university and he is doing sciences quite well. Supposing these students had three complete laboratories, may be we would have had 20,30,40 students. I think this loan is very well intentioned and we should pass it. 

It also goes further to open our eyes. I do not know but I am sure our government is doing it. We should start looking at vocationalisation of our education system. If I had a way, I would have started with vocational education next year. I know it is going to start the other year, but if I had a way, it would have started next year because it is very critical. We can easily start - look at a school like Mbarara High School, it used to do a lot of science education practicals, wood work, carpentry and brick laying. What happened to some of these schools that were doing this? I think it is high time this loan comes in to rescue the situation. I would like to associate myself with it, but I have one small nagging question at the back of my mind.
When you look at the Constitution - if my mind is cleared on that one, I will certainly have no problem in supporting this motion wholeheartedly. When you look at our Constitution, Article 159(1)&(2), they talk about- but I do not know whether they deliberately refused to talk about 3(a) which reads: “that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before the Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament”. I do not know whether they have been laid on Table. I want to be clarified on that one but otherwise I support the motion. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson laid them there; they are here with us.

3.37
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking at this request by the government to borrow money for the Millennium Science Initiative Project on paper, it is really a very good request. I believe that every Member of Parliament here is duty bound to support this motion if we are to improve on our science and technology in our country. If the money is used to its cardinal purpose not being diverted to other channels definitely it is really a genuine move by the government.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the recommendation 2, which reads, “Government should strengthen the approach to teaching science education with availing science equipment to all schools”. This is a very good recommendation, but I will add on that in most cases private schools are being neglected by the government, yet we all know that the students in these private schools are Ugandans.  Private institutions are playing a very important role in our education. In fact they are really supporting or complimenting the government’s initiative or efforts.

Madam Speaker, in most private schools, science laboratories are not there and if they are there, they are inadequate. Recently, the senior four and senior six students finalised their UNEB examinations, but to some students especially when it came to practicals, they were seeing laboratory equipments for their first time in examinations because the head teachers in preparations for these examinations go and borrow equipment from other schools or at times buy. But look at the situation where a student is in an exam and it is his first time to see and use that kind of equipment, which has been brought because the exams are going on. Madam Speaker, I will urge and beg government to consider private schools in as far as building their laboratories is concerned.

Secondly, it is very expensive having a modest and average laboratory, which requires a minimum of Ugshs 200 millions. Definitely, it is too high that many schools cannot afford it. This Parliament has passed many motion of this kind. But what worries us is the way the loans we are passing here are used which leaves a lot to be desired. 

One wonders as to how a project which has not been implemented yet will really - when you move around you see very expensive cars of Ugshs 150 million and Ugshs 200 million for that project, and the money that has been used to purchase those cars is part of the loan, yet on the ground the project is not there. I will give an example, Madam Speaker. 

When you look at a project known as Rabbit Multiplier Project, it is a very big project with big and expensive cars, but I have never seen butchery or a place where these rabbits are sold. Even in our hotels, rabbits are not on our menus, yet it is a very big project and I believe that we must have spent a lot of money in that direction. But where are those rabbits? Hon. Members, in your constituencies, do you see a very powerful project called Rabbit Multiplier Project? The answer is obvious; it is “No”.  But we see expensive cars, being driven by those who are really spearheading that project.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, when we talk about Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, the loan request is in line with PMA. But I think what we need to do here is to strengthen our farmers who are really putting in a lot of effort in as far as generating especially incomes for their homesteads is concerned. We have been talking about PMA for so many years now but on the ground this Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture is yet to be really visible.  Yet we have spent a lot of money in PMA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, try to conclude.

MR SEBAGGALA: My request, as I conclude - we are going to pass this motion and we are going to receive this loan.  We as members of Parliament, our major role is to monitor.  When we pass here this loan, we are supposed to monitor. It is my request to the Executive, please give us duties; give us roles to monitor because when we misuse this loan, then we will be monitoring nothing. We request you to put this loan to its cardinal use and then we progress in science and technology. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we focus on the loan and its purpose.

3.46
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now a culture for Uganda to borrow for everything, and the practice is that the minister comes here and makes a request in a very short statement and then the chairman of the committee elaborates as if he is the one going to implement the projects. I wonder whether hon. Members now know which ministry is going to be responsible for implementing this loan. 

Is it the Ministry of Education or the Ministry of Finance who will do the follow up? It is not clear from what we have seen. But the practice is that we are going to agree to borrow the money, but the report has not even told us how we are going to repay the loan. There is no mention of how the process of repaying will be done and whether this country has the ability to do the repayment. It is not a serious matter, which is considered at this borrowing stage.  

Then the report makes very pertinent observations that, “Parliament should be involved at some level in the negotiation in order to appreciate the purpose of the loan early enough, but not only at approval”. I think that is a proposal for the future, but for this one, it is a foregone conclusion. Consequently, Parliament never gets to know what has happened with the money. For those of you who were here, we borrowed a very big loan to build polytechnics in this country at every sub-county. Where are the polytechnics in every sub-county? (Interruptions)

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was an intention to borrow, but the borrowing did not take place. The Islamic Development Bank was supposed to lend money but negotiations were never completed. Although there was intention to borrow, the money was not borrowed.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. Kawanga, for giving way. The information I want to add on to my colleague is that if you read the Auditor-General’s report. Already we are going to pay another penalty for not utilising most of these loans to the tune of more than Ugshs 6 billion. Some times they come with conditions, where we have to raise what we call, “counterpart funding”. But we failed to get the counterpart funding and we end up paying the commitment penalties to that tune of Ugshs 6 billion.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, some of us are mesmerised when we have got the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. We borrow all this and then there is that ceiling. If you go to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Energy alone, you will see most of the loans are there. We have borrowed, we have not utilised them; some to the tune of 100 per cent are unutilised. The interest is there, and the commitment penalties are there, which means we do not have the capacity to utilise the loans. I do not know what is going to happen now as we borrow more. That is the information I wanted to put across.

MR JOHN KAWANGA: I thank all the members for the information. We are now being told the intention was there, the money was never borrowed. It is because I have raised it now. This Parliament has never been informed that the request, which was made then has actually never materialised and the minister comes to inform me just casually because I have raised the issue now. Does this Parliament know what has happened? We just approve and everything ends and we have to wait until somebody raises it casually? I am raising all this – (Interruption)

MR OPIO: The member was on the Floor stating that the money was borrowed and one of the government ministers comes and informs the member that the money was not borrowed. Is that casual? This Parliament is not here for casual statements; we are here to inform the Member of Parliament on the Floor from the Executive that money was not borrowed; it was negotiated, but some conditions could not be fulfilled. But there is also a committee on Assurances, which would have been put in place. So, it is not a casual matter; it is a statement by a member of the Executive that we did not borrow the money.  

MR KAWANGA: I thank the honourable minister for that information –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, when a Minister stands up and says we never borrowed money for the polytechnics when I was the chairman of the committee by then and I know we borrowed money for polytechnics. I must read you the date –(Laughter)- It was in May 2004 when we borrowed money for polytechnics; they were 13 initially and they were increased to 16 and the districts, which were –(Interjections) - we have it, if you want bring the resolution - but I was reading the summaries which we have in the Hansard. We borrowed the money for polytechnics –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is it the fact that this House considered that loan? It is a fact that we considered it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was the chairperson, we considered the loan for polytechnics and Ministry of Finance knows about it. I want to assure you that the districts, which were supposed to get them are known- even mine called Sironko was one of those to have got the polytechnic.  

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kawanga and hon. Mafabi for raising this issue. What I want to inform this House is that our Rules under the functions of the Committee on National Economy provide that it is upon the committee and the committee of the whole House actually to request for six months reports and annual reports. 

If you could recall with due respect, Madam Speaker, before the Budget is read, the President always sends the state of the loans. I think it would be at this stage that Parliament really intervenes and debates. So, this actually is a weakness of Parliament that whenever such indicative reports are sent and a state of indebtness of this country is sent to this country and to this House, members do not analyse it. Actually, this blame goes to hon. Mafabi, being a former chairperson of the committee, you would have caused the report to be read in this House and debated. So, when you come here and tell us that it was not debated and nothing was done, you are actually shooting yourself –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was debated.  

MR ODIT: The Chairman of Finance Committee is very informed as an economist and he knows very well that hon. Mafabi stood firm here when the loan for constructing the road from Soroti to Lira was being debated. He stood firm and wanted to know how this country has utilised the loan and he laid on Table the list of unutilised loans in this House. Is it in order for one to insist on blaming an hon. Member who has been doing his job professionally?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if it is true that he laid that Paper on the Table, then it was a responsibility for us and the government to follow it up. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, hon. Kawanga was talking of a polytechnic in every sub-county, hon. Mafabi has said there was a loan for 13 polytechnics. Can we get clear on that? What the minister was talking about is a much larger loan than it could have been - the loan that hon. Mafabi is talking about.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I too was a member of the national economy committee with hon. Mafabi as our chairman. There was no time we discussed a loan for establishing a polytechnic in every sub-county across the country. Never! Consequently, as additional information, the standing Committee on National Economy is charged with the responsibility of making periodic reports to this house. Therefore, hon. Kawanga, the responsibility for monitoring evaluation is squarely on the shoulders of the Standing Committee on National Economy and if that has not come through it, it is not for the Executive arm of government to be blamed. Thank you very much.

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, I just want to give information that my Committee on National Economy has already embarked on a programme to consider the first quarter of 2006/2007 financial year; and if I am given a slot next week, we shall be reporting on some of these issues.

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I think enough debate has been generated for Parliament to realise that it actually has no control on loans that it passes as of now. Unless something is done specifically, we are in problems. In fact, the recommendation that the committee to be involved at negotiation stage should be taken very seriously and then subsequently we would be able to follow up on what goes on. 

Now, my request is that even the committee when it is making a report, it should not assume that because the loan is long term, therefore, it is assumed the country would be in a position to pay. It should be in position to tell us the status of the loans portfolio as it is now put it in perspective and indicate to us our ability to repay that loan. Even if it is not us, at least our sons and daughters will be responsible for repaying these loans.  Otherwise, we shall be a Parliament approving loans with no duty to know whether this country will ever be able to pay and we mortgage this country up its ears, which is not good.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.00
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a very serious concern to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in respect of this loan business. I think in future we need the ministry to come out, first of all, with the total debts incurred by the country before we involve ourselves in approving more loans and then how the loans have been serviced because we may go beyond the limit.  

Even now, I do not know how much we owe them in terms of loans and the impact, because when we come to the implementation part of it and the recommendation as stated here; when you go to my constituency and others, you will find that all these schools like in my constituency have no laboratories. How are we going to benefit from these loans?

We have no equipments. Now, when you therefore recommend here and then we do not monitor by the minister presenting first how much we are owing in total and how much we are serving the loan, then it means that we can go on and on without proper knowledge of the amount of money we are borrowing.

The second question I would like to ask is: Do we have a limit of borrowing or we are just continuing like that? If we have no limits then why is it that the Ministry of Public Service cannot borrow loans to service the senior citizens of this country who have been trotting the streets of this country looking for their pensions and gratuities. Because it is a serious matter, I can see this one coming from this angle and yet even according to the presentation of the chairperson, where has he involved the Committee on Science and Technology? They have not involved the stakeholders. 

Therefore we are talking about the Committee on National Economy. If we now question the technical part of it, who is going to monitor it; where are we going to assist in this case? Because totally we are not involved, but now we see on the Floor- I do not remember when the committee has been requested or consulted on this important request. 

So, Mr chairman, in future you better look left and right to ensure that we all corporate in order to approve some of these important loans. Otherwise, to me, Madam Speaker, we therefore now need to know how much we owe in total debts and loan. Because as in respects of other loans you have borrowed, I think if you are to give our reports, we are not benefiting. I am sorry, Madam, to indicate this one but it is very important. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that the President is required every year to inform the country about the state of indebtedness. So, I expect that between April and June, this information will come to us. So, you can actually start from there.

4.05
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but before I do that, I want to make a few observations. In the development process of this country, I have heard many people say that for Uganda to develop you need a middle class in economics or in the economy. As I support this loan, I would like to tell this House that the middle economic class cannot develop without an appropriate technology class. 

I want to emphasise that this loan or this money that we are getting should be targeted specifically to the needs of this country in the area of science and technology. I have listened to the committee recommendations but one of the problems, which I want to be addressed is the problem of relating the issues studied in institutions with the communities that we lead. I would like to see a direct relation between what is learnt in schools and what is done in our communities.

We have a lot of science institutions, we have a lot of professors in universities, they have done a lot of research, but whatever they have done cannot be found anywhere in our communities. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to see this recommendation where we separate the issues of science from these other issues made very clear. I would like to see us- for example why should the National Council of Science and Technology be under the Ministry of Finance? We should have unique structures that address science issues.

The other point I want to raise, Madam Speaker, is about the issues of local artisans. People are talking about the artisans in Katwe, but we have many other areas that need to be looked at. I would like to look at other areas especially in terms of location beyond Kampala. We also look at other areas like irrigation. Madam Speaker, it is only in Uganda where we are depending on God’s mercy. He just sends us rain, we grow crops, when the crops are about to dry, he stops the rain, and we get sunshine. We are just dependant on God. We must put in our own effort to utilise the environment. 

Madam Speaker, there is a general feeling in Uganda that even those who are studying science now do not behave scientifically. Even in this Parliament here, there should be a difference between somebody who is practically trained with somebody who is theoretically trained. But we are all putting on ties, he is a graduate of science but he is also looking for administrative work. 

It is very, very important that, Madam Speaker, for science to take root and help in development, we must change our behavioural thinking. For example, even what we do in our homes, look at these floods in Kampala, all those show that we do not have any basics in science thinking. Look at hygiene situations in our homes; look at how we are degrading the soils, we cannot use terraces; look at the issues of nutrition, all those are issues –

So, Madam Speaker, I would like that as we get this loan and any more money, let us deliberately move as a science based culture. Let us develop a science culture where we know that even our citizens are helped to think scientifically to do most of the scientific aspect that do not need serious training.

Madam Speaker, all the issues that we talk about, you hear in Kampala all the politics we talk about, we have forgotten the technical components. I was reading a motion today about some issues in Kampala. Look at how we are sleazing latrines in the middle of the city. So, if we were thinking scientifically and promoting the scientists, I think our output will be increased.

Madam Speaker, as I end, I would like now- this loan is under the National Council of Science and Technology, but also we have a very big programme about universal technical training in the Ministry of Education. How are they related? I would like to see that as we get this loan and as the ministry of education plans its other programme, we see the co- relationship so that our people can benefit maximally. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.10
MS AMUGE OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin with observation 6(0), that is number two. The committee noted with concern that there is no national technology and innovation policies. The committee was informed that the draft is yet to be approved by the cabinet. My question is, do we begin with the policy or we begin with borrowing? 

The next observation I want to make here is, who is supposed to follow up and what is the stage in the cabinet? I want to find out.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, this question might not be answered by the cabinet because they might not remember –(Laughter)- I have been associated with National Council of Science and Technology in this Parliament for five years. That committee has appealed to this House to prevail over the Ministry of Finance, which has been sitting over this draft policy throughout the 7th Parliament. We have up to now been complaining that there is no policy; the policy is in draft form gathering dust in the Ministry of Finance. I hope they will come and confirm.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I intend to move a motion -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is nobody on the Floor. Didn’t you finish?

MR EKANYA: No, just a moment, I am seeking your guidance. Madam Speaker, they are supposed to pass this report, but there is normally a resolution, which is attached and based on that resolution, I wanted to move some amendment because the loans we have been passing in this House were violating the law of the land. I have been on the Committee on National Economy for over 7 years; we passed a loan with a provision stating that during implementation, all taxes will be waived; and that has been violating the law of the land.  

This morning, Madam Speaker, I was having a meeting with the country head of the World Bank and they said that it has been a problem of many countries - they enter into agreements knowing very well that it violates the law of their land. So I wanted to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Ekanya, what is the law, which is being violated? Be clear so that everybody can take notice.

MR EKANYA: You see we approve loans here in which the main agreement has a clause that government should automatically waive taxes during implementation. For example, a loan for a road - machineries that are brought here, the implementing company never pays tax for all the machineries, including fuel and that violates the Constitution because it is only this Parliament that has power to waive taxes. 

So World Bank is saying, “You countries, if we give you a loan, you need to raise taxes. Why do you allow it to happen and then later on government gets money from the budget to pay for taxes on the trucks and machinery used on the road.” All the fuel that the company that is building the road uses, it is the Ministry of Finance again that draws from its national budget to pay”. 

So the modern argument is that if Parliament passes a loan agreement here and stating that – I mean removing that clause so that during implementation the taxes be paid to the country- that is really a proposal, which I want to put forward so that we do not just pass a loan with   agreements that tie our people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to set the record clear. One, I happen to be the former Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, and when I see a real member of Cabinet coming to lie before Parliament that nothing took place, when he knows that it is true, I feel so hurt.  

Madam Speaker, because of being in a hurry, I never came with the documents, but I have here two documents. I was the chairperson and Prof. Kamuntu was a member. But let me read the exact day, these are the motions. This is a business, which was transacted by the 7th Parliament on 13th December 2001: “A motion for resolution of Parliament seeking to authorize Parliament to borrow US$ 2.509 millions from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction, equipping and furnishing the community polytechnics”. Now this was the resolution, which was –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I think the problem we have here is whether they were 920 polytechnics to be constructed for the whole country, because we had 920 sub counties - whether they were 16 or 13.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, when I came, I told you that they were 13 polytechnics and they were adjusted to 16. I said 13, and that is why I never said 920 because I was clear.  

Now, Madam Speaker, we have here a report of the Auditor-General, which says in summary that penalties, which are rising as a result of non-utilization of loans every year, for the year 2004/5 is Ugshs 6.5 billion, and that is quite dangerous. Why do we pay money having borrowed money? 

In addition to that, we have a loan, which Parliament approved on 13 December 2001, for US$20 million from International Development Association for COMESA regional trade facility project. Nobody has ever mentioned about this money while we are sitting here. 

The chairperson of the committee - we made a report to the House, a total report, which was presented by hon. Guma under my leadership. It presented a position on how much we have and the absorption capacity lacking in government. None of the people has ever come to discuss that report. So, Madam Speaker, I plead with Members of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR OPIO: I stand here because I belong to the implementing ministry. It is true the motion was moved here, Parliament approved the money from the Islamic Development Bank, but as far as the government is concerned, when it came to negotiations, they hit a snag and up to now the money has not been borrowed from the Islamic Development Bank. This is the point I read. 

I am not saying that Parliament did not pass it, what I am saying is that it passed, but it has not been implemented. There is no point of saying that we have lied. That is what I stated and that is what I am repeating. Money has not been borrowed because the Islamic Development Bank has not abided with what we decided in Parliament. This is what I want to put on record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Nandala, are we incurring penalties as a result of this particular loan?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker.  Let me inform the hon. Members how a penalty comes up. They may say that this month, you are going to take US$1 million. Now, if you do not pick it, it will attract a penalty because they have committed that money already. The absorption capacity in this country is low.  

As we are standing now, the numbers of loans, which are not dispersed, if you look at them, you may shade tears. If the minister is saying that they borrowed, who designed the document? It is the Ministry of Education, which designs the documents about borrowing money. How can it hit a snag, when the technical officers of the ministry are the ones who designed the document and they produced what we call a project implementation manual, which they have to follow - the basis on which they approve the money? Now having approved again the design, what happens?  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the born of contention on this Floor arose from the contribution by hon. Kawanga that government had borrowed money to construct a polytechnic in every sub county with 970 sub counties; it would mean, 970 polytechnics. Our argument was that there has never been - because I have also been a member of the National Economy Committee, never in the committee did we ever discuss a loan providing polytechnics in every sub-county. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Mafabi to continue confusing the two issues? These are facts.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this is a loan from IDA to provide US$30 million for supporting Millennium Science Initiative. Indeed there is no way hon. Mafabi can establish the absorptive capacity of the country to use this loan as compared to other loans that he is referring to. Never! You cannot establish it because I know for the fact right now that we need –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not respond to the hecklers.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The point of order, Madam Speaker. Is this, is it in order for hon. Mafabi to clearly bring something, which he cannot establish on this Floor of the House as being correct and using it as an argument for confusing the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, I think the opposition has conceded that it was not a loan for 970 sub-counties, but they were either 13 or 16. I think that is what they were talking about.  Then the other issue they were talking about is the utilisation, for which I think committees should arrange and have a special session on this matter, because the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Developments will table the report of the National Economy and discuss it. So please, conclude.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. I wanted to seek clarification because I do not want to get lost. I heard the Minister saying that a loan was passed and we negotiated and then we failed.  So, I want to find out, do we pass the loan first or we first negotiate? I just want to get a clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, I listened carefully to the report of the Chairperson of the National Economy. He has actually raised the question of when does Parliament intervene on issues of loans? It is already in this report.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Members can benefit from this statement, which I am going to make. The law demands that before government borrows it should come here and get approval. That does not mean that government has already received the money, you approve before we move. 

As the honourable minister has said the procedures - the negotiations may not succeed and this is exactly what hon. Mafabi should understand. The fact that we are going to pass this resolution does not mean that US$30 million are already here –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am a trained economist, accountant and I worked in government as a professional. The procedures are well known, it is true Parliament approves the loans, but whenever it is going to approve, government has done everything - that is why the committees come and say, “Can you bring a project implementation manual, the development credit agreement”? All those are brought and those are always brought when government has finished, and in some cases, the minister has already signed and they bring it here for us to approval.  Is the Minister in charge of Disaster in order to –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is also on the point of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I pray that you organise another induction course for Prof. Kamuntu so that he understands when to rise. Is it in order for the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness, Prof. Kabwegyere, to say that Nandala is wrong to have said that when approval is going to be done, project implementations have already been completed, that we just come here to say, “okay go and get the money on the account” Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I think you heard the Chair reporting. One of the areas of dissatisfaction was that Parliament was not sufficiently involved in the deliberations and negotiations and it is already on record. I think we should just follow it up and find a way to rectifying it.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. I want to look at 4.1 (3) and then I want to link it up to observation 7 and finally link it up with recommendation 5. 

I would like to make an appeal to the government side, to the Cabinet, that it is not that no initiative has been taken in the area of the artisans. I would like to inform and also appeal to the Executive that a lot of initiative has been taken in the area of artisan developments. I want us to look at the area where the Ministry of Education has got some funding to help private vocational training institutes and almost about 60 have been funded now; Ministry of Education has been the grantor.  I want us to look at UMA, Uganda Manufacturers Association, Gatsby, which is headed by Dr Byaruhanga at Makerere University, and other areas like UNIDO where governments got a lot of money for development of these artisans.  
 
Honourable members, the only problem is that there has been completely no coordination, the artisans are trained, but no body follows up to mentor others. I would like to say that if we get this money, this time we should look at the area of the outreach, but let no policy coordination take it up completely. 

Here if we are talking of policy coordination, let it not be policy coordination whose impact is assessed by big vehicles. Let the policy coordination have impact that is assessed by a number of artisans who are performing in the given cottages or industries. 

 Finally, I would like to say that probably some people are ready salivating because we are passing this Bill. But we want the right people to handle this project that we are looking at and make it reach to the right people and to me, this begins when the artisan are put together with serious research. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Kaddunabbi Ibrahim): I want to thank my colleagues, members of Parliament, for the various observations they have made, many of which we had hinted on. But, the point, which brought contention on the Floor of Parliament is what we actually observed that because they bring these loans to Parliament just to be approved, then instances arise, like that where we pass a loan and it is not utilised. To the best of my understanding, by the time a loan is brought to the Floor of Parliament, basically what is remaining is Parliament approval and maybe a letter from the Attorney-General.  So, if they sought a loan and got it, then I would not expect them not to secure it. 

Secondly, hon. Mugambe, talked of an independent ministry, I am sure that even if it is not written elsewhere, it is written in the Hansard that we were told that South Africa has a fully fledged Ministry of Science and Technology. So, we are giving it to Parliament to consider having an independent ministry to take care of all these research and science bodies, and have them under one ministry, it will easy a lot of work. 

I was asked whether science and technology members were aware of this loan. The answer is yes. Hon. Mugambe, the Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology did attend a meeting and also the Chairperson of ICT, hon. Baliddawa, attended the meeting when we were discussing this loan.  

Madam Speaker, you answered hon. Byaruhanga about the terms and conditions of the IDA loan because these are in the agreement, which I laid on the Table.

Hon. Kawanga, you asked, “Which ministry will be responsible for this loan”? It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. As we speak now, the mother ministry of the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology is Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

To give Parliament an indication whether there is capacity to pay, as I requested earlier on. We are in the advanced stages of the state of economy for the first quarter and some of these things will be handled there. The ministry promised to give us a comprehensive report on all loans so far received and their utilization. The local artisans are not only in Katwe. I just gave them as an example –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Chairperson, that information will be contained in the report you are going to write. The information the minister is giving will be contained in your report, which you will present here.

MR KADDUNABBI: Yes, Madam Speaker. The issue of Katwe as the centre of local artisans was given as an example, but I will not be a member of the body, which is going to assess who will be getting money. However, we were told that it would be from anywhere in Uganda.  

The honourable member asked whether we begin with policy or borrowing; I think the minister will answer that. 

Hon. Ekanya said that we did not attach a resolution on the report. It is not the procedure of this Parliament for a committee report to have the resolution attached, but the minister brings a resolution to Parliament and he actually did that. 

Then about tax exemption, maybe next time, when we are debating - because next week we might be debating the East African Transport Facility, which has a component on Works; it might involve tax exemptions. But regarding the Millennium Science Initiative, my committee did not see anywhere where we shall have tax exemptions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members.  When we read the Budget Speech on the 15th of June this year, we did table among other things the indebt ness of this country and so this information is with Members of Parliament. 

We are also aware that we had also through the IMF a reduction of up US$ 3.7 billion as far as our total indebtness is concerned. But, as the Chairperson of the Committee has mentioned, we shall soon be giving this information to this House.  

Madam Speaker, the National Commission of Science and Technology is right now under the Ministry of Finance and this is because originally it was under the Ministry of Planning, and when the Ministry of Planning was combined with that of Finance, Uganda National Council of Science and Technology was brought under the Ministry of Finance. 

The policy, which hon. Rebecca has talked about is already in its finally stages and we are handing it soon to Cabinet and then subsequently, it will be brought to the House.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, hon. Mugambe did say that there is need for a Ministry of Science and Technology, and I think it is now common knowledge that we have a Ministry of Science and Technology. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, when we have the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, where is the Ministry of Science and Technology?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have the Ministry of ICT that is already handling most aspects, which the Ministry of Science and Technology should be doing; that is what I am referring to.

Madam Speaker, there is also what was –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I wanted to inform the Minister that the ICT ministry is catering for Information Communication Technology - (Laughter)- and there are so many other technologies. That is the information I wanted to give you hon. Minister. It would be part of the other bigger ministry of science and technology. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, most obliged. But as you know, we are emphasising the issue of technology -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, hon. Ssebaggala did raise an issue of the need for science laboratories in all secondary schools including private schools. And I think it is just right and fitting that we pass this loan request so that more of our secondary schools can be equipped with laboratories.

On the issue of monitoring of this fund, the chairperson has already answered it; this will be done through the Ministry of Finance in conjunctions with the Institute of Science and Technology, and there will also be a technical committee that will be monitoring and supervising this.

Now, this also answers the issues that were raised by hon. John Kawanga on which ministry is implementing it and how we are to repay. The chairperson of the committee has already answered the issue of the repayment of the loan. Now, in status indebtedness, I have already answered that, Madam Speaker.

Finally, the issue of why National Council of Science and Technology should be under the Ministry of Finance that was asked by hon. Ngabirano. I have also answered that.

Madam Speaker, with these few remarks, I would like to urge members to approve this loan of US$30 million for science and technology. I beg to move. 

MR OCHIENG: Clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Eh, but why do you wait until he has finished then you say, “clarification”? He is off the Floor now -(Interjection)- no, hon. Member, why did you wait for him to conclude and then you got up for clarification? You should have stopped him on the way? Okay, if it is burning, ask, and do not make a submission.

MR OCHIENG: It is common knowledge as he said that the Ministry of Finance makes most of the loan requests. My problem, Madam Speaker, is on the people who dwell around Lake Victoria. The reason why I am mentioning this is that from 2000 to-date, there were two or three loans, which were requested from this Parliament, which we did approve much of which were even provided for by different areas. The truth is that to-date, those loans have never reached the beneficiaries and they are still lying with the Ministry of Agriculture. I am only requesting that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you name those three loans so that we can give the minister the task to come back and tell us where the money is. Name those three loans and we –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Basically that is what I want to know. The loans that we approved for fisheries, first of all, there was one of REVEMP, the second was for the institution of BM use, the third was under Lake Victoria Environmental Management. To-date, all these are still lying with the Minister and I am worried that even this loan that should not be opposed by anybody may also fall under the same trap. 

Finally, I want to know if there were some, which were good for the seed schools in the districts for laboratories. To-date, the seed school that was constructed in Siguru Island has never been provided by the laboratory equipments. Children are still sitting down - in a magnificent house, constructed with a lot of money. But they are still sitting down on the blocks while attending lessons. They see the apparatus on the last day before they go for their last exams. I fell a victim of the same and I do not want it to happen again. I request that the minister - since he is the person who comes here always to request for the loans, to find issues to do next time than having people trying to oppose things, which should never be opposed. I thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we said that we are going to bring a comprehensive report covering the loans that have been taken by government. And given that the level of water in Lake Victoria has gone down, going to the Islands should not be a problem -(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee has already mentioned that we are bringing this –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. The drop in the level of Lake Victoria has caused a lot of damage on marine traffic. Tanzania has almost grounded all its ships and we have been connected very comfortably. The piers have had to be constructed again right further inside. We are not talking about power, just traffic on the lake. And the minister insists that because the lake is dropping, travelling on the lake should not be a problem. Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, I think certain things should not be treated as trivialities. You address the question of when this gentleman and his people will get their fishing things and the policies of those other three loans requests. Had you concluded?

MR OMACH: Most obliged. Madam Speaker. So, as I said, the chairperson of the committee has said that we are going to present these reports next week, which will cover also the level of indebtedness in the country. I thank you and I urge members to support this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. members, I have two small announcements. This is from Uganda Revenue Authority. Tomorrow, they will avail themselves in the south wing of Parliamentary Gardens to facilitate the inspection of your motor vehicles between 9.00 a.m. and 12.00 noon. So, they have now come here; you do not have to drive to them. They are saying that they expect you to come with the motor vehicle logbooks, the licence certificate - blue copy and the URA receipt.

So, if you want verification of your vehicles, it can be done here tomorrow between 9.00 and 12.00, instead of you driving to URA; they have brought the office here. This is for Members of Parliament and the staff and I think they are making your life easier. Because I do not think anybody would prefer going there. So, those who want can really do it here.

Secondly, there will be representatives from the Stanbic Bank tomorrow in the Members Lounge at 11.00 O’clock in the morning. The people from Stanbic are coming to update you on the public offer of their shares. 

So, you take your cars and also attend the other things. Thank you.

PRESENTATION CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA, FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2001

4.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Sebuliba Mutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to present for consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor- General for the public accounts of the Government of Uganda for the financial year ended 30th June 2001.

Madam Speaker, the book was laid on Table about two - three weeks back early this months, and I know that all members are now part of whatever is going to emanate from the discussion. 

Madam Speaker, let me give the executive summary and then you will open the Floor for further observations. The report has got a table of contents with 40 votes. 

Introduction

The work of the Public Accounts committee has been provided for under its mandate and it is based on the findings of the Auditor-General on how money granted by Parliament met the public expenditure for the financial year ended 30 June 2001 was expended.  

The Public Accounts Committee proceeded on its work under the following terms: 

Evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency and economic value of government projects and programmes according to their set objective.

Assessing the consistence of budget outlays in relation to the increasing overspending by ministries and departments of government.

Madam Speaker, it has got a procedure that was followed, and has also got specific issues of concern raised by the committee. I think I will start from there for the sake of time.

Under the Commitment Control System, government ministries/departments are barred from committing funds, which are not budgeted for or released by Ministry of finance. 

During the year under review, various departments and ministries submitted arrears arising from over commitment outside their budget for verification and justification, totalling to Ugshs67,525,333,911.  This figures cover most of the government ministries including State House, which over spent Ugshs3, 176,265,207, Finance Ugshs 19,731,036,096 and Foreign Affairs Ugshs7, 414,170,263, among others. 

During discussions with the accounting officers, they complained of inadequate funding due to budget constraints, most often resulting into suspension of their releases vis-à-vis unavoidable expenditures and late submissions of claims mainly from security services.

The committee observed that the Commitment Control System as a policy of government was meant to instil discipline in the accounting officers on management of finances. They, however, note that this policy has only partially worked because of lack of seriousness on the part of the accounting officers to adhere to it. This has been possible because of failure to apply the prescribed sanctions by the responsible authorities.

The committee on its part recommended the sanctions to be applied in order to discipline the accounting officers who breach the Commitment Control System. 

There is equally frustration on the system by the Ministry of Finance itself, in failing to release funds budgeted for and approved by Parliament to ministries and departments. Ministries and departments have experienced suspension of their budgets and yet their activities are supposed to continue. This has forced accounting officers to violate the system in order to take care of mandatory bills like Utility bills, rent, feeding in the hospitals and other institutions, and payment to international organizations. 

The committee therefore recommends that: 

Ministry of Finance should review this policy, in relation to the budget to make the Commitment Control System enforceable. 

Since most of the breaches are in relations to payment of rent, the government should establish homes for its ministries.  

The committee therefore recommends that Amber House and Crested Towers be made to house government ministry and headquarters since they are fully owned by government. 

The committee however noted that this policy has failed, because of classified expenditure. The committee, therefore, recommends that Amber House and Crested Towers be made to house government ministries/headquarters since they are fully owned by government.

On classified expenditure, the Auditor General reported to the committee that he had commenced the audit of classified expenditure. However, he noted that by the year ended June 2001, classified expenditure stood at Ugshs 36,510,640,662 and US$ 500,000 and were related to the office of the President, IGG, State House, defence, Internal Affairs and Police.

The committee noted with appreciation the steps taken towards auditing classified expenditure, but directed that the whole process be expedited by making sure that the Auditor-General’s work is not frustrated. The accounting officers of the respective ministries and departments were therefore directed to comply with the law.

On outstanding advances or unaccounted for funds, the Auditor-General reported that advances totalling to Ugshs 2,569,595,789 had not been accounted for. This covered State House, which stood at a tune of Ugshs 18,723,700, Water Lands and Environment Ugshs 38,913,795, Mbarara University Ugshs 24,58,500, Mass Mobilization Ugshs, 14,020,000, Works Communication and Housing Ugshs1,258,011,115 and Uganda Police Ugshs, 1,215,868,679.  

The committee directed recoveries from these salaries of the officers concerned and by the time of writing this report the situation was as follows: 

All outstanding advances from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment had been recovered except Ugshs2, 634,000, which was being recovered from the salary of the Chief Administrative officer of Moyo. 

Late accountability for State House and Ministry of Works Communication and Housing were submitted, verified and confirmed by the Auditor-General.

Accountability for Mass Mobilization, the outstanding balance of Ugshs 925,000 was to be recovered from Mr Obola George since February 2004.  

Accountability for Uganda Police of Ugshs 31,763,000 was being awaited from upcountry stations.  

The committee noted the recoveries being made and the late accountabilities being made but questioned the rationale of this late accountabilities. It is the committee’s view that these late accountabilities should have been made according to the regulations. The fact that they were not made available in time caused a lot of doubt on their authenticity.

Assets owned by government: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Auditor General reported a number of anomalies connected with procurement among management of government assets. The report noted that a number of Police stations and prison farms were built on land whose titles have not been obtained. The boundaries are not surveyed and demarcated. As a result, a number of encroachers were on the land. In one instance, a local council threatened to re-allocate the government farm if rents were not paid.  

The committee was further informed that there are some lands occupied by Uganda prisons whose rights are vested with Busoga and Buganda governments. Although prisons is making use of these lands, there is a possibility that the lands in question could be returned to traditional institutions. The prisons in question are Bufulubi in Busoga and Kigo in Wakiso. The committee directs that the status of these prisons’ land be established by government with a view to obtaining leases from the local land boards.

This situation is not unique to local properties alone. During the year under review, two Uganda counsels abroad were threatened with closure due to non-payment of rents and utility bills. In fact, one of the two missions had already been issued     with a delinquency notice and was to be auctioned. Further more, on the foreign missions, the intentions to obscure the procedures of sale of properties and our proceeds should be handled.  Some of the sales have been termed illegal and cancelled at a considerable waste cost against government, while some proceeds on the other sales have been used on recurrent expenditure or purchase of other property with no clear authority.  

When it comes to the use of government vehicles, the situation even becomes pathetic. Government vehicles are misused for private work and driven far beyond official times. It is common to see government vehicles carrying charcoal, goats, posho and many other things.  

New vehicles purchased hardly last without either accidents or serious mechanical problems. Most of the government buildings within the country and abroad are in a sorry state, with leaking roofs, unpainted and cracked walls.  

The committee, therefore, directs Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Works, Communication and Housing and Uganda Land Commission to work out proper guidelines on the management of government assets, including the use of government vehicles.  

Wasteful expenditure:

The Public Accounts Committee notes with dissatisfaction that it has become a habit for government ministries and departments to commit government on contracts. And because of their laxity to respect the terms of the contracts they themselves sign, government ends up losing huge amounts of money. One of such cases was when Mbarara University incurred an amount of Shs 53,925,221 on interest in delayed payments for a local firm that had been contracted to construct a students’ hall. 
 
Another example was when Ministry of Defence failed to pay repair charges of a plane C130 promptly. This made government pay an extra Shs 286,676,497 as interest and auction charges on top of the bill of US$ 827,000, which is equivalent to Shs 1,475,440,000 for the aircraft. It was only the intervention of the Auditor General that saved the situation. Otherwise, the ministry would have incurred further charges of interest and auction. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, the committee draws the attention of the secret treasury to such irresponsible acts on the part of government officials in defaulting in agreements.                         All the concerned officers should be held responsible for such losses.  

Spending funds without Parliament’s approval:  

The committee noted that it has become common practice for some accounting officers to spend public funds outside the approved budget. In his report to Parliament, the Auditor General reported that the official residence of our mission in Bonn, German was sold for 650,000 Deutsche Marks. Out of the proceeds from the sale, 373,401.45 Deutsche marks, that is approximately US$180,500, was remitted to Pretoria to purchase a chancery building at 822 Church Street Pretoria. It must be noted that the purchase of this property was done outside the budget and procurement procedure and therefore lacked Parliament’s approval. This was, therefore, contrary to the set regulations.
  
At the time of the purchase of this building, the government valuer had placed the value of the building at Rands 1,300,000. The mission, however, paid Rands 1,424,000 making Rands 124,000 above the valuation price. This was done without seeking further advice of the government valuer.  

The committee cautions and directs the accounting officers to perform their work within their authority.  The committee also recommends that the Secretary to the Treasury disciplines the officials that were involved in this transaction.  

On classroom constructions:

The Public Accounts Committee noted with concern the report of the Uganda Debt Network on the construction of classrooms in Katakwi, Soroti and Kaberamaido. The committee also considered the question of quality and value for money in the classrooms constructed. It also noted overwhelming reports of gross abuses in the handling of the school facilitation grants in almost all the districts. 

The committee heard testimonies from Members of Parliament of numerous cases of poor construction work and award of contracts. The accounting officers mentioned cases where constructors have been fully paid for the uncompleted jobs in Mukono and Kampala districts. The committee was convinced that no amount of control from the centre could be imposed on the chief administrative officers and district tender board in the districts in order to ensure propriety and quality in the delivery of classrooms. The accounting officers have already put a lot of effort in holding workshops and using sanctions, which did not work.  

The Public Accounts Committee was informed of the wish of the Ministry of Education to centralise the management of the school facilitation grant and construction of classrooms. The accounting officer lamented to the committee that this programme was under Ministry of Finance under Poverty Alleviation Action Plan and was governed under conditionalities agreed upon between the donors and government to improve their incomes on the low-income population. The committee agrees with the use of these resources to improve the income of the low-income population but I pointed out that this was a central government subvention intended to mitigate the effect of the policy of the universal primary education.

The committee observes that the ultimate people to suffer were the children under the universal primary education. This was because classrooms were poorly made and would not last long. The money under this programme had generated uncertainty levels of corruption in the districts. 

The committee further observed that penalties to districts for failure to account by withholding funds and returning money to the Consolidated Fund account only created a vicious cycle of not accomplishing the programme and punishing the beneficiaries.  

Public Accounts Committee recommended that the use of Poverty Alleviation Action Plan for implementing this programme of classroom construction be reviewed by the government and the donors with the view of centralising the operations of these funds from the Ministry of Education and Sports so that: - 

(a)	by using work plans of the districts, the ministry would be able to identify the schools intended to be constructed by the districts and commission studies on them so as to get the bill of quotations;
 
(b)	the ministry should then tender for the classroom construction according to the schools to be constructed and ensure that tenders are offered to credible registered companies.

It was the belief of the committee that this measure would deliver both quality and quantity of work and the objective of assisting the low-income people would equally be achieved, as it would be contingent upon the constructor to use local artisans and materials that benefit from the expertise of the constructor.  

The Public Accounts Committee directed the accounting officers to submit this view to the Ministry of Finance and donors for consideration. The committee therefore took this decision because of its reluctance to impose penalties on lack of accountability, which it would have actually done by withholding remittances to districts until satisfactory accountability and value for money was done. 

On management of projects:

The management of a number of projects run under government ministries and departments continues to be abused by the accounting officers in many projects. Projects funds are borrowed to facilitate delegations to travel or for carrying out other ministers’ operations but accountability may not be made for the life of the project. Projects funds are advanced to project officials but there are in most cases no measures in place to prompt accountability of such advances. In other cases, project funds are diverted to carry out other activities that they are not meant for. 

The committee is concerned that such indiscipline on the part of accounting officers has led to the failure of many projects to achieve their purpose noting that funds borrowed are not put back to the project. The committee, therefore, discourages such habits in ministries and directs for proper management of project funds.  

Private enterprises: 

A total of 56 privatised enterprises has been fully paid for and payments amounting to Shs 236,778,936,748 have been realised. The committee however points out that the Uganda Consolidated Properties Embassy House, Development House, was sold at Shs 11,250,000,000 against the same liabilities. Seven enterprises however continue to default on their payment to the tune of Shs 3,173,020,000 and some are in arrears for periods of over five years. These include the following: 

•	African Textile Mills. The buyer is one Patel, the sale amount was Shs 1,700,000,000 and the outstanding balance was Shs 1,600,000,000 as at 31 December 1998. This is an extent of default of four years.  
	  
•	Uganda Fisheries Limited. The buyer is Nordic-Africa Fisheries Company Ltd. The sale amount was Shs 1,100,000,000 and the outstanding balance was Shs 994,400,000. Extent of default is over four years.

•	Acholi Inn Hotel. The buyer M/S Laoo Ltd and the sale amount was Shs 230, 000, 0000, with an outstanding balance of Shs 180,000,000. This is an extent of default of five years.

•	Hilltop Hotel. The buyer was Three Links Ltd and the sale amount was Shs 35,000,000 with an outstanding balance of 25,000,000. This is default of five years.

•	Lira Hotel. The buyer was Showa Trading Company. The sale amount was Shs 250,000,0000 with an outstanding balance of Shs 200,000,000. The default is over five years. 

•	Uganda Meat Packers Ltd, Soroti was bought by Uganda Meat Industries. The sale amount was Shs 300,000,0000 with an outstanding balance of Shs 150,000,0000. The debt default is over five years.

•	Uganda Pharmaceuticals was bought by Vivi Enterprises Ltd. The sale amount was Shs 1,501,000,000 with an outstanding balance of Shs 23,620,000. The default is over five years. 

So, as you can see, the outstanding balance for all these is over Shs 3.0 billion. The Auditor General however reported that no interest was charged by government on these balances and the securities are equally being held.  

The committee was also told that whereas the agreed sale for Nyanza Textile Industry Ltd was US$10 billion, the buyer had only paid Shs 2.1 billion leaving a balance of Shs 4,868,000,000. There are no measures to have the balance paid.  

The committee also noted cases where shares were sold for less than the value amount. This included Bank of Baroda where valuation report by KPML put the value of four percent of Government of Uganda shares at Shs 3.5 billion but they were only sold for Shs 2.5 billion.  

In PAPCO Industry, the value of 25 percent Government of Uganda share was put at Shs 438,889,888 by the evaluation report but it was only sold at Shs 100 billion. 

The Public Accounts Committee is concerned about the sell of properties by the negotiating committee of the privatisation unit, which does not seem to have strategies for government’s interests.  

The committee thus reports that the summary of receipts by the financial year under review stood at Shs 223,956,217,537 while total payments towards expenditure were Shs 151,673,222,537. The details are the ones indicated in that summary. The total comes to Shs 72 billion but you must add another US$50 million that was not part of the money utilised.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the Public Accounts Committee throughout its work has emphasised the application and maintenance of high standard of financial control and management of both revenue collections and expenditures by all accounting officers. The failures by accounting officers are highlighted as part of this report under the ministries concerned and the committee urges all ministries and departments to comply with the existing laws and regulations governing the using of public funds, so that time is saved for both the committee and the accounting officers themselves.

I wish to recognise the dedication of the colleagues who sit on this committee who worked tirelessly and those on whose behalf I hereby present this report. I also beg that this report be considered and all the proceedings of the committee be adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Did you table the proceedings when you first brought the report? In conclusion you said that this report with the proceedings be adopted. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, it was laid on the Table the other time. I do not know whether the chairperson laid everything on Table. But at least this was slotted. I do not know what transpired but at least the book was put in the pigeonholes for all Members to internalise and have an informed decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable Chairperson and the Public Accounts Committee, we thank you for that very elaborate executive summary and for the work done to try and update the reports of the Auditor General although this is 2001. I think it is a good effort. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, next time when we come up before you it will be updated. We want to be updated much as we are dealing with some kind of a post-mortem approach. This time we will make sure that we move faster such that even the auditors are not discouraged from doing their work. I hope when they bring the Bill, it will be expeditiously passed such that everything is catered for and we get value for money and real accountability.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much, Public Accounts Committee.  

5.17
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Public Accounts Committee for the job well done. I also thank the past committee under the leadership of hon. Okulo Epak because they did part of this job that has finally been presented. It is good to appreciate. 

The problem and the challenge that Parliament needs to handle is the implementation of these reports. I know we have gone a long way to provide for production of treasury memorandum by the implementing ministry and that is the Ministry of Finance. However, if you get a copy of the treasury memorandum regarding implementation of the report, it is hazy, evasive and dodgy. The treasury memorandum will say the issue is still under investigation by police, or they are still tracing for the concerned officers. 

For example, if the accounting officer involved in financial mismanagement was in agriculture, he moves to the Ministry of Education. The treasury memorandum that we have read from the Ministry of Finance indicates that they are still tracing for the officer and this is really disturbing. Government needs to have its inventory very thorough and clear. This is because most of these officers cause financial mismanagement and then move to other sectors.

Two, the department in the Ministry of Finance that is supposed to implement this report needs to be thorough. Unfortunately, I do not have the draft financial estimate for this year. But we have looked at the draft financial estimate and it does not indicate revenue that is recovered from the officers who cause financial loss. 

This report recommends recovery of funds and return to the Treasury. I expected the draft estimate for the financial year to indicate revenue refunded or other sources of revenue. However, it is not indicated and it disturbs us so much. You tell somebody to refund the money to the Treasury - we discovered sometime back that the Ministry of Finance has a secret account where this money was being banked and yet not declared to government. They use it just like that. This caused part of the accumulation, which the last Parliament was forced to write about. This was something like billions. We hope that the Ministry of Finance will do this country justice because it makes some of us get headache. You force an officer to recover money from an estate of a dead person and the money goes to the Ministry of Finance and it is not reflected in the budget! It is mockery of justice. 

Therefore, I want to urge the Minister of Finance to go back. What we have done is to constitute a mini-committee of PAC, Finance and Budget. We really want to audit the Treasury account. In fact, Mr Okecho has written to the Secretary to the Treasury to ask for the Treasury account statement for the last three years. Really Parliament is going to sit, pass a resolution, recover this money, have it refunded but somewhere some people play about with it. As I said, the normal procedure is that these monies must be reflected in the draft estimate and in the budget for the subsequent year.

Madam Speaker, the next issue is that the public is questioning the desk officers who implement this report. Some of the monies, for example, you heard it that the –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been in PAC for the last six years and the issue of refunding money is actually done. When we recommend that an officer must refund money, it is refunded and evidence is presented to the committee. But the problem the Member is talking about is to specifically indicate how the money was receipted, how much was recovered and other details. Even some Members of the Sixth Parliament were forced to pay some money and we got evidence that that money was paid. Therefore, there is no worry about it, but maybe a summary of the amount of money and the people who have been asked to refund the money. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. That is exactly what I was saying. Maybe my brother joined me with his mind in the middle. The issue I was articulating is that the debts copies at the Ministry of Finance also cause a problem. Some of these monies are sent to some accounting officers when it is not part of their budget and then it is sent late and they are forced to spend it. 

I would like to thank one of the greatest Musoga who is a permanent secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs. He refused such money, which was put on his account without his knowledge. I am not very familiar with his name, but he has been my friend and I knew him as a Musoga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is called Dr Kagoda and he comes from Kamuli.

MR EKANYA: Okay. (Laughter) I thank Dr Kagoda and the people of Kamuli. This country should emulate the conduct and behaviour of Dr Kagoda and others with the same attitude. But what were the intention and the practice of the desk officers? You find that such monies are returned to the Ministry of Finance and it is not reflected in the budget. 

Another very important issue, that I want to ask my colleague the chairman to review if he can, is the issue of re-centralisation. Recently, Members of Parliament were called for a seminar to look at this policy. If we are not careful, we are really re-centralising contrary to the Constitution and the laws of this country. As if we in the centre are saints! I thought we are building a country together. The Ministry of Education has standards of what is supposed to constitute a classroom. The construction manual is so detailed, but the problem is supervision. 

I tell you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, if we take the recommendation of this report on construction -if a classroom block costs Shs 10 million, the Ministry of Education from the centre will spend Shs 50 million on the same classroom. And I think my colleagues who have been accounting officers in the district can attest to this. Therefore, if we change the policy, if we have US$10 billion and it is meant to cover the whole country, it will cover just a quarter.  Therefore, I propose that we instead move to monitor quality-established standards. It is not late because government needs to have standard and quality.   

Another issue is that the money that is given to the district to build these classrooms is not adequate. Tororo County like Kamuli has had an opportunity where Plan International has been building a school. If you look at the structure by Plan International and compare it with ours, you realise that theirs is of standard and modern even though the cost is a bit high. So, whereas we criticise the districts, the issue of costing by the Ministry of Education also calls for improvement.

The chairman raised another pertinent issue regarding properties of government. Madam Speaker, you remember that this Parliament recommended that in order to manage government properties, the Ministry of Finance and government should set up an institution. The Ministry of Finance went ahead sometime back, because I was even on the Committee on Foreign affairs, and set up Uganda Property Holdings Company Ltd to sort out the management of properties. But to a great dismay, to this date - I know we are looking at the report of 2000/01 - there are still anomalies that occur and keep on re-occurring regarding the management of government properties. 

You recently read about a building that was leaking - was it in Brussels, where the local authority said this building is causing the neighbourhood properties to lose value and should be destroyed and turned into a green garden. So, it is very unfortunate because if you, for example, live in Kololo and there is somebody with a grass-thatched house, you cannot entertain such kind of environment, or even if you have the best storied building in Kawempe where my chairman comes from and there is a flat -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. I have listened to a well-articulated argument but there are some problems not necessarily of logic but I think of missing some information. First, in this very sitting today we have been talking about borrowing, which simply means that you do not have enough money. Therefore, if you are talking of adequacy of local government fund, you should bear in mind the money we pass here. The monies we pass that go to the districts are known and the adequacy is obviously known - whether inadequate or adequate.  

Secondly, if you are going outside Uganda and you are looking at the properties, look at how much money is released by the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the maintenance of our properties abroad in relation again to the budget we have. When that has been born in mind, you can see the difficulties that we have. It is okay to say a building is leaking, but at the same time you have a problem of raising the money to address that problem. 

This is not to say, however, that there have not been gaps. There have been some gaps because there can be a bit of creative imagination and even some of the standing orders and financial regulations need to be reviewed.  For example, it does not stand to good logic that you stay in a house paying say US$12,000 a month when you could get a property where you pay US$8,000 per month as mortgage and at the end of the period the property is yours. There are some things, which need to be reviewed. I think as we grow on, we shall improve.  I certainly agree that there are certain mistakes that can be made, but I think also we must bear in mind that the economy we are trying to squeeze cannot give you the juice that you would want to fill your can.  

LT COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, Hon. Ekanya has talked about the management of properties abroad, and Uganda Property Holdings Company Limited. It was found out that this company spends more money travelling to those embassies and properties abroad and trying to look for contractors to renovate from there not from here. They spend a lot of money to stay in those hotels and travel by first class. But we found that it is actually cheaper for the mission abroad to look for a contractor there to do the renovation but at least with permission from the secretary to the Treasury and others like the Auditor General and others, other than sending a team of eight people with eight tickets staying in eight hotels, hiring vehicles to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In a country where they are not normally residents.

LT COL (RTD) BUTIME: In a country where they are not residents. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I thank Prof. Kabwegyere and hon. Butime. This is an issue of management and that is why the opposition are saying, “We are really in need of an alternative”. And I think even when hon. Butime was in the ministry, we raised this issue very seriously. We said that when it comes to appointing of diplomats, we should have all round diplomats and career diplomats. Do not wait for Peter to lose an election and then you make him an ambassador. He has no knowledge of how to conduct himself abroad. He does not know diplomatic etiquettes, language, and other requirements. So, that is why we really -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ekanya in order to say that we should not wait after elections and appoint ambassadors when actually the ambassadors are appointed and approved by Parliament.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Ekanya is making a case for career diplomats rather than political appointees. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It goes beyond just the issue of looking for contractors; it even goes to the issue of accountability for the little funds that they get.  In fact, the Auditor General has raised it and I am sure it is in the report because that was the executive summary. It has become very hard for them to send auditors, just like it is hard to send engineers to get this property renovated. In most of these embassies, they neither audit nor know how to manage their finances. So, even if they raise money using the embassy facilities like visas etcetera, the way they keep their books is a problem.  

If FDC and the opposition were in power - we are now talking of the African Union; we are members of the Commonwealth, we are talking of the East African Community - these issues would be handled at a regional level besides making sure that in order for one to be made an ambassador or a diplomat, he/she should have undergone certain basic training because an ambassador should be the accounting officer of that institution and should really have the basic training. But as we wait to get power, I want to urge the government in place to –(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I would honestly like to seek clarification from hon. Ekanya, how the FDC policy will become regional in matters of appointing ambassadors?

MR EKANYA: Professor, you know this is a topic that you and me can really debate, because under the East African Treaty it has been agreed that during negotiations - I am really well versed with this.  For example, when it comes to negotiations in WTO, how do we handle it? Don’t we handle it at a regional level as Africa or globally - the South versus the North? So, all these issues are there, but the problem is implementation and I am really ensuring that it is done. For example, in some regions in the world, we do not have an ambassador in every country but there is coordination. We need to strengthen it and make it work.

Prof. Kabwegyere was asking me about the little money we send to the districts, that means a loan.  I came from Ghana two days ago, but we were told that Nigeria, in order to sort out their financial problems, decided to write to all bilateral and multi-lateral donors and said, “Most of these debts that we are paying are illegitimate; they were acquired by corrupt regimes and we cannot honour them.” And the Parliament of Nigeria passed a resolution, which the Paris Club finally honoured. That is how Nigeria, which was not part of the Paris Club in the first phase, managed to get some loans written off.  

They went ahead and withdrew their reserves from the US Treasury in dollars. They brought them home and gave the local banks to invest within the country. If you keep money in another currency, it generates income while you are making losses. So, there are so many ways and if you read the FDC platform, you can really find all these alternative means.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR EKANYA: In conclusion, I want to state that government should be given a timeframe to ensure that this report is implemented. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ekanya in order to address you while he is pocketing?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, when you are addressing the Speaker please, do it in decorum.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I take your advice. But I did not know I had my keys in the pocket. I thought it was raining and I was thinking –(Laughter)- now I am going to wind up.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I was seeking your indulgence that a resolution of Parliament does not impose a condition on government. But we are dealing with financial matters and if somebody has embezzled money, it is clear theft. If somebody has told a lie, it is a lie; it is clear. If you read the Parliamentary Privileges Act, it really gives us powers. I would seek your indulgence to find out how under that arrangement should government treat this report?  

When we pass the motion, will it be treated as an ordinary resolution of Parliament like saying, “Do not give away Butamira and Mabira forests” and they are given away? Or is this one mandatory, and government must implement the report the way we pass it because if we do not, government can make changes. These are financial matters and we have to be guided by the Public Finance and Accountability Act plus the Constitution because these are really specific issues.  So, I am seeking your guidance as to how this should be handled. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not been debating these reports in detail, so we actually don’t have precedents. There is no problem with coming up with a resolution that the state implements. But we would have to prepare for it, redraft this and that. Can we do it with the next set, which is coming?  

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I was referring to what you are considering right now, that is, we are working very fast to produce another report.  But if there is need for a resolution and a timeframe for it, it is very much welcome. We are going to prepare for that.  
 
MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, when we receive this from the committee, we prepare a treasury memorandum, which is presented here in the House. The one for the financial year ending 30 June 1999, was tabled here and right now it is with the appropriate committee and it has been debated. The one for the year ending 30 June 2000 is now at the drafting stage. When we finalize with the report, which has been tabled today, we expect to have given the treasury memorandum by the end of March 2007. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: But, Madam Speaker, the honourable member was referring to the timeframe - how we do the things. Unless we give ourselves periods, that is why most of these officers are discouraged especially from the Auditor General’s office. Much as the treasury memorandum is there, what is the timeframe? The minister has said that they have already submitted, but the committee is yet to pick up the reactions of the treasury memorandum in order to make a response. But I think you should give us a time frame and then an action plan. By now the money should have been recovered and even the officers who are responsible –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I am also sitting in for the Prime Minister this afternoon. There has been a time lag and perhaps we cannot think on how to avoid it. The accounts we are talking about now are for 2001 and we are in 2006. So, there is already a time lag, which we seem not to be able to overcome.

Now, if this report comes like it has come and we give ourselves a time frame of one or two months and then table it, we shall still have 2002, 2003,2004 and 2005. So, the fundamental challenge that we have got to address is the way government runs so that we can catch up with the shortcomings and address them soon enough to ensure that they are not repeated. That is the bigger challenge you have to address. For example, I could challenge the honourable chairman to bring us the report of 2004, even the Auditor General himself; by the time the report comes out there is a time lag. So, we should bear in mind that it is not deliberate or negligence –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: That is why, Madam Speaker, we have been retained here. We never went for recess and we are trying to do our best so that the reports can be ready. Even the report for the financial year 2005/06 will be before you very soon. That is why we must move faster such that we don’t create a clog somewhere about this backlog, that is why we are bringing all this and then early next year, we shall be having the most up-to-date report.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, in that circumstance, a resolution demanding for a timeframe will be appropriate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have concluded?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, just on the treasury memorandum. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is supposed to be submitted within one month. When the committee recommends that money should be recovered from somebody, the accounting officer is supposed to do it immediately. So, when the memorandum comes, it will be stating that the money has been recovered.

5.47
DR GORDON SEMATIKO KATENDE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the previous speaker in supporting and thanking the committee for the work well done.  However, there are some issues, which I would like to raise.  

First, the commitment control system would work very well where the budgeted for items are catered for adequately and it should have sections. There are expenditures, which might not be able to be met under the commitment system. For example, in the medical field, which I am more conversant with, if the budget for drugs in a hospital is Ugshs 10 million a year and they are releasing Ugshs 3.0 million every quota, if you get Cholera like the case is in Kawempe, the minister –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: The whole Uganda is covered by Cholera, so it is not particularly in Kawempe.

DR KATENDE: Well, to the best of my knowledge, Kawempe is worse. However, Madam Speaker, the medical officers cannot wait for their release of the next quota but have to get immediate access to drugs and avail them to the patients –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that in this House, we have senior people who worked in government. When we talk about commitment control, it means that you should not on your own, as the accounting officer, incur expenses outside or beyond the budgetary framework that you have. You should not take or get services without payment; otherwise it leads to domestic arrears.  

Should a case of that nature arise you, as the accounting officer, should seek authority from the commissioner or treasury office of accounts. Once that permission is granted, you can then go ahead and incur the expenses in an emergency situation. But you should not unilaterally out of your own right as an accounting officer go and incur or commit government into expenses without authority from the Treasury. That is the essence of commitment control.   

DR KATENDE: Thank you, for your information.  However, Madam Speaker, my point –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform my colleague that we have the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness, which is supposed to address such eventualities. So, whenever a query comes when somebody has over committed himself, all that has been addressed because we have a full ministry that it supposed to do that. If at all we are supposed to come and say there is Cholera, it was addressed during the budgeting, but if you analyse the budget all that is prepared for. So, there is no scapegoat that this is Cholera.

DR KATENDE: Thank you, for your information. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that, actually in that angle I am informed. However, that leads to what is termed as wasteful expenditure. My first statement was that the commitment control system effectively works when you allocate equitable amounts of resources. That is why the cause of all this is poor budgeting and allocation of resources to the respective ministries.

The committee recommends that the secretary to the Treasury should hold the responsible officers, but it is not indicated in the report whether he was given a particular period in which to report back to the committee the actions taken on the responsible officers. 

On classrooms construction, the committee still recommends centralization, but I don’t support centralization of already decentralized activities.  First and foremost, the Ministry of Education’s core business is education and not construction.  So, when you centralise the activities handled by the Ministry of Education, you are taking away its core business to another line, which creates inefficiency. 

So, what the House should do is to support and maintain the decentralised approach, but put more capacity in supervision and avail the standard drawings and structures. Otherwise, we saw it in the Ministry of Health where it was reported that the surgeon and patient couldn’t fit in the theatre at the same time. One had to be inside at a time and that is the problem with centralised activities. So, it will be in the interest of development to improve on the capacity of the people in the decentralised districts and leave the Ministry of Education with its core business. 

On the privatised enterprises, Madam Speaker, it is hurting to see that such huge amounts of money have not been remitted, and that money is interest free.  I am sure most of these companies are enjoying tax exemption for the first five or so years. So, it will be double interest. They will be using our supposed to be state funds to do their business, at the same time getting profits out of it. So, it should be put as one of the conditionalities that interest on this money should be given to the state with effect from when they start collecting these funds so that it deters others from thinking that when you buy property from the state, you use that capital and you live without paying any interest. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we agree to be brief? Can you use two minutes each? 

5.56
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the Public Accounts Committee for this very good report. However, I would like to make a few comments on the misuse of government vehicles raised by the committee. The recommendation given by the committee should really emphasize that the accounting officer should ensure that government vehicles are used properly. 

I saw in the papers, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health giving a directive that the ministry’s vehicles found being used during weekends should be impounded. I was shocked to learn that the permanent secretary withdrew the statement and said that he had not given the directive written in the papers. But if it is true, then it was really very bad for the permanent secretary to have withdrawn that directive. So, I fully support that and that the committee should follow it up with the accounting officers. Vehicles supposed to be used for government business are being used for personal business.

Madam Speaker, on re-centralisation of classroom construction, like my colleagues have said, I also don’t buy the recommendation made by PAC. Because the cost of constructing one classroom will probably triple or even go five times higher since it will require officers from the ministry to travel to those areas. Travel expenses to places like Arua and Moroto will increase the costs involved. Instead of using Ugshs 30 million for constructing a classroom, it will go to over Ugshs 50 million.

Finally, I just want a clarification from the Public Accounts Committee - I know it was raised from here. I am on a sister committee, the Local Governments Accounts Committee, but my dilemma is, when we ask these accounting officers to refund the money, how do you as PAC follow up to ensure that that money is actually refunded? And once refunded, how do you ensure that it is properly dispensed? Because the information we get is that even if it is refunded, it gets stuck there and that is where it gets lost. So, Public Accounts Committee you need to follow it up and clarify to us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

6.00
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having put in a lot of effort to try to beat this backlog. I know for sure they have been working sometimes from early morning to very late at night. I want to thank you so much for having put up a very strong and beautiful document. I, however, have one departure from one of your recommendations and this is with regard to re-centralisation. Honourable members, most of you come from districts –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All of us –(Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: Okay, all of us. Unfortunately there is a strong wave trying to fight this wonderful policy of decentralization. I can see some of us trying to get trapped into that unfortunate wave. It will be a very bad day for this country. Decentralisation has got its own failures, but also has strong points. Look at what is now happening in these small districts that were created just recently. Yet some big shots from central government departments come out and convince you and confuse us that, “Look, these people do not know what they are doing, they are not well conversant with the systems and they are not capable of doing a, b, c, d” and we swallow the whole load, which is not the case for goodness’ sake. 

I am fortunate to have worked as an accounting officer in quite a number of districts and where I last worked, we defied the guidelines of the Ministry of Education. When you look at the designs of their classrooms, they don’t have windows, door locks and ventilators. The chairperson of that district and I defied and went ahead to put there glass windows, which surprised everybody. People came running to see what we were doing and how we were getting the money, and yet we were using the same amount of money allocated. 

Was that bad work? Is that what should cause us to re-centralise reconstruction of schools or classroom? Look at the pick-ups baptized “ambulances”, Zzimwe’s roads just here in Rubaga and the valley dams, aren’t they directly from the centre? (Applause) Look at the TDMS schools and compare them with the current SFD schools constructed by the districts.     

Madam Speaker, let me wind up by urging all of you to ensure that nothing is re-centralised from now on. It is very important for all of us and for the good of this country. We need to build capacity for these local contractors; we need to distribute resources down there -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Member for Isingiro.

MR BYARUGABA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.03
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to elaborate about centralization of schools. We should be supporting decentralization. First of all, this is a report of what happened in 2001 and I know that since then there are so many improvements that have been made.

The other point, which I wanted to make, is that, the problem is general. It is especially a government problem that technocrats find problems when they are misallocated in other ministries.  For example, you find construction in the Ministry of Education and find mechanical engineering in the Ministry of Health.  What we have done in Mbarara and which I want to share with this House so that we can go ahead is that, when there is construction in the district, it must be under the construction department. Whether you are in the department of health or agriculture, any work to do with construction is done by the relevant department where the engineers are.  

Therefore, the biggest challenge is about integrated planning, where you find that somebody is putting up a school but he cannot test the soil and materials, cannot draw and approve the plans and that is the bigger problem, which you even find at higher levels like here in Kampala. You find that, for example, one is agitating for a school at Shimon, but somebody who is planning for the city sees that the school is not supposed to be there. The Ministry of Urban Planning has a different plan. How can we fight that so that we integrate our planning to ensure that when we plan, the relevant technical input is well coordinated?  Therefore -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I have listened very attentively to the honourable from Mbarara and I got touched when he made a reference to hon. Erias Lukwago that he is agitating for a school in Shimon. Hon. Lukwago is nothing but a mouthpiece of the people that he represents. A petition has been dully tabled before this Parliament, and the people who petitioned were not hon. Erias Lukwago, but the parents and the pupils of Shimon Primary School. Is the honourable member in order to dilute the important petition of the pupils and the parents and just attribute it to hon. Erias Lukwago?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do not know whether he meant it really in bad faith. He was talking about proper planning with all the stakeholders, which is his problem. But I think he has no problem with hon. Lukwago, he was talking about proper planning with all the stakeholders.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In some districts like Ntungamo and Mbarara, some of these constructions are progressing very well. I would like us as Parliament to support the decentralization policy and pick on examples from where it has done very well so that we can all improve.

The last point is that, the standard plans from the Ministry of Education have had very many problems because they do not consider, especially, the localization of these plans. When you are constructing, the soil conditions are not the same, the cost of materials is not the same, the labour costs are not the same, but they just carry one uniform budget across the whole country. If we rectify that, localise these budgets and empower the local committees of management at the district councils and LCIII councils, we can get better results. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It appears we do not have time to do the proper analysis of this report, but I will try my best to quicken the exercise. I have a problem, when we talk about Nyanza Textiles and all these privatised enterprises, with dully signed agreements on what is supposed to be done by who, and then somebody goes ahead to violate the agreement, to disregard the intention of privatisation, to do everything to the tune of five years paying only a quarter of what he is supposed to pay, I get a problem with understanding where he gets the comfort, because even me as a Member of Parliament if I borrow something small the following day I will be in Police I will be where, all these places. But where do people get the comfort to cheat government and to violate all the agreements that they have signed?

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, if my colleague bothers to lift the veil, he will find that the people involved here are politically well connected and he does not have to look very far. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Can I give information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is nobody you are informing.

MR NANDALA:  Okay, for NYTIL, Ministry of Finance had to ask for the board of the National Insurance Corporation to guarantee the payment. They raised a resolution to guarantee the payment, and yet National Insurance Corporation is a government body. Having reached sometime, the agreement was that NYTIL Picfare surrenders the titles as soon as they get them from the Privatisation Unit. When they got the titles, they never surrendered them. They instead took them to the Common Wealth Fund for Cooperation (CFC) to borrow more money. You recall again when NYTIL Picfare was under receivership, National Insurance Corporation refused to honour the guarantee and the Ministry of Finance instead paid CFC.  So, who was the problem? 

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, it is good we have before us a number of people who have worked under this department. This is the time to be sincere and really sort out this problem.  The aspect here is the question of accountability. Madam Speaker, there is this issue of the title of Ministry of Finance where they say, “Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development” and all this kind of thing. According to the papers I have seen - Finance plans. We have spent most of our time here without going home because we were trying to clear the backlog under the local governments. According to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, there is a very clear-cut case of trying to stifle what would be the best monitoring system.  

You find so much money being given to an entity, but with very little monitoring by the accountant general. The man was coming to us and saying, “You see, I do not have money.” Even the Auditor General came and we had a meeting one time, but he was lamenting saying, “You know, I have to do all this work but there is no money.”  Why do you budget for lots of money to be given out without following it up? When an NGO comes, they come singing the same thing, “No money” and so does the Police.  

Sometimes I pity a number of them here. You get a person who has embezzled a lot of money with a big stomach and then you order a CID who is a small man -(Laughter)- to take the man in.  The guy looks for where he is going to handle -(Laughter)- there is a problem! A Police CID is paid Ugshs 100,000 and here he is to take charge of a person who has embezzled millions of shillings. Why do you sanction big amounts of money with no system of monitoring them?

Madam Speaker, as if that is not all, there is a problem here of re-centralizing. Let nobody deceive any Ugandan. In 2002, I was at my district headquarters complaining about the problems of failing to abide by the regulations and the agreements of a tender board of a particular school. There and then we saw a gentleman coming. He introduced himself as a person who had been sent from Ministry of Education and he said, “From today onwards, I am going to be a resident of Bugiri monitoring all the construction of schools in Bugiri.” I can be advised if that is not correct. I was surprised when the gentleman said, “Normally, when you hear of a new person coming you start quaking. I want to assure you that you do not need to worry. Business will continue as usual provided that you do things in your own way.” I was totally deflated. I could not understand and I only waited to see what he meant by, “Business will continue as usual”. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable, what is the name of this person. Surely, try to help the House. What is the name of this person?

MR OCHIENG: This officer is still there. He has only been transferred from Bugiri to Mayuge. It is not a question of trying to say we are going to hide anybody. I was sent here by NRM and they told me zero tolerance to corruption. That is the message that I took to everybody. I am not going to accept -(Interruption)

PROF KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I think we have got to weigh our own contributions to governance. There is a government, there is the Executive. There is also the legislature, which is made up of people’s representatives who have constituencies and who therefore must have an interest in checking what is going on there. I am a bit worried that the honourable member had not brought this matter up in the form of a question to the relevant minister, to ask what is going on. Our problem is standing here to criticise and thinking somebody else is the one responsible for doing the right thing, and yet we are all part and parcel of doing the right thing. 

I remember this question of monitoring in local government, and I mean it even now, if the local leadership, if the Members of Parliament do not co-operate and oversee each other, you will have shoddy work. The problem of re-centralising, for example, the office of the CAO had to do with the way the office of the CAO was being used by the local district leadership and, therefore, the way money was being utilised. 

If all of us know that some of these SFG buildings have been of poor quality, if you are in the ministry or a minister in charge of education and you would want quality, of course, you have a problem. I do not think the point that the SFG should come back to central government has been approved by government. I do not think it will pass through Cabinet, unless we reviewed the entire system of construction. 

There was a time when people were thinking that when construction was under Ministry of Works, PWD, quality work was done because it was centrally controlled and designs would be the same and so on and so forth. However, the moment we go back to that, it means then we have got to have a change over. So, really, the issue we are addressing is the proper utilisation of resources and how we all participate in them. If there is a back and forward effort, it is because we are trying to address this question. 

Honourable members, please be active in participating and overseeing what is going on in your sub-counties and mulukas because this is where the money is being spent and shoddy buildings are being built.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the advice. I would think that money should now go to the sub-counties and most of the monitoring should be done from there. This is my request. I know that things will be done better there than coming to the centre. There are a number of problems that we can also enumerate if we are given time. 

Finally, there is the issue of Police failing to account. If Police fail to account because they claim the accountability is somewhere in the village then what next? We are supposed to hand over all those we think have wronged the people of the Republic of Uganda to Police. Now, if you are giving a person who already also has the same problem, then you are sure of what you are trying to achieve.

Madam Speaker, because we do not have time, I will stop there for the time being. I thank you very much.

6.19
MS BETI KAMYA, FDC (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to discuss the Public Accounts Committee report. I also wish to thank the committee vice-chairperson for his presentation. It is not a report that we should be proud of as a nation. It is a report for which we should hang our heads in shame as a nation. It is an orgy of dishonesty, immorality, irresponsibility, inefficiency, incompetence and outright theft that have afflicted this country for many years now. 

Public officers do not take responsibility for their actions or omissions. Government does not hold them accountable. For that matter, this government even rewards some of these actions. We have seen a person like the Attorney General who loses so many cases, government loses so much money, and he is awarded with a ministerial position. A minister is censored by Parliament and he is recycled. Lt Shaban Magara shoots three people in broad daylight and he is released on bail when there are 12,000 people on petty cases who are inside prison on remand. They are not even released on bail. 

The result is that the situation gets worse. Public officers who would have been a bit cautious watch as others get away with murder, as others get away with theft, as others grow bigger and bigger on their inefficiencies and theft with impunity. So, they join the race. The law enforcement people who would have taken up the relevant cases also join the race and everybody joins the race.

The result of this, Madam Speaker, is that, in the last 20 years, we as a nation have borrowed over $5.0 billion in loans and have received about $16 billion in grants, a total of $21 billion. We have pretty little to show for it except defunct industries, social services, infrastructure and impassable roads and over crowded prisons. 

In comparison, in the previous 20 years, all the other governments before this one put together borrowed about $1.6 billion and received loans of about $800.8 million giving a total of about $2.6 billion -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not debating borrowing, we are debating the report of the Public Accounts Committee as presented by the chairperson. Can we address the issues he raised?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Prof Kabwegyere rose_)- I am almost running out of the two minutes.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be clarified on what the Member holding the Floor is talking about. She talks about loans received so many years ago and the loans received during the NRM Government. During those other 20 years, places like Mbale to Kapchorwa were unreachable but are very accessible now. I have seen the road from Arua, where they had never seen tarmac roads but they have them now. There are health centre IVs in every constituency. Honestly, I would like to be clarified. 

Fortunately, I have been here for some time. I remember days when you would hardly walk on the streets of Kampala. Security was terrible! At this time you would not see any vehicle on the streets of Kampala. Was that the good period you are trying to tell us about? 

Honestly, I want to be clarified on some of these small matters. Maybe our gauges are very different. At least there is infrastructure and even schools, universities - how many radio stations do we have today? I have heard you on Radio One, Radio Simba, CBS, Radio West. Kabaka was not there, the Kabaka is here –(Interruption)

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, I just want to add to what my colleague has said. Our colleagues from the Opposition know so well how to speak against what the Movement Government has done. Sometimes you wonder whether to be in opposition is to actually be envied because all they do is to criticise and nothing else. They do not know what doing actually entails in a country that had gone so far down and is just coming up from a dung heap of history. If I remember, we saw a day -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: I am wondering whether hon. Kataha is in order to insinuate that all Members of the Opposition, even us who are not on the Floor, do nothing and we do not appreciate anything that is being done. That is a blanket accusation against the entire Opposition. Is she in order to come up with that omnibus charge against everybody, even those who are outside this House and are not on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding is that, she is talking about those who consistently concentrate on criticising and not appreciating.

MRS MUSEVENI: I wish I could remember, Madam Speaker, one day when any Opposition Member ever said anything good that the Movement Government has done over these years. If I remember correctly, one day when the Opposition were demonstrating in town, there was so much looting in Kampala that people wondered whether all the looting was actually done by the Opposition. If we go by the generalisation that you do, that we hear, that is the impression that would have been made at that time.

MR LUKWAGO: I am wondering whether hon. Museveni is in order to again make further observations on a matter, which was pending your ruling, Madam Speaker. Our rules are very clear. I raised a point of order and the Chair is supposed to make a ruling. Once a ruling is made, no further comment or observation should be made. She would be out of order to make further observations on a matter where you have made a ruling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already made my ruling. Let us have no further discussion on that matter.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, I have been writing articles in the papers since 1987. The last time I checked, I had actually over 100 of them in support of this government. You can check the archives of The New Vision and The Daily Monitor you will find them there. For the record -(Interruption) 

MRS MUSEVENI: I just want to say that what I was referring to was nothing to do with the media. I was talking about what happens in this House. [Mr Okello-Okello: “Information”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To whom? She has not even said anything! (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thought she was still on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but she has not started speaking.

AN HON MEMBER: Is it in order for hon. Okello-Okello to disregard your Chair and continue holding the Floor even when you have requested him to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very clear; speak when you are given the Floor. Hon. Kamya, please resume the Floor.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Yesterday, I congratulated the Minister for Gender for the Equal Opportunities Bill. Before that, I had congratulated the government side for the maternal health motion and there are many things that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya, you are generating a new debate. Can you focus on the Public Accounts Committee and the report of the chairperson?

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I was developing a case up to where we are today. My reason for bringing up the statistics of the previous figures that we have spent is the aggregate of the Public Accounts Committee report that we are debating today. In my view, performance is a factor of the time involved, the cost and the quality. When I compare these 20 years with the other 20 years, the money, the quality and the services, I find the other 20 years with a longer list and less money and these 20 years with a shorter list and ten times the amount of money -[Prof. Semakula: “Information”]- In the interest of time, Professor, allow me not to take your information. 

Madam Speaker, if the honourable members want us to compare lists of the good and the bad or the not so good, to be more positive we can do that in the right forum. I have no doubt that my list will be much longer. We cannot go on like this, where the public just watches in awe as we receive one Public Accounts Committee report after another, reporting about the inefficiencies, losses and irregularities and flouting of regulations. It is not just right.

Madam Speaker, the onus is on government to implement the recommendations of committees. The onus is on government to show cause for their being in power. The reason why we have reports like this is because government is not enforcing regulations. It is not implementing committee reports and indeed, as I said, it is almost rewarding irregularities.
 
In conclusion, the committee urges ministries to respect financial regulations. I would say that just “urging” is not enough. This House can enforce and government should enforce. I am encouraging the committee to strengthen that word. “Urging” is not enough; they must assert very strongly that government enforces committee reports. Otherwise, we shall remain a vicious circle of stealing with impunity and getting poorer and poorer. Thank you very much

6.34
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Sebuliba Mutumba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your observations and contributions.

Hon. Ekanya, your point was taken, regarding issues of sounding a bit soft. The Member who has just been holding the Floor said that words like “urging” are a bit lenient. I think the onus is also on Parliament to come out in unison to enforce the recommendations of this committee. What we have presented to you is the fact and that is what the committee found out.

Hon. Sematiko talked about the commitment control system, and I think hon. Kassiano Wadri answered that well. You must seek authority whenever you want to over spend. The budget process starts at that primary level and comes to you. There is no use for you to come and say, “We know the problems are there, but there are guidelines and procedures to follow regarding such matters.” That is why government came up with such regulations. We have even asked Ministry of Finance to come out vividly to handle some officers who do not abide by this. The problems are there but if you accept that, there will be chaos in all departments and ministries of government. Everybody will be saying, “I did this and that because the funds were not enough.” Money has never been enough, so we should use the little we have well. 

Regarding re-centralization, we are saying that money should stay in the districts. Here the wording was wrongly captured as “re-centralization.” I suggest that the money stays at the district, if Parliament agrees, and then the bills of quantities be submitted to Ministry of Housing and maybe Education. The districts would then identify the schools, which should be built and the others, which you have suggested.

I know re-centralization is bad after that policy which was developed, but how are we going to curb the business of leaving it to one person? I know Members of Parliament should come in as overseers, but still government should not say, “We liberalised, decentralised and privatised so let them stay where they are and we stay where we are.” I think it should be two-way traffic rather than leaving it to the districts.

I remember in the Seventh Parliament, I was on the Local Government Accounts Committee. A minister once went to open a school and the school nearly collapsed on him. He was holding the handle of the door and it gave way –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, I do not think that the buildings collapsed because of decentralisation. They collapse because of shoddy work. You cannot convince this House that before decentralisation, the centre was efficient. I think let us find another way of monitoring and supervising, but not re-centralization.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am opposed to the same, but there must be ways in which we compliment the roles of the central government and those of the local government. That is why I was suggesting that the Ministry of Housing should come in with the Ministry of Education, like the Professor is whispering there, so that we do not leave it at that. It has become a habit, and we experienced this with the Ministry of Agriculture also. There were problems but the minister was saying, “We are decentralised and privatised and our role was to pass on the money and watch.” There must be some role of complimenting each other as a whole effort otherwise there is cry at the local and central level –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the chairperson is summarising and the House is going to make pronouncements on this report soon, I have some mixed feelings. It has been observed, and the chairperson has also seen this, that most Members are not in agreement with the recommendation of re-centralization. Before we vote on it, I am a Member of the committee and I must declare my intention. I have attentively heard the debates and politics has come in, so I appeal to you, chairperson, to think twice. Let us remove that clause so that our report can be adopted. I do not know how the voting will go, but the moment we remove that clause, it will be okay. Rather than –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the chairperson was re-formulating the proposal so that it is not re-centralization but a level of monitoring and supervision. He was amending it.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Like you guided, Madam Speaker, I was deliberating on how we can compliment each other so that once money is released, it should not be the business of government alone. Even with monies regarding other aspects, we suggest the Ministry of Housing and that of Education come in and look at the BOQs (Bill of Quantities) but the money and everything, even other designs, remain and then they work together. I think that is the way we can abate corruption. I do not know whether -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any objection from the ministries of Education and Finance?

MR GABRIEL OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we went ahead and decentralised, it takes time for a system to really be perfect. It would not be possible for the Ministry of Education to say, “We take over the powers which were decentralised.” However, we have a problem, when we go to districts as ministers. Within the decentralisation statute, there is very little you can do with regard to when things have gone wrong. Maybe in the immediate future, when we are reviewing our work of decentralisation, there should be some articles put in to give some residual powers to the centre so that the centre can at least do some supervision. 

At the moment, you go there but definitely when it comes to whether that structure is not working, you may not do much. There is a time when I was the Minister of State for Finance, we went to a school and it was reported that this structure was bad. I recommended and the following day the engineer said, “Let the minister go back to the headquarters.” So, there has to be some way if there has to be some supervision. However, it is also difficult now to say, let us throw away the decentralisation process because –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. He was not proposing that.
 
MR OPIO: It is very important, but in his amendment whatever he is saying is not legally binding. We can pass a resolution here to say we move there and maybe take action yet when you go there, the law does not allow you as the Ministry of Education and Sports.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, as I listened to the minister and more so Member of the Executive, I apparently got lost. Do not look at the Decentralisation Act as an isolated law. Under decentralisation, the centre still has the responsibility for quality assurance. That is what you, as members of the Executive together with your technocrats, should really emphasise. If there is poor construction work, there are other relevant laws under the Public Health Act. It is your duty and responsibility, as a minister, to invoke those laws to put matters right. So, for the minister to come up here and lament that under decentralisation the centre has little to do – (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_) - I know Professor you have been a Minister of Local Government, you are conversant with those things but you will help me at the appropriate time as I take leave. 

The point I want to bring forward is that, the centre should not abdicate its responsibilities. Under the Local Government Act you have responsibilities. Quality assurance is one of your four cardinal duties and that is where you come in. No administrative officer is going to chase you away if you come up and say, “This building is in a dangerous shape and it will endanger the lives of the children.” Professor, you can take on from there.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are talking of decentralisation, which actually started in 1993, incorporated in the Constitution in 1995 and the Local Government Act in 1997. You can see the period we are talking about. In the Local Government Act, there was a lot of power given to the local authorities, particularly with regard to finances: One, the district authorities were actually influencing the appointment of the CAO and appointing a local person. Secondly, the tender boards were appointed by the chairperson almost. There is one case in Bushenyi where the outgoing chairperson in the last one week appointed a tender board and he was in power and nobody could change it. So, the incoming person had to deal with that tender board. 

Amendments have been made, as we all know, through this House and the defence of those amendments was made comprehensively here. One, that the CAO be appointed by the centre, and by appointing him from the centre he can be disappointed by the centre, that is, the Public Service Commission. He can be transferred, which was never the case, and he can be promoted, which was never the case. What were the agreements behind this? The agreements were that even if the centre is sending over 95 percent of the money and now probably even more, control of the management of the money through somebody accountable should be handled from the centre.

A decision was further made and an amendment made on the Floor of this House that instead of having a tender board you have a procurement committee, which is from people who are already in the service, who can actually also be disappointed if they do not do a good job. All these were measures in an effort to ensure that money, which goes to the districts is properly used.

There is nowhere it indicates, in what I have said and what you read, that government is shunning responsibility for quality assurance. The problem is that, government cannot just stand here and say, “Quality assurance there” and it is there. You get mechanisms, for example, the financial management system which was introduced in local government, which needed to have computers and there are places in Uganda today where we do not have electricity. Even when you have electricity, you must have technical expertise and so on. 

There are simple administrative time lag questions, but at the same time we all agree and we have seen it in our constituencies that in a lot of cases work has been shoddy. I went to Yumbe District and I was being asked to open a building. There was a ribbon that I was supposed to cut - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And flowers? (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes. (Laughter) When I entered the building, I was not sure that I was going to come out alive. I told people there and then that this is not something you should call a minister to open. Across in the compound there was a building, which was put up in 1945, which still existed, and this one would not last as long. These realities are there but the way to get over them, whether it is FDC, UPC or DP in power, is that they must be addressed progressively and effectively. I think we are on the right track, with your participation. Do not go to your constituency and see these things and say that government should be the one to go and see them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, please wind up.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Chairperson, with the indulgence of the House, I propose that we do not re-centralise but the ministries of Health, Education and Housing should come in regarding the design of the buildings and brochures. I think that can cater for all interests.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think it is safe.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: The honourable from Serere talked about the public vehicles and that we use soft language, so we should be stern. I think it was fair enough on our side, but as we continue, we are going to get sterner measures regarding this one. It is a standing order which is known. It is against the law, first of all, to use a vehicle which is beyond 2800cc and even regulate their movements. 

Regarding the time to refund the money, it is immediate. Usually we say that money should be recovered immediately, but how immediate is that immediately? There is one where we gave a deadline of up to 31st December, but we are going to ask for the action taken and then give subsequent time frames.

Hon. Byarugaba talked about re-centralisation. It was the same thing.

Hon. Ochieng from Bukooli was talking about the enterprises plus accountability. Your observation is true, although the honourable minister came in and tried to also add something. 

Regarding NYTIL, Madam Speaker and honourable members, government should pick interest because later you will discover that, as we bring in more information in the subsequent reports, this factory was sold at Ugshs 1,000. So, government should move in very fast to rectify the situation. Much as there is an outstanding figure of 9.9, they should move in and bring a report regarding this, take action and even bring the action taken to this Parliament. The monies still outstanding are a lot. I think what we have recommended, our input, as Members of Parliament, whatever we have requested for here, should be brought to book. Whoever is involved should recover the money. By the time they bring the treasury memorandum, I think 99 percent of the action we have recommended here should have been acted on. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving our committee ample time and space. I thank the Members of Parliament for your enrichment, input and observations. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me thank the chairperson and his committee for setting the standards in the Eighth Parliament. In the past, standing committees hardly reported. Thank you, for setting the standards!

Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted with amendments proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the long session. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. We shall start with the petition of Shimoni Primary School.

(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 14 December 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)

