Thursday, 14 December 2006

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back for this afternoon session and I am delighted to inform you that MTN-Uganda has given an award to this Parliament specifically because of the Members who participated in the Third MTN Marathon on 19 November 2006. I would like us to congratulate and thank the following Members who represented us:
•	Hon. Erias Lukwago
•	Hon. Bernard Mulengani
•	Hon. Milton Muhuma
•	Hon. Dan Kidega
•	Hon. Kiyingi
•	Mr Peter Busiku
•	Mrs Ann Mugunga
•	Mr Peter Odeke
•	Mr Simon Mayinja
•	Mr Robert Kayigwa

I want to thank all the Members who participated in that marathon and I encourage them to participate again on the 18 November 2007. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, we have a lot of business today so we shall allocate time and be very strict. We shall give 45 minutes to the first motion and to the rest I think we shall give 30 minutes so that we can run through the Order Paper. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS BUSINESS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 23(4)

(A) MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO STAY THE IMPENDING EVICTION OF SHIMONI DEMONSTRATION SCHOOL FROM ITS CURRENT PREMISES

3.05
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government of the Republic of Uganda to stay the impending eviction of Shimoni Demonstration School from its current premises. It is moved under Rules 43 and 50 of this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion on the Floor reads that: 

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda is reported to have allocated the piece of land on which Shimoni Demonstration School is located to one Prince Al Waheed of Saudi Arabia for purposes of constructing a hotel to host CHOGM; 

AND WHEREAS the government decided to temporarily relocate Shimoni Demonstration School to some makeshift premises to be constructed in the playground of East Kololo Primary School and thereafter to a proposed permanent home along Lugogo Bypass, adjacent to Kololo Secondary School; 

COGNISANT of the fact that the parents, staff and management committee of the school vehemently protested against the aforesaid government decisions under all proposals on grounds inter-alia that, thorough preparations and consultations with all the stakeholders ought to have been made in advance, which was not done; 

AND AWARE of the fact that on the 16th day of August 2006, parents, staff and management committee of the school submitted a petition to the Speaker of Parliament, a copy of which is annexed hereto wherein they spelt out matters of great public concern;

NOTING THAT the Government of Uganda has directed the staff and management of the school to vacate the premises by 18 December 2006 before the said petition and the concerns therein are addressed; 

AND NOTING FURTHER that if the said directive is not rescinded it is likely to occasion a demise of Shimoni Demonstration School, a situation that would be unfortunate given its historic record and the fact that it is the largest universal primary school or UPE in Kampala District;

AND OBSERVING that it is practically impossible for the said Saudi investor to construct a hotel for CHOGM purposes within the remaining few months;  

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as hereunder that the Government of Uganda is urged to stay the impending eviction or relocation of Shimoni Demonstration School to a makeshift site pending investigation and determination of the issues or concerns raised in the petition.”

Madam Speaker, allow me briefly to highlight the concerns and issues raised in the petition for purposes of supporting this motion:  

Issue number one is about the preparations made. As noted in the petition, Madam Speaker, there is a proposal to shift Shimoni Demonstration School to a new site along Lugogo Bypass but as of now no steps have been taken whatsoever even to organize the groundbreaking function. The management, staff and entire community of Shimoni Demonstration School are not aware as to what is going on.  

I have here a conceptual plan for that proposed site and it is here with me. This is the proposed new site that is supposed to be constructed along Lugogo Bypass. In principle, the management committee and staff as well as the parents of the school are not objecting to the idea or proposal of shifting the school, but let this new structure be constructed first given the circumstances surrounding the whole transaction.  

The second issue is this proposal to first shift the school to a temporary site, that is, to East Kololo Primary School.  The management and staff as well as parents of Shimoni Demonstration School have rejected that proposal on sound grounds. First of all, there are no structures befitting a school already on the ground there. Although attempts have been made and although there was a ground-breaking ceremony in August, the structures are not yet on the ground.  

Furthermore, even if the structures were to be constructed, this is a task that government has admitted it cannot complete. The Minister of Education and Sports clearly indicated that they couldn’t have enough structures to accommodate all the pupils of Shimoni Demonstration School. The proposal, therefore, is to construct makeshift structures in East Kololo Primary School that will accommodate only 780 pupils, which is far below the capacity of the current structures of Shimoni Demonstration School. They are talking of 14 classrooms, which can accommodate only 780 pupils yet the current population of the school is 2,198 as of closure of third term. Before this proposal came up they had a population of 3,400 but now it has reduced to 2,198. This is an express admission that there will be no accommodation in East Kololo for a total of 1,408 pupils.  What are you going to do in order to address this kind of crisis?  

The proposal we have received from a press release from the permanent secretary Ministry of Education and Sports is that, these other pupils are going to be distributed to various schools within the city.  They are proposing Kibuli Demonstration School, Naguru-Katale Primary School, Kiswa Primary School, Police Children School, Bat Valley Primary School, Nakivubo Primary School, St Jude Primary School Naguru and Kisugu Church of Uganda.  

Madam speaker, this is one of the surest ways of killing of Shimoni Demonstration School. The moment you talk of redistributing these pupils to various schools they will not come back to Shimoni. In any case, the parents and the school management committee have made no arrangements whatsoever to this effect. 

Madam Speaker, it will be unfortunate to kill Shimoni Demonstration School at this point in time as it has been in existence for over 50 years. It has got a record, a history and pupils who have been there for a long time have all these concerns. And noting the fact that the purpose for which this land was secured was to construct a CHOGM hotel and you cannot construct it within the remaining few months, the proposal is to stay the impending eviction while preparations and negotiations are made with all the stakeholders and thorough preparations are worked out. 

The third and final ground, Madam Speaker, is about the nature of the transaction. The stakeholders were left out of this transaction and they do not know what is going on. The management committee is not involved in this transaction and the parents who have got a stake in the land - the records before me, which I wish to bring to the attention of this House, are very clear. 

The parents contributed to the construction of the structures now standing on the land there. For example, they built the primary 7 block which has got eight classrooms, a modern kitchen with four fuel saving stoves, three self-contained deputy head teachers’ houses, over 15 teachers’ houses, a school garage, two canteens, they bought a Tata lorry and carried out other developments on the land. This was under the arrangement of the PTA; so they have got a stake there.

Besides this question of the developments they carried out on the land, like all other Ugandans they have an interest to know: 
1.	The investor who is coming to carryout developments in terms of constructing a CHOGM hotel. How much has he paid for this land, if he has paid for it at all? 

2.	They were concerned that he has never been to this country, so he does not even know what is going on on that piece of land. We are talking of 15 acres of land, which is a national asset and they have got all these concerns to be addressed.

Concerning the makeshift site at East Kololo Primary School, no arrangements have been made to construct staff quarters yet members of staff are currently housed at the school. What is going to happen? As I have already said, the classrooms are less by 32, there is no library, no office for the deputies, no kitchen, no sick bay, no facilities for the unit class (that is for those pupils who need special attention), no provision for staff accommodation and no teachers’ toilets. So, you can see there are no basic facilities for a structure worth the name of a school.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is my humble prayer that in the interest of promoting education in this country and for those of you who really advocate for UPE, please support this motion. You are very well aware that UPE was nurtured at Shimoni because it provided the ground as a pilot project. That is where it started from and surely if we are to promote UPE and indeed education in this country then let us support this motion and address all these concerns before Shimoni is shifted to the new site.

Finally, let us urge government to first construct permanent structures so that it would be exchange of keys; as Shimoni is handed over to Al Waheed, he is also handing over the new premises fully constructed, fully established and probably fully furnished. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me the time to second this motion. Honourable members, the learned legislator, hon. Lukwago, has presented a motion for which if it was not a matter of procedure there should be no debate. He has been eloquent, convincing, assertive, informative, informed, courteous, authoritative and witty. I think he has been absolutely superb in his presentation. 

But most important, Madam Speaker, he has presented the views of over 3,000 families. He has presented the pain, the anguish, the uncertainty and the confusion of over 3,000 families. I am begging each honourable member in this House to put yourself in the shoes of a parent of Shimon Demonstration School, who deliberately chose to take his or her child to this school for reasons ranging from a good spacious environment that is very conducive for studying, proximity to the family’s place of abode hence cutting out the prohibitive transportation costs, or those who chose to take their children to this school so that they can conveniently drop them at school and pick them later to and from work. 

Madam Speaker, these parents chose this stable learning environment from which they expect good quality education. Imagine yourself to be that parent who is unceremoniously instructed - for goodness sake without even the courtesy of being involved in the discussions, in the debates, in internalising and owning the whole process - to relocate to an area, which will not provide any of the amenities that have been so eloquently presented by hon. Lukwago. Imagine yourself to be that person who now has to completely re-orient his or her budget, his or her route to work, which will most likely include extra cost and impact perhaps on the family’s life style. Just at the whim we hear of an Arab investor who we further hear will not have any other place except that where Shimon is located. 

After you have imagined yourself to be in the position of anguish of that parent, put your kid in the shoes of the 4,000 kids who will now have to walk the extra distance on foot. A much longer distance probably, go without lunch because the family’s budget is now going to be highly affected and the school’s facilities unable to provide the amenities it used to because they are not available. Imagine your child to be that child who now must forego the benefits of a comfortable teacher.

After you have imagined yourself or your child to be that child, imagine yourself to be the teacher. Put yourself in the shoes of the teachers previously housed in the school premises at no cost, in a spacious location with no transport costs for him or her and their children who now have been thrown in the street and will have to pay for not only accommodation but also transportation to the new location. 

Put yourself in the shoes of the headmaster who apart from handling his own challenges of the new instructions, will have to manage the frustrated parent, the frustrated teacher and the frustrated student after this mental but no doubt purifying emotional trip. 

Honourable members, assume your status now of the legislator, of the representative of these people sitting here in this House and listening to this motion. Madam Speaker, I urge the honourable members to remember that we are representatives of the people first and foremost; we are not advocates of Government. We may belong to certain political parties but only to advance the interests of the people. If that were not the case, the Constitution of Uganda would have provided for political parties to elect or select members and send them here. But no, we are sent here by the people, for the people themselves.

Honourable members, I am aware that the majority of the Members here have been whipped to adopt a certain position. But I ask you to transient over certain issues and look at national issues and people issues. There must come a time when people issues must transient party issues. We belong to different parties but that should not be the end of our mission; it should be a vehicle to represent the interests of our people. 

I know that CHOGM is very important for Uganda, Madam Speaker, but is it more important than the future of the 3,000 young Ugandans whose lives could be thrown and destroyed by the act of relocating them to a new environment totally unmindful of the effect it may have on them? Is it more important than the anguish of the 3,000 families who will have to change their life styles and programmes because of this relocation? Is it more important than the millions of Ugandans who are looking on as one national asset after another is disposed of in the manner that national assets are being disposed of? 

It is not as if previous disposals of public property or investment ventures for that matter are anything to be proud of. Look at the AYA Brothers adventure with UBC at Nakasero, the AGOA Tri-Star Apparel Factory, the UCB controversy. I know that when I talk about certain things some Members get very emotional. But these are facts that need attention of this honourable House. Is there any venture that can convince Ugandans of the need to hurriedly dispose of any property? Moreover, Madam Speaker, it is just one hotel, it is not as if it is the only hotel where CHOGM will stay. 

Furthermore, given that this relocation business started as far back as January 2006 with plans for the construction of the hotel to begin in 2007, given that so little progress has taken place it is highly unlikely that the hotel will be completed in time for CHOGM.  

Madam Speaker, I beg this House to consider this motion in light of the suffering of about 4,000 families, which could spill over to many other families given the African extended family obligations and ultimately it could spill over into the lives of 1,000 other people. 

I am sure and I am about to conclude that Prince Al Waheed is a reasonable person. He is a Moslem and I know that Islam teaches the faithful to be very mindful of the less advantaged particularly by those that are highly blessed by Allah as the Prince is. If Uganda takes the Prince through the emotional and moral trip that we have just been through, I think he will surely feel very uncomfortable causing so much anguish, pain, confusion and suffering to so many people. 

The Ministry of Education has provided an explanation and justification for this transfer and I thank them for it; but the point is the key stakeholders are not convinced hence this motion, which they have caused through hon. Lukwago. This Parliament must be mindful and responsive to the needs and cries of the people of Uganda; this Parliament is obliged to be so.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I beg this House to consider this motion a national rather than a partisan one. If you do that you will find merit in hon. Lukwago’s motion. I support the motion and urge this House to support it for the parents and the 3,000 people that have sent us here to present this motion to their representatives seated in this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the state wish to say anything, Minister of Education?

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HIGHER EDUCATION)(Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to oppose the motion. The government has reasons why it has decided to relocate Shimoni to where it is going. I would like to assure all the parents, pupils and Ugandans who are listening and who are concerned about education in this country that the Government of Uganda is very committed to making sure that we educate our children through primary, secondary and tertiary institution level. Therefore, we are not the same people who would come and destabilize the lives of the pupils in Shimoni and other primary schools.  

The enrolment of Shimoni Demonstration School by the end of the third term on Friday, that is December 2006, was 2,196 pupils. The school records indicate that the percentage distribution of the children by the areas aboard is as follows:
1.	Makindye Division 53 percent, 
2.	Nakawa Division 18 percent, 
3.	Kampala Division 15 percent, 
4.	Kawempe Division 3.8 percent, 
5.	Lubaga Division 3.6 percent and 
6.	Other areas including Mukono and Entebbe 6.6 percent.  

The construction of the new site to accommodate Shimoni Primary Teachers’ College and Demonstration School will be along Lugogo Bypass and will soon commence and be completed in approximately two years. Interim arrangements have been made to facilitate - Madam Speaker, it is the government that has prepared this and we know that you cannot build the type of structures that are now at Shimoni and even more within a short period. Thus, we have gone ahead and provided interim measures.  

Madam Speaker, interim arrangements have been made to facilitate a smooth temporary location of the PTC to Nyondo, Mbale and the demonstration school to East Kololo Primary School. A construction firm was contracted for this purpose and phase one, which is already underway, includes expansion of the facilities of East Kololo Primary School with five classroom blocks that provide offices, a staff room and 14 classrooms, 13 of which can accommodate a total number of 780 pupils and a pupil-class ration of 60-1. 

The extra classroom is earmarked for children with severe special learning needs who are currently only 10 in that school. In addition, 20 waterborne toilet stances have been constructed to permit pupil-toilet stance ration of 40-1.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education and Sports has secured assurances from the contractor to the effect that the facilities being put at East Kololo Primary School will be ready for secure storage of all property of the demonstration school at the new site by the end of December 2006. On its part, Kampala City Council Education Department has indicated readiness to facilitate movement to this new site. The contractors are working round the clock to ensure that all the facilities mentioned above are ready for use by commencement of the new term, which is on 5 February 2007. 

In conjunction with the KCC Education Department, the ministry has also secured confirmation from a primary school in the immediate vicinity of the capacity to admit the remaining 1,408 pupils at different class levels. I just want to run through what these vacancies are, Madam Speaker. We are only looking from P2 to P7 because most of those in P1 will be due at Kololo. There are 60 vacancies in primary 2, 60 vacancies in primary 3, 70 vacancies in primary 4, 50 vacancies in primary 5, 40 in primary 6 and 70 in primary 7 giving a total of 350 vacancies in this school.  

I can enumerate but because of lack of time, the following are the schools, which we have earmarked. The second school is Naguru-Katale Primary School. It has 25 vacancies in primary 2, 11 in primary 3, seven in primary 4, 14 primary 5, two in primary 6 and ten in primary 7 giving a total of 69 vacancies.  

Kiswa Primary School has 109 vacancies in primary 2, 102 in primary 3, 110 in primary 4, 117 in primary 5, 151 in primary 6 and 25 in primary 7 making a total of 614 vacancies. 

Police Children School has 57 vacancies in primary 2, 43 in primary 3, 44 in primary 4, five in primary 5, 29 in primary 6, and 97 in primary 7 making a total of 235 vacancies. 

Bat Valley Primary School has 156 vacancies in primary , 65 in primary 3, 19 in primary 4, 29 in primary 5, 4 in primary 6 and 20 in primary 7 making a total of 293 vacancies.  

Nakivubo Primary School has 70 vacancies in primary , 70 in primary 3, 70 in primary 4, 70 in primary 5, 70 in primary 6 and 70 in primary 7 making a total of 420 vacancies.  

St Jude Primary School, Naguru has 26 vacancies in primary , 41 in primary 3, 34 in primary 4, 28 in primary 5, 18 in primary 6 and eight in primary 7 making a total of 155.  

Kisugu Government of Uganda Primary School has 27 vacancies in primary , 37 in primary 3, 76 in primary 4, 81 in primary 5, 67 in primary 6 and 118 in primary 7 making a total of 406.  

We have, therefore, a total of vacancies in primary  530, in primary 3 429, in primary 4 390, in primary 5 394, in primary 6 181 and in primary 7 418 giving a total of 2,542 which is more than the remaining pupils. 

To facilitate orderly and timely access to the 790 vacancies available at the temporary site for the demonstration school at East Kololo Primary School and the 2,542 vacancies in each of the schools listed above, parents are advised to register at the preferred schools by Monday 15 January 2007. Admission will be on first come first served basis and will not exceed the threshold indicated. The admitting school will, therefore, be required to submit returns of the registration exercise indicating the actual numbers enrolled to facilitate further planning by the ministry and KCC education department for provision of additional facilities that may be urgently required. Special attention will be paid to the provision of additional teachers, furniture, sanitary facilities, clean water and others on a case-by-case basis.

Madam Speaker, the implication is that re-deployment of the current teachers of Shimoni Demonstration School will be effected by KCC education department before end of January 2007 after assessing the needs of the admitting school. However, considering the need to vacate the present site of the demonstration school by the end of December 2006, the ministry and KCC education department have agreed on modalities to facilitate smooth and convenient re-location with the school administration -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the honourable minister and I seek your indulgence on this. Are we not privy to that statement he is reading because it involves the statement of the motion and it seems this document is too long. Are we likely to follow that document without being given such a statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will direct the clerk to produce copies and give them to you.  

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, abide the copies are being distributed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Members of the government surrender their copies to the opposition?

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, the ministry is appealing to all concerned, affected persons and the authority to cooperate fully and support the government plan, which is in tandem with the country’s high education objectives and goals. The Ministry of Education and government is mindful of the concerns of the parents, teachers and all people concerned. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, we have been listening and watching the behaviour of Members on the government side. Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi is the workers’ representative and more so that teachers who are highly affected in this particular subject are his electorate, is it procedurally right for him as a minister to start conversing throughout and behaving as if Shimoni is his utmost enemy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you ought to have raised a point of order to say that he is behaving in a disorderly manner in the House but you did not. You should have raised a point of order so that we stop him from talking to the other minister- (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Is he, therefore, in order to behave the way he has behaved? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was listening so intently to the minister that I did not see his counterpart. Minister, please conclude. 

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, I will conclude my presentation by appealing to all Members both on the opposition side and on the government side to support the government to re-locate this school so as to bring more economies of scale in terms of revenue for the benefit of this country. I end here by supporting again the motion. Thank you very much. (Laughter) No, no, Madam Speaker, I mean I end by supporting what I said here so far not supporting the motion and I am opposing the motion.

3.45
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the state minister for higher education for that elaborate presentation. I would also like to thank my brother, hon. Lukwago, for bringing this motion to the House.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to point out clearly that it is in the interest of government to democratise education at all levels and this is very well stipulated in the NRM manifesto that, it is in the interest of government to create equal opportunities for every Ugandan to access education. I would, therefore, like to appeal to my brothers and sisters from the opposition side most especially my sister hon. Beti Kamya who said that we on the government side have been whipped. Madam Speaker, I stand here to say that what I am presenting to this august House is purely from the bottom of my heart and from my understanding as a professional teacher, a lover of education and a strong supporter of education in this country. 

I would like to make three observations: One is that, I know when someone undergoes an operation it is really very painful and I know the re-location of Shimoni Demonstration School is like someone undergoing an operation. However, when a doctor decides to carry out an operation he or she makes that decision in the interest of the patient and, therefore, the re-location of Shimoni Demonstration School is done in that spirit. It is not being done in bad faith.

The re-location of Shimoni Demonstration School is being done in the interest of boosting universal primary education. What do I mean? Madam Speaker, everybody is aware of how much money government is spending on universal primary education. Our tax base in the last 20 years had moved from Shs 33 billion to 2,000. It is in the interest of government to continue rising the revenue base, to continue rising the tax base so as to finance these pro-people programmes of universal primary education, universal post-primary education etc. I would like to appeal to this august House to debate this issue in a way that shows that government is not against education, or government is not sabotaging education but rather is looking at avenues of generating funds to support universal primary education.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I appreciate the contribution of the parents of Shimoni. We have learnt from the mover of the motion, hon. Lukwago, that the parents have really contributed classrooms and teachers’ quarters. I would like to appeal to the parents of Shimoni Demonstration School to bear with the government. As we have learnt from the minister’s presentation, government has already earmarked funds to put up another site and it is going to be fully funded by government. We have been assured that within two years this facility will be ready for use. With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I stand here to strongly oppose the motion. I thank you.

MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, North): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have critically read and analysed the motion moved. I have read through the petition by the parents and the response by the Ministry of Education. I would like to speak as an African who grew up in Uganda since birth and who had an opportunity to study at Shimoni Demonstration School.

Madam Speaker, as an OB of Shimoni, I feel deeply touched and I sympathise with the current status quo of my former school. For those of us who are Christians, we know that in the Bible when John the Baptist came, he told the entire world that he has come to prepare the way. His was the preparation of the way for the coming of the Messiah. My point is that, there is an urgent need for us as a country to begin preparing the way for investors also. Imagine a situation where we are going to have all these innocent young Ugandans shifted and there is no way in which we are going to help them. 

In preparing the way, Madam Speaker, somewhere in the petition there is the issue of elaborate consultation of stakeholders. It is my humble appeal that despite the fact that I support the coming of investors, as a country we should be in a position to prepare a way for them to come. We are doing this thing at this time to our young brothers and sisters at Shimoni; I sympathise with them as an old boy. 

I would like to conclude by saying that as a Parliament, let us give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God. Let us give to Shimoni what belongs to Shimoni and to whomever what belongs to whomever. That is my humble appeal from the bottom of my heart as an old boy of the school. I stand to speak here because I went through this school. I feel very sympathetic with the school. Thank you.

MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for Higher Education for the elaborate clarifications he gave and I thank my brother, hon. Lukwago.  

Madam Speaker, I stand here to oppose the motion. The hon. Lukwago should have observed by now the developments in that axis. We had bungalows with iron sheets, now we have buildings of eight, six storeys. The skyline is changing. We cannot leave Shimoni in that state.  We must accept a change in planning and in land use. Let us accept this change. Good enough, government is not just abandoning them but is providing alternative places.

Madam Speaker, the minister took us through the catchment areas that are serving that school. The majority of the pupils come from Makindye Division, and the majority of the schools, which have vacancies, are from Makindye. In other words, we are not going to have a problem. We are in fact making life easier for the pupils. They will not have to cross from Makindye to the city centre. We are going to reduce on traffic jams. No accidents, because they are about to stay in the areas where they reside.

Madam Speaker, let us be Ugandans. Any MP here should debate first and foremost in the interest of Uganda. The developments we are bringing to Shimoni are in the best interest of Uganda. If you think of your district or constituency, you are advised to go and become a district councillor or a councillor at the municipality. If you are here, your primary objective is to debate in the interest of Uganda. 

I appeal to all of you, please do not support this motion. Let us have the development, which has been earmarked for this place. As leaders, let us be very serious. How could hon. Lukwago accept such a thing to come, apparently that Prince Al Waheed would not accept any other place apart from Shimoni! That man could not have said that. It is your duty to educate your people not to bring such nonsense –(Interjections)- I am sorry it is not nonsense, but you should –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I take exceptional objection to the statement made. I also find it in bad taste to rubbish a motion, which has been duly tabled on the Floor following the procedures laid down in our rules and is also a matter of great national interest, as nonsense. I am wondering whether the honourable Member is in order to make such a statement. Even as far as parliamentary language is concerned, I wonder whether his statement is in line with the Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a breach of our rules to use un-parliamentary language. Fortunately, the honourable member withdrew it before you stood up.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must also mention another one. This hotel is not being built for CHOGM; this hotel is going to be here for years. CHOGM is a by the way. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to oppose the motion. There are two issues that I find perturbing. When hon. Kamya talks of an Arab investor, I want to say an investor is an investor. If hon. Erias Lukwago went to Bushenyi and put up a building, we would not keep on saying that this is a Muganda investor. That is racism! We should really strike off this name-coding otherwise it will spoil our nation. It is actually alright to be whipped into position. Any party worth its name has got its rules and therefore to whip people into position is alright.  

Madam Speaker, I would have had a problem with taking away the school Shimoni if it was not going to be relocated. It is not that it is going to fade from the map of Uganda. I, therefore, do not see why we should oppose a school that is going to be relocated. I read here where my brother –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, I just want to give information. When hon. Denis Obua raised the issue of having been an OB of that school and he was therefore worried that his school is going to disappear, I also sympathised with him. However, the fact of the matter is that, not every school or institution started at a certain point is supposed to remain there forever. I will give an example. St Mary’s College Kisubi, which is one of the best schools in Uganda, started from Lubaga and now is at Kisubi. I happen to be associated with it and I do not see any problem –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are submitting. Hon. Karooro, please conclude.  

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. He has actually concluded for me. He was not giving me information but he was concluding my remarks. When my brother, hon. Lukwago, says and observes that it is practically impossible for the said Saudi investor - I wish we could even remove the word “Saudi investor” - to construct a CHOGM hotel within the remaining few months, we do not know. What facts do you have that he cannot construct that hotel? Moreover, we are saying that a hotel is a hotel whether it is for CHOGM or not. It is a starting point. 

People are saying that after CHOGM, what are we going to do with these hotels? One thing that people do not know is that CHOGM is going to open doors wide for Uganda. Now the international community will know that we have got facilities for international conferences and they will come here. So, it does not matter if that investor may not finish, the fact is that he will have started it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a process worldwide for big cities to decongest the centre. Go anywhere, residences are being moved from the centre and businesses are being brought into the centre. This is true. If hon. Lukwago has travelled abroad, he would see this to be true. Schools are quite better placed in the outskirts of the cities. So, what is happening now is not just a simple affair; it is a global issue. 

If you go to Cairo now, which has a population of 27 million people, you will see that people are going outwards. In fact, the richer people in Uganda now are leaving Kololo, they are leaving Nakasero and business offices are taking the centre. Even then, with the centre becoming a business environment, there is also a move to move cars away from the centre so that people can come by bus and can start preparing for railways and trams.  

Some of us see Kampala in 30 to 40 years, if not earlier, actually having the modern facilities you find in these capitals elsewhere. Therefore, let us not be emotional like my good friend who has studied in the school. I do not blame him, we get attached to buildings, to environments and, therefore, it is fair for him to speak the way he did. However, let us also see the changing skyline of Kampala. That is why we are talking now of a satellite city in Nakawa/Naguru. That is why some of us were angry that the Lubowa area was used the way it has been used with those houses, which look like upturned wheelbarrows. This should have been high raised so that people at Najjanankumbi leaving Kampala should see high raised buildings, but now you see overturned wheelbarrows. Madam Speaker, at this point I would like to welcome the efforts by companies like Akright who are building estates outside the city. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, creating jobs. Schools do not create jobs -(Interjections)– they create people who seek for jobs. You must understand this. Building a hotel in the place of a secondary school, a primary school, a teachers college, will mean you are going to have more people employed there than the teachers you have. I think these are real issues, which the honourable may not have been aware of and should now reconsider in presenting this motion to this House. I certainly do not agree with him. I do not support the motion. 

MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by thanking the Minister of State for Higher Education, brother Opio, for taking the trouble to give us an elaborate explanation of the steps being taken to take care of the pupils of Shimoni Primary School. I would like to begin by echoing his appeal to our brothers and sisters from Shimoni Demonstration School who are probably working there or are parents of the pupils. 

I would like you to try and understand the difficulties and choices that government has to make at this time in the life of our country. The case in point is to have on one hand a school, which is struggling to give education to our children. Shimoni Primary School, as I am sure you all know, is having problems with the infrastructure itself. I did not go to the school, but I have been to Shimoni Demonstration School a number of times and the school is truly struggling to give education to our children. It is not in a good shape. The walls are barely standing. The government cannot be happy to see the state of the school with so many of our children’s lives at risk.

On the other hand, we have an offer of an investor to put up a facility that would motivate serious business in the heart of our city. Of course, it is also offering accommodation to CHOGM visitors soon expected in the country, but thereafter there will be other people who can use that facility. That project would offer more employment, I believe, than the school is offering right now. It would also pay taxes to this country, which taxes would help to build better schools than Shimoni is at this time. Therefore, what would the choice be? 

Hon. Kamya, you have been asking us to put ourselves in the shoes of the parents, the children or the teachers, now I am asking you, put yourself in the shoes of the Government of Uganda at this time in the revolution of our country. What would be the better choice there? To keep a struggling school in the heart of the city, which is falling apart, or to put up a new structure that would surely put more schools in Uganda?
 
We should consider that the focus of this government at this time is transformation of our motherland. Uganda is our motherland whether you belong to the opposition or the ruling party. Uganda is for us all. I would really want to say that even hon. Lukwago would have saved this Parliament the trouble if he had taken the trouble to listen to our brothers and sisters and counselled them like all leaders must do sometimes. Counsel our people, give them the wisdom to know that these are difficult choices that we must make and leadership is to make those choices. Thank you, but I must say I oppose your motion. Thank you, for listening.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the first place, I would like to seek your indulgence that since this is a very important motion, which we feel affects a very large number of our population, I be given latitude to talk more than two minutes. 

Madam Speaker, I have heard and seen speaker after speaker stand up to say, “I am making this presentation from the bottom of my heart.” These are people who, according to the Parliamentary Elections Act, have either at least an S.6 certificate or equivalent or have higher qualifications, including professors, who must actually be in a better position to appreciate the important role education plays in any development of a country.

Madam Speaker, in all countries that have undergone development, what is very important is social investment, of which education is one of them. Look at China and at many European countries, their development did not start by constructing industries; it all started by social investments, in which case they treasure their people more than these tangible infrastructural developments that we are talking about. 

Today and on many occasions, we see leaders of Uganda especially people on the front bench going to international conferences and toasting glasses of wine in the name of millennium development goals. One of the components of the millennium development goals that we have committed ourselves to is provision of education for our children. Provision of education for our children is not just about UPE. It is about – [Prof. Semakula: “Information”] - Professor, I am sorry, I am well informed on the subject, which I am talking about. You will inform me in the corridors of Parliament. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the purpose of universal primary education is not just a matter of government proclamation. We are talking about accessibility; how many of our children are able to access educational facilities. We are talking about retention; how many of our children are able to be sent to school and they remain there, learn and are able to go to the next stage.  We are talking about quality of education. There are not many schools in Uganda at the level of Shimoni Demonstration School that have got the standard embedded in them of which all of us are proud. 

I concur, sure many of us would love to have our children in Shimoni Demonstration School, in Nakasero Primary School, in Buganda Road Primary School but because of distance, we are not able to do that. Now, what is the intention of depriving our children from these facilities, which are already in existence? If you can recall in yesterday’s The New Vision –(Interruption) 

PROF. SEMAKULA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give him is basic. He says governments should be interested in human development. This government has educated 8,000,000 Ugandan children free, in primary schools. Two, he is saying government should be concerned about Ugandans going for education. Universities are overflowing. When this government took power, there was one university in this country; today there are more than 10. 

The information I am giving the honourable members is that, this government is concerned and preoccupied with the development of the children of this country. In January next year, this government is introducing free secondary education. If there is anything, which shall be preached to this government, it should not be preached on the question of education.

MR WADRI: When you are a professor of history and you cannot recall what I have said hardly a day old, then I wonder what kind of professor of history you are. The statement I made is very clear that when we are talking about universal education, talk about accessibility, retention, quality. These are the issues I am talking about. At no one point have I denied that Uganda is doing very well in the UPE programme. I expected you as a historian, a professor, to be in a better position to capture what I said just a few minutes back. (Laughter) As I said earlier on, these are the type of leaders we have at international fora, toasting glasses of wine in honour of millennium development goals, but when they come back home they cannot live to them.  

In yesterday’s The New Vision, it was sadly reported that the relocation of Shimoni Primary School from its present location to Kololo is going to deny educational services to 1,430 pupils. How can we be proud of this! I refer you to the front page of yesterday’s paper. It is there. This is because the facilities that are going to be constructed there, to begin the in-take for the next primary academic year, will not be enough. So, where are you expecting all these 1,400 pupils to go?  

Ugandans need to be proud that none other than our own, Madam Speaker, was the first African Student to have passed through Shimoni. Why don’t we give an opportunity for others like her who are still young, to pass through there?  Why don’t we give opportunity to other Ugandans to also be able to wear the shoes of president, having passed through Shimoni Primary School? I think we are not serious! 

The bad thing that I have seen in this country is that many of us are overtaken by tangible things rather than long-term investments, which we should be able to have in our people. People in Uganda will treasure animals more than human beings. People in Uganda today have switched on –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Wadri for giving way. There is a school called Kampala Parents, which was at one time on Namirembe Road and exactly the same reaction came up when the owners of the school wanted to shift it to where it is in Naguru, which is spacious and more organised. But I am very sure that many parents are very happy that their children are now in a very spacious and well-organised place, with more enrolment. The name continued and has never been a problem, actually there is progress. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Honourable minister, who I always refer to as my grandson from Bunyoro, the information you have given me is self-defeating. You need to appreciate that even if we asked ourselves here how many of us have our children in Kampala Parents - Kampala Parents is a private investment, it can compete! In any case, it relocated from a smaller place to a bigger one, which is not the case with Shimoni as we talk now. 

I appeal to you, honourable members, for those of us who went through great schools called seminaries, to meditate very seriously between yourself and your conscience, respect the Constitution that you swore to defend and uphold and do not just think about your own personal interests. Please, let us invest in our people. We shall only prove to the world that we are more concerned about Uganda if we cannot be selfish to ourselves and the systems that we serve, and if we talk for those who, unfortunately, are not able to be here to talk on their own behalf.

MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I thank the mover. Honourable members, one question that is pertinent is, why are we polarized even in the House when it comes to the issue of investors? The answer could be near to this, we do not move in unison. Things are done outside haphazardly and when they become sour, they then come here. That is why yesterday you heard one honourable member saying that Members of the Opposition are ever opposing everything. 

Here we are again, an investor is coming but in which manner? What is the modus operandi used in his coming? Why should we have an investor coming and we have petitions? Why should we have an investor coming and we raise red flags? That is where the gist of the problem is.  

Madam Speaker, we are all Ugandans. When disasters strike, we should shed off the veil of, “I belong here or there.” We should move in unison. The mover of this motion somewhere hinted that they are not opposed to the moving but the methodology applied in the moving is the one, which is raising hairs and we are splitting hair over this. Some people have even quoted developed countries. They say the schools there move in an orderly fashion. 

My colleague hon. Mutuluuza has talked about Kisubi. They never forced Kisubi where it went. They have expanded because they move in an orderly fashion. The honourable minister came and said, “We are committed to education.” We do not dispute that you are committed to education. However, imagine a situation of moving a huge population, teaching staff, support staff and with all the ramification to another school. In other words, you are grafting one school onto the compound and the environment of another school. Even the school where you are taking them is not prepared. Their playground may not accommodate them. It has been so abrupt. You said these are planners. You gave us all the beautiful data. However, did you plan for this?

My friend the former engineer of this county was talking about the landscape being coloured. Former city engineer, look at the potholes in our roads.  If we had planned properly we would not be having all this. Therefore, we need to move –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Sebuliba that as a city engineer, I am not a planner. There is somebody else who does planning. I am not a planner. Therefore, was he in order to insinuate that I was in charge of planning?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not know the details of the specific duties that the engineers and the planners do. I am sorry I do not know.

MR SEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, thank you for that ruling. I thought everybody plans before he moves in.  

As I wind up, the honourable minister said that it would take two years to build the school and place it where it is supposed to be permanently. This is beautiful.  However, you see how fast government is moving with hotel industry. Very fast! We are not even sure that some of the buildings will not collapse on us. Why didn’t you also plan to move fast for the sake of our children? Many of you go to Ntale, Kisubi and schools of that nature because of that old attachment you have. 

I know change is supposed to come. One philosopher said everything changes except the law of change. We will change but let us move in unison. Let us be orderly. It should not be a matter of pushing teachers off.  You can imagine where the teachers supposed to train from this area were taken. We get reports to the effect that they are already suffering. Now, where are we going to put the balance?  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, he has categorically stated here that the schools he has read out are where the pupils are going to be pushed. Are they just pushing the pupils? Are they not prepared? Is that their choice? That is why they are saying even in the motion that the stakeholders must be involved. We should not be tricked into traumatising our children. They really feel that they should also be part and parcel and belong to this nation.

I am dismayed with the statement of the honourable minister and that is why I support this motion. Let us throw down the investors. Let them come but we should respect the citizens of this country. When this is done, they will work amicably well with all the investors. But if you move in this fashion people will say, “Okay. Let them take it today. Tomorrow will be our day and we do the same to them.” I support the motion and I urge all honourable members to do the same.

4.29
DR OKULO EPAK (Independent, Oyam County South, Apac): Madam Speaker, thanks to God and people like hon. Nsibambi -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon, you are saying –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: I am saying thanks to God and people like Rt hon. Prime Minister Nsibambi. Madam - (Laughter)- I do not have to go into details. I stand here deeply concerned and worried about the future and quality of our urban development. I will start by reading Article 46 in the Land Act: “Any use of the land shall conform to the provisions of the law relating to the town and country planning Act and any other laws.” This is fundamental.  

The standard for siting a primary school in the Kampala structure plan is a minimum of six acres. What we mean by land use is that all functions are zoned for. A hotel is a commercial function, Shimon primary school is an educational function and it has been zoned as such. I hope that when we decided to locate it for commercial development, re-zoning was done by the town and country planning board. Secondly, I do hope -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, at the time of allocating this site to the hotel user, the town and country planning board were not in place. I think up to now it is not even in place for several years. So, who is really siting these five star hotels? I do not know.

MR WERIKHE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Under the Act of town and country planning board, even when the board is not in operation the minister is empowered to take decisions on behalf of the board and this was done in respect of this hotel. Thank you.

DR EPAK: But, Madam Speaker, I am not sure that the minister has zoning powers. I know he can make specific decisions but not zoning. Did the minister write re-zoning Shimon from education to commercial? Be that as it may, we should encourage and support planning. Anybody who does things ad hoc like my friend former city engineer - no wonder the whole city is going berserk! (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak was in charge of planning for Kampala City Council for many years. KCC as a local authority has been planning for the last 10 years but before that, he is the man who was planning for this city. So, is he in order to insinuate that it is the city engineer who is not even the planner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is not right to attribute the chaos in Kampala to one individual.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I was a chief planner and I know the kind of city engineers and surveyors we used to have. The entire physical development of the city depends on the city engineer, the planner and surveyor. So, I am not talking about hearsay.  The country planning board, the city planning department would not approve of the shifting of these developments particularly for the new site, which is definitely less than four acres. Do they take their profession seriously?  

Madam Speaker, the debate is not about whether we need a hotel or not. It is also not about whether alternative facility has been provided for Shimoni Demonstration Primary School or not. The most serious aspect of the debate is, has a sensible decision been made? My submission is terribly no.  There was no need for government to incur a lot of cost, putting up a new Shimoni Primary School for the sake of an investor. I also want to assert that there was absolutely no shortage of land in this city for siting such a hotel. You only needed my expertise. I would give you a very good site.  

Somebody is talking about the break down of the school. I would have expected that the school should be rehabilitated on that site. That is what the function of government is. Not each time things fall into pieces, should you run away. You have to reconstruct and build them to a higher standard.  

Another thing I want to remind Members is that, it takes a very serious matter to site these schools in their various locations in this city. When we planned in 1972, we determined sites for all primary schools in this city together with their catchment areas for a long term. Therefore, any body to come in today and meddle with these long-term functional allocations –(Interruption)

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to pass to my honourable colleague is that, when we talk of transformation, it does not only mean restoration. It also means breaking down and building anew and that is what we are proposing in this case. Thank you.

DR EPAK: Well, it is not bad to receive information from such high placed people. I welcome the information. We have shifted the attention and the focus of the debate purposely to say that there are people here who are anti-development and opposed to a hotel. Claims are that there are people who do not appreciate government’s effort in education.  But the effort is there. An alternative site has been found for Shimoni Primary School. The issue is, was it essence for relocation? And I am saying, no. In future, we should make better decisions than this.  We have experts in this country. 

If I had a little more time, I would tell you that sometimes it is painful even to go back and appreciate what Amin did. Otherwise, we would not be having the Golf course, we would not be having the Conference Centre, and we would not be having the Summit View.  All those things were relocated by Amin. They were rejected by the town and country planning board and Amin respected their decisions. That is why Namboole was never put up in Nakawa. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I know this is a very important subject but we have other business. I would like to ask hon. Lukwago to read the text of his motion and then we conclude the debate.

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. Once again I am making a humble appeal to honourable members to appreciate the full import of this motion. There is nothing partisan about this motion; it is for a national cause and national interest. Education in our Constitution is a right; it is not a privilege. It has got no colours. It is for all of us. Let us give Shimoni a chance. A few issues have been raised and I would wish to respond as follows:

The honourable minister of State for Higher Education, Gabriel Opio, in his statement clearly stated that government is not prepared to take Shimoni to the new permanent site along Lugogo Bypass. That is an express admission that they are not ready to take Shimoni to its new home. There is also an express admission that the hotel, which is going to be constructed in Shimoni land, is not for purposes of CHOGM only and actually not for purposes of CHOGUM. If it is true as the honourable minister said that the construction of the new premises is going to take two years, why can’t the investor also wait for two years? CHOGUM is not the Alfa and Omega of development in this country and this hotel in particular. We are not focusing on only –(Interruption)

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, hon. Lukwago, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the Sheikh is a good friend of mine. Given the fact that he is planning to set up a very beautiful hotel, if this august House allows me, I can talk to him. He can wait until Shimoni Demonstration School is –(Laughter)- I know what I am talking about. If government has failed to convince the whole Sheikh to wait, maybe for two years or one year, I can do it free of charge.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, hon. Sebaggala, for that information. I think it has been received honestly with open heart and hands. He is ready to convince Al Waheed and if you are not agents of Al Waheed please, honourable members, let us take this undertaking by hon. Sebaggala seriously. I was saying that we are not making policies for this generation only. We are making legislations and policies for posterity. So, if it is for posterity why do we make these haphazard arrangements? 

A case has not been brought out by the minister as to why this temporary or interim arrangement to go to East Kololo first when this hotel can be constructed even after two years. Again this playground is for another school. They also need that facility. Why create a slum in Kololo? These kiosks we are constructing in the name of Shimoni School in East Kololo are not good.  

Madam Speaker, Government has earmarked money for this particular facility. If you have earmarked that money, let us put it into use by constructing these premises and immediately after construction as the parents have made the undertaking they will hand over the premises to you or to Al Waheed.

Madam Speaker, there is no question of racism in this motion. We welcome all investors and this motion was not brought in the spirit that I am against Al Waheed or any other investor from outside. That is not the case but this is a question of priorities, a question of a well-organised development.  

This brings me to the issue raised by hon. Janet Museveni, the question of choices; that we need to shift the school for purposes of encouraging development. She says that this is a dilapidated structure. Observation has already been made that the obligation to refurbish the structure is on Government. My addition to this is that, it is not enough to say that because Shimoni structures are dilapidated that that is the reason we should give away the land. Otherwise, all the structures we have here including this House are also in a sorry state. Are we dishing it away because it is in the sorry state? That should not be the reason. 

We recently committed a lot of funds to the rehabilitation of State House in Entebbe but we are yet to see the President of this Republic shifting from Nakasero to go to Entebbe. He is waiting for the construction to be completed and he is rightly taking that decision. If that is the case, why don’t you allow Shimoni the same opportunity that you first construct the premises in its new home, Lugogo Bypass, then they shift? But if it is to shift before the construction takes place, hon. Janet Museveni should show the way that you can go to Entebbe before construction is complete. 

This comes in with the proposal of hon. Kabwegyere that we should decongest the city. If we are to decongest the city we have sank a lot of money in the construction of State House. Let us start with the State House in Nakasero –(Interruption)

PROF. SEMAKULA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Is hon. Lukwago in order to stand in this august House and conduct himself in a manner of calling an honourable member by name? She is here as a Member of Parliament, why refer to her as “state house”? Is the honourable member in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have tried to make this position clear. Hon. Museveni is here as a Member for Ruhama. Please, stop insinuating any other capacity. You are out of order.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The honourable member of Parliament for Ruhama, who sleeps in Nakasero –(Laughter -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR LUKWAGO: And State House is in my constituency so I am talking about State House in Nakasero and we have another State House in Entebbe. We have sank a lot of money in the rehabilitation of that State House and I am saying that if it is in order for such a facilitate to be shifted before the construction of the new site is complete, then those who reside in Nakasero State House should show the way. That was the point I was making in line with the proposal given by hon. Kabwegyere that we should decongest the city. But the whole point is very clear. This is a question of fundamental rights. You have to make proper arrangements for the pupils and the employees there.  

As I wind up, I call upon all of you Members and I reiterate the call given by hon. Kassiano Wadri to seriously consider not betraying your conscience. I know many of you on the other side encouraged me to bring up this motion and I see you –(Laughter)- please, leave up to your promise. Hon. Wopuwa, history will judge you because you have lived up to the old adage in The Song of Lawino that never uproot the pumpkin from the old homestead. You have lived up to that adage and history will stand to judge you. Please Members, live up to your promise. You promised me. Do not betray me. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, I had called you so that you can read the text of your motion. It is not in the Hansard.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, this is the text of the motion: 

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda is reported to have allocated the piece of land on which Shimoni Demonstration is located to one Prince Al Waheed of Saudi Arabia for purposes of constructing a CHOGM Hotel;

AND WHEREAS the government decided to temporarily relocate Shimoni Demonstration School to some makeshift premises to be constructed in the playground of East Kololo Primary School and thereafter to a proposed permanent home along Lugogo Bypass adjacent to Kololo Secondary School;

COGNISANT of the fact that the parents, staff and management committee of the school vehemently protested against the aforesaid government decisions and or proposals on grounds inter-alia that thorough preparations and consultations with all the stakeholders ought to have been made in advance which was not done;

AND AWARE of the fact that on 16 August 2006, parents, staff and management committee of the school submitted a petition to the Speaker of Parliament wherein they spelt out matters of great public concern;

AND NOTING that the Government of Uganda has directed the staff and management of the school to vacate the premises by 18 December 2006 before the said petition and concern therein are addressed; 

AND NOTING further that if the said directive is not rescinded it is likely to occasion a demise of Shimoni Demonstration School, a situation that would be unfortunate given its historical record and the fact that it is the largest universal primary education school in Kampala District;

AND OBSERVING that it is practically impossible for the said Saudi investor to construct a CHOGM hotel within the remaining few months; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as hereunder: 
That the Government of Uganda is urged to stay the impending eviction or relocation of Shimoni Demonstration School to a makeshift site pending investigation and determination of the issues or concerns raised in the said petition.” I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable members, I put the question that this House approves a resolution as proposed by hon. Erias Lukwago. We shall proceed by voting row by row.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the outcome of the voting is as follows: Members for the motion are 29; Members against are 59 and seven Members abstained. The motion is lost.

(Question negatived.)

(B) MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

5.01
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I had given notice to move a Private Members’ Bill. I did the preliminary work and submitted to the Clerk but as of now the Office of the Clerk is not ready with the necessary documentation. So, Madam Speaker, I propose that we postpone this motion until the next resumption of the House. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The item will be reflected on the Order Papers for next week.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 (2)

Question 10/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION

5.02
DR OKULO EPAK (Independent, Oyam County South, Apac): “Is the minister aware that there are a number of schools and colleges whose buildings are roofed with asbestos?
i)	Is the minister aware of the dangers asbestos roofs pose to the health of the school communities?
ii)	Would the minister list the schools affected and the programmes for replacing their roofs?”

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  With reference to the question put by hon. Okulo Epak, I would like to respond as follows:

The Minister of Education and Sports is aware of education institutions whose buildings - (Interruption)

DR OKULO: Madam Speaker, don’t you think I would have been given the benefit of getting a copy of the reply?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is customary for the minister to give a written reply to the person moving the question.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education and Sports is aware of the education institutions whose buildings are roofed with asbestos sheets.  It should be noted that a number of schools and colleges were built in 1960s before the harmful effect of the asbestos were discovered. I am sure hon. Okulo Epak is aware. Since then the use of asbestos sheets has been banned. Several education institutions have replaced the asbestos sheets with iron sheets. However, due to financial constraints, it has not been possible to replace the asbestos sheets with iron sheets on buildings of all the educational institution in the country. The minister of education and sports will however replace the roofs in a phased manner beginning from the next two financial years.  

As a health protective measure, head teachers of those schools have been instructed to refrain from harvesting rainwater for human consumption from the asbestos roofs. The list of the affected schools is attached for reference. I do not know whether I should go through but maybe for the sake of record I will read them. They are only 32:

1.	Iganga High School in Iganga 
2.	Kyebambe Girls School in Fort Portal
3.	Pallisa Senior Secondary School in Pallisa 
4.	Koma Secondary School in Mbale
5.	Loro Secondary School in Oyam
6.	Kotido Senior Secondary School in Kotido 
7.	City High School in Kampala
8.	Wanyange Girls School in Jinja
9.	Kako Senior Secondary School in Masaka
10.	St Elizabeth Senior Secondary School in Soroti
11.	Bududa Senior Secondary in Bududa
12.	Trinity College Nabbingo in Wakiso 
13.	Busoga College Mwiri in Jinja
14.	Koboni College in Lira
15.	Gulu Senior Secondary School in Gulu
16.	Mengo Senior Secondary School in Kampala
17.	St Catherine Senior Secondary School in lira
18.	Jinja College in Jinja
19.	Tororo Girls School in Tororo
20.	Kololo Senior Secondary School in Kampala
21.	Kitgum High School in Kitgum
22.	Christ the King Secondary School in Rakai
23.	Ngora High School in Kumi
24.	Makobore High School in Rukungiri
25.	Nyaruhanga High School in Kabale
26.	Jinja Secondary School in Jinja
27.	St Mary’s College Namagunga in Mukono
28.	Sir Tinto Winyi Secondary School in Hoima
29.	Moroto High School in Moroto
30.	St Joseph’s College Obaki in Arua
31.	Mityana Senior Secondary school in Mityana

As I have stated, Madam Speaker, this is the list which we have got so far and we as a Ministry of Education and Sports are very concerned and we know that although we do not know the statistics of who may have contacted the disease from that, we are now being told by doctors that it is not right to use these schools. But we, as the ministry, are going to budget for this and we are going to roof these schools in a phased manner. 

I would like to thank hon. Okulo Epak for drawing to us this important concern and let us hope that we shall work together with Parliament to ensure that we replace these roofs in the near future. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I had raised this question consistently in the Seventh Parliament and nobody took the trouble to respond. I want to thank the new team in the Ministry of Education and Prof. Gabriel Opio for responding. I think cancer is no longer a small issue in this country. It is a very expensive treatment. We do not have enough facilities and anything that we can do to prevent predisposition we should try our best.

Sure, these schools were built when the United Nations system had not banned the use of asbestos in construction. But that does not mean that now that we know it is an international declaration banning them, then we should have taken immediate action. May I, therefore, while appreciating, request the Speaker to insist and request that from the next budget the ministry submits a programme. The ministry cannot obviously embark on rehabilitating all of them, but we would appreciate the inclusion in the next budget of some of these schools whose whatever material –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Okulo Epak, you know you are supposed to ask supplementary questions but you are making a lengthy submission.

DR OKULO EPAK: Well, I would have asked a supplementary question but I thought I can ask the minister to tell me because he has admitted that they are making a programme to implement. Could he confirm to us that this programme will start appearing with effect from the next financial year? I did some study. I hope these papers were distributed earlier but I want to table this copy indicating how dangerous asbestos is as far as cancer is concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you tell us the author so that it goes on record? You speak to it and tell us the title and the author so that it can go in the Hansard.

DR OKULO EPAK: The heading is “Asbestos Fact Sheet”. The website - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, please come and lay it on Table.

5.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to lay a paper on behalf of Dr Okulo Epak entitled “Asbestos flat sheet”. This document details the dangers of the use of asbestos sheets as roofing materials.  Detailed information can be accessed by members on website www.arb.ca.gov/toxics/asbestos/general.htm. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the clerk will make copies for circulation.

5.13
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, St Catherine, Comboni College and Dr Obote College are the biggest schools in my constituency.  Having listened to the Minister directing that the schools affected should not use water collected from the roof, is he aware that the schools he mentioned have no running water facilities? How will they survive? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odit, are you saying there is no running water in St Catharine? I was a student there.

MR ODIT:  It is a very serious matter. I have even appealed to the Minister of Education to visit those schools. The country is gone -(Laughter)

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, it is not only limited to the schools in his constituency. Even St Elizabeth Girls’ School Soroti District - the first girls’ school in the whole of Teso region does not have running water, yet the roof is asbestos.

5.15
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his response.  In his response as a safety measure, he instructs the administration in the schools whose names he read to refrain from collecting water from the roofs.  I do not know whether the minister considers that this is not adequate in checking the effects of asbestos on human health. This is because it is well established that once asbestos virus becomes airborne then they have disastrous effects on human beings.  So, just restricting safe measures to collection of water from water from roofs, I think is not sufficient.  Would you like to go one mile beyond that in actually banning accessibility of these buildings all together because what is happening is, these roofs are very old. Virus are already air borne and if it were actually possible I think it would be necessary to de-roof the buildings altogether in the interest of saving human life.

In addition, this goes not specifically to the Minister, but to the members of Government and members of the frontbench.  We know that in certain countries - and I would like to site the example of South Africa where plant workers fell in, in fact they were found to suffer from asbestosis which is a condition that is caused by inhaling of fibres from asbestos.  There is a possibility and I think this could – actually it is not evidence based, that some of the cases of cancer today in this country could have resulted from the use of asbestos on our roofs. 

Does Government want to try to find out – carry out a research on this with a view to establishing the number of people who might have contracted asbestos related illnesses?  And since these people are actually terminally ill - in fact, they cannot be cured easily, make a provision to try to lengthen their lives.  

In the case of South Africa, I would like to give the information to the Leader of Government business. There was a strong appeal for compensation of these persons who suffered as a result of negligence of the plant operators and managers.  Those are the two concerns and questions that I wanted to raise.  Thank you.

5.18
MR SANJAY TANNA (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo):  Madam Speaker, I thank you.   The supplementary question goes to the minister and other members of the frontbench.  Like we all know the home of asbestos sheets and pipes was Tororo municipality before the plant was scrapped off. As I speak, most Government structures and churches including the main Government hospital are roofed with asbestos sheets.  Having read about effects of asbestos, shivers run through my spine because there are two schools that the minister has left out in the list he read, including Tororo College and Rock View Primary school that hosts the largest number of pupils within the municipality under the UPE scheme.

Is the list substantive or is it just indicative? Were these two schools in my municipality left out erroneously? Are these the first schools that the ministry intends to work upon and the rest will come in later?  If these are all in the negatives, as a Government policy all these institutions like Tororo hospital and other institutions should be re-roofed. It is not only roofs. There are also asbestos pipes, which were used in the construction of these institutions for water and for sewerage. So after learning about this, I would like to raise it to the line ministries in order for them to take up this issue very seriously.  Thank you.

5.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  One of the issues my colleague has raised includes not only schools but very many other institutions. 

Recently we passed an emergency budget here for cows, which had Foot and Mouth Disease. Parliament was on recess but we were called to pass it.  This one is a dangerous thing, which involves lives of human beings who look after cows. We were saying we should take two years to do it.  Could the Ministry of Finance immediately think of bringing a supplementary to deal with roofing these schools?  In fact, I am an O.B of Mwiri and maybe I have taken it already- (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala.  Madam Speaker, when you visit the website and that document, you will realise that the effect is not only limited to those people who live there. It also affects those people who live with the people already affected by the effect.  Therefore, it is not only limited to people who have gone to those schools, or who stay in such offices. We are all at risk.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, even water, which is collected, is definitely very dangerous.  I plead that if this Government is for the people, it should quickly bring a supplementary to re-roof all institutions in Uganda that have asbestos roofs. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, there are six forms of asbestos.  May I know from the honourable minister which type of asbestos was used in the Ugandan case?  This is because their degree of infection differs from one type to another.

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I will start with the issue raised by hon. Okulo Epak.  In his supplementary, he still emphasises the government’s resolution to start re-roofing these schools which have asbestos sheets.  I would like to repeat what I said. We shall do it in phases starting from the next financial year.

There are two questions about the same issue. What do we do with these schools, which have the asbestos sheets?  Won’t they use water?  What can we do in order to save life?  It went even further that it may not only be running water. Even we who breathe in air from the neighbourhood of such schools are at a risk. We thought that we could begin to drill some boreholes in the school compounds so as to avoid the water from these roofs. Then we were told that we can even breathe it. But I think it would reduce the intensity if we started with boreholes for the time being as we find a solution. I think we may have to start with working with the Ministry of Water to see that the boreholes are available in some of these schools to stop direct drinking of this water.

MR  ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am very uncomfortable with this. It appears we are dealing with some nuclear waste.  If the minister is knowledgeable in this, or any Member for that matter, how do we dispose off the asbestos which we have on hand?  Do we burry them?  Do we burn them?  What do we do with them?  

Drilling of boreholes for the schools is not enough. Where will the schools take these things? Exposure will make some components get into air and people will breathe them in.  Thank you.

MR OPIO: I think this is now becoming a very formidable problem, which may need some research. We are told boreholes may help but studies need to be conducted so that disposing of those asbestos sheets is done the right way. So, I think we should –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, the assertion by the minister on this Floor makes me get concerned.  I would like the government to clarify whether there is a policy about acquisition, use, management and disposal of asbestos and asbestos product. If the minister is talking about further research when this has been a problem over the years, it appears as if there is no specific policy and whatever is being done is basically to respond to a question that has been raised.  Do we have a policy? What does it say?  

MR OPIO: Well that is a very good question. As I said, we need to go to the drawing board.  I do not even think that the person who asked has ever thought about this policy because he has been on this Floor for many years and he has never come up with it. Therefore, it seems we are intensifying the need and we shall do research and find out the solution to this problem.
  
5.28
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, most countries started dealing with the problem of asbestos in the early 1980s.  They started demolishing houses, which had asbestos when I was in the United States. These were usually used for keeping heat during winter.  

The disposal of asbestos needs extremely well trained people and they have to wear special gowns, filters around their noses so that they do not breathe in the fibres. Fibres are the most dangerous because they cause cancer of the lungs.  Therefore, if there is a problem and if the country needs to develop a policy, we should consult those countries, which have already dealt with this problem.  The only thing is to realise that there is a problem and work out a policy.  Thank you very much.  

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, we have heard from the Minister of Health, who has heard from Members on the Floor that there is a problem. I think it is within the government, including the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education and others to take this very serious and do some study and see the way forward.

Now, the other question -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, I do not know whether the Prime Minister would not want to propose which ministry really so that when we go from here, we know who is charged with developing this policy. Otherwise, we shall not know whether to look for you or for the Minister of Health, on this matter.

5.30
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is clearly an inter ministerial matter but the Ministry in charge of Housing is the one which is really responsible for it. Of course, we have the Ministry in charge of Water, and the Ministry in Charge of Health. So, the ministry in charge of Housing will have to interface with all the relevant ministries so that we have a solution to this problem. I therefore have no hesitation in requesting him to do that and then that policy will be discussed in Cabinet and the policy adopted will be informed to all Members of Parliament.

It is difficult to have a time frame. It has a financial implication as well. It is difficult for me to have a time frame now but it is a very urgent matter. I believe that three months are reasonable and I do not see the Minister in Charge of House – oh yes, hon. Kasirivu is here -(Laughter)- so he is – I am actually directing now. I ask him to ensure this matter is studied and a policy is taken, brought to Cabinet, then all members of Parliament are informed and the entire body politic.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Prime Minister. The question was raised whether this list is comprehensive. As I said when I was presenting the answer, there are many but there are maybe some which have not been included. And I say that we shall continue to include them as we discover them. 

A question was put that even Tororo College is among them. Yes, Tororo College has some buildings, which are roofed with tiles and others with asbestos sheets. And good enough in that area, they are more buildings with tiles than asbestos. So it will be easier; it is also going to be included. 

Hon. Tanna also raised the issue of pipes and I think now that we are going to have a thorough study, we have – but this is again a very expensive venture. It affects even homes of people. I do not know whether it is possible for Government other than using other measures through ministries of Health and Housing and urban bodies to begin to may be sensitise people about the use of these pipes and then may be if people have money to replace pipes in their own buildings- (Laughter)- otherwise it will not be easy for the government to replace all the pipes in private buildings. But in Government institutions, the study with in the three months should include this one.

There was a question of whether we should carry out research to find out whether people may have contacted the disease through the use of asbestos, and whether the government would compensate. I do not think- until they do the research, I do not think it is wise for a minister to stand here and say the government will compensate. We do not know what we are dealing with first. But now we know that we have a problem and we must try to see how to solve it.

Lastly, a question was raised by Hon. Mafabi that we should also treat the humans as we treated the animals by bringing here supplementary – actually we do not know the magnitude of the funding, so it may not be possible to do it within the few months. So we need to study then come up and see whether Government can decide on how to go about it. I thank you very much, honourable members. (Mr Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last question? Oh, he wanted to know whether you are aware of the six types and which one of them is the most dangerous.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, that is a very complicated question and I would – am not really going to stand here and say I have the answer. We should study together and we find out what types and how we can solve the problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

QUESTION 11/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

DR OKULO EPAK (Independent, Oyam County South, Apac): “Is the Minister aware that: 
a)	Customary land owners who apply for land titles are being made to fill lease forms and are being given leasehold titles by the District Land Boards and Registrars of Titles, contrary to Clause 1 of Article 237 of the Constitution, and Sections 10 and 11 of the Land Act 1998?

b)	Purchasers of the former Pool Housing Properties are being issued with leasehold titles by the Uganda Land Commission contrary to the fact that upon total sale of its interest on the properties, the commission ceases to have any more rights and interest on such properties.

ii)	In respect of those affected in (i)a) and b) above, what remedies without extra burden or cost to those affected will be offered, and how soon?

iii)	a) Under what legal provisions and procedures has the President been acquiring and allocating land to investors in various parts of the country?
	b) In the case of land held in trust under paragraph (b) of Clause (2) of Article 237 of the Constitution, have the respective Local Governments and Parliament been consulted for their concurrence or consent?”

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LANDS) (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This question by Hon. Ekulo Epak –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you give him a copy of the answer?

MR KASIRIVU: Yes I did. And he is happy with it -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, he asked about the customary owners who apply for land titles being made to fill these forms. My answer is that my ministry has already started addressing this problem and in the recently concluded training of District Land Boards and land officers, it has also been highlighted in the guidelines from my ministry to all districts to guide lower land management institutions in the way they manage land. The District Land Boards and the area land committees should be able to assist and guide the applicants when applying for land by informing them the types of land they are applying for hence either to apply for leaseholds or to apply for customary certificates.

Madam Speaker, customary owners who are interested in leasing or sub leasing their land to individuals or institutions can also do so. And in the land regulations there, Form 34, which gives the details of what information is required. And it is important that a copy is submitted to the District Land Board for record purposes. 

Provision of customary certificates was done for people who could not afford high expenses of acquiring free hold titles. But for those who can afford, they are encouraged to apply for free hold titles.   

The purchasers of former Pool Housing Properties that are being given leaseholds, at the time when Government took a policy to sell them off the policy was that the Uganda Land Commission at the sell of the pool houses only transfers the interest of the loans on the land which is a leasehold and retains the revision interest in the land. However, thereafter and with the coming into force of the 1995 Constitution, Land Commission is now encouraging the new owners to apply for grant of freehold titles.

The other question is: “Under what legal provisions and procedures has the President been acquiring and allocating land to investors?” The President has never acquired any land by virtue of his office for allocation to investors. All the land that has been allocated to investors is done by the controlling authorities under their mandate as per the law. The President, however, as a chief executive may give policy directions and guidance on the running of the government business, and he has done so.

The other question is: “In case of land held in trust under Article 237(2) paragraph (b) of the Constitution, has the respective local governments or Parliament been consulted for their concurrence or consent?” Madam Speaker, land held in trust is owned by Uganda Land Commission, but managed or used by different ministries or departments. And different laws provide for the manner that that land held in trust may be alienated and different ministries are to follow the laws when alienating or degazetting such land. For example, for the forests, we have the National Forest and Tree Planting Act. For water, we have the Water Act. For wetland, natural lakes and rivers, we have the NEMA Act. I thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for the response. However, let me give my opinion. The issue we are dealing with is not a small matter. We are dealing with an attempt in the land office to amend the Constitution by policy, by regulation and by Act. So, it is not as simple as it is stated here. 

What will happen to those whom by mistake have been given wrong forms by the district land boards and the land boards have proceeded to give them leases over their own property? How do you lease to me my own property? What will happen? That has to be addressed now. While you are saying in future that should not happen, the honourable minister should tell us how the district land boards will address that mistake.

Secondly, I wonder whether the minister considers it that district land boards are successors to the Uganda Land Commission. If not, why are they taking over the former leases, which were given by Uganda Land Commission before the 1995 Constitution? Why? 

On the question of Government Pool Houses, the minister may not be aware that you cannot eat your cake and have it. It is a law. You sell a property; you cease to have any more residual right over it. 

Secondly, the commission is giving different lease terms to different former purchasers of pool housing. Some are getting 99 years, some are getting 49 years lease. Can the minister explain this difference? And I hope the minister is aware that under the same policy National Housing and Construction Cooperation was also obliged to sell their properties to the tenants. They transferred to the tenants the full freehold title. How can the same policy be implemented differently? 

Finally, about the so-called land held in trust, the Constitution is very clear under clause 2(a) that these areas can only be established and gazetted by the approval of Parliament. Now, if you come to Parliament to approve the alienation of land for reserves before you gazette it, how come you proceed to degazette it without consulting Parliament and the district councils? 

The authority the honourable minister is quoting has already resisted these allocations and they have been disregarded. This is an open secret. This is the same with Forest Authority, just as NEMA. If you think it is they who should do it instead of the President, why is their advice and objection not being taken into consideration? 

5.45
MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Leases have discouraged land titling particularly in the North. This is because people regard customary tenure like freehold. They ask questions like, “If you have been here since time immemorial, how can you go to somebody to give you 49 years? Where will you go after 49 years?” Is the minister aware that giving out these leaseholds will discourage land titling in this country. 

Two, the Land Act provides for convention of leasehold titles into freeholds. It would appear that since 1998 the ministry is still marking time on this matter. Can the minister inform this House what arrangement is put in place to speedily convert leaseholds into freeholds? 

MS  EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Giving reference to the Land Acquisition Act, Article 242 which states:” Government may, under laws made by Parliament and polices made from time to time, regulate the use of land regulate.” What we see at the moment is not what is being followed and yet all the land is vested in the Uganda Land Commission. But that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, is that a supplementary –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Yes, please. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or you are introducing a new matter?

MS EKWAU: No please. I am following what is in the question here. But what is happening at the moment is not what is being followed. Parliament is not being contacted. Land Acquisition Act, Chapter 226, still says Government can compulsorily acquire land for public purposes but what is happening at the moment as well is not what the reality is. When we talk about public purposes and public interest, we are being told of hotels. A hotel in my view is not a public purpose. A hotel is a private good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, if you are asking a supplementary, it must relate to the question he gave and the answer, which the minister has given. You do not introduce new matters.

MS EKWAU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, but we are talking about land acquisition. Land being acquired at the moment is definitely land given to investors. The question at hand if you remember the Uganda Land Commission the Chairman appeared before the committee.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is the hon. Member who happens to be the Shadow Minister for Land in order to continue insisting when we are asking her what supplementary question she is raising and she is continuing to submit? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, among other things the issue of land was discussed in the earlier motion but specifically can you raise a supplementary question arising to the minister’s answer on this issue?

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether what I have in my hand is a different-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Member, you must ask the minister out of what he said.

MS EKWAU: So, under what circumstances is the government giving out land to investors? What we see happening does not follow the procedure. If the government is following the Disposal of Property Act, I do not know whether land in Uganda at the moment is being disposed of. Simple economics tells us that if Government is supposed to be disposing off land as an asset - that is if what is happening is true; it should follow right procedures and the process of bidding and competition. Will the, honourable minister, therefore tell us whether at this point Government is disposing off land? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I would like to ask the honourable minister if he is aware that National Housing, which is supposed to give property to sitting tenants has been sold to Libya with majority shareholders. What will you do to those sitting tenants when you promised that you are going to give them land? How do investors know that land is in a particular place? Do you advertise? How do you value the land that you give the investors? Do we get a joint –what is the share of Government in that venture which is being done by that so called investor?

Finally, what was the value of Shimoni land?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, hon. Member, you are asking the Minister of State (Lands) to tell you –(Interruptions)- No. Honourable members, you are really smuggling in something, which would have been raised earlier.  I do not know whether it is really fair to ask this minister to answer that question.

5.51
MR OCHIENG:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The supplementary question I would like to ask the minister is: According to his explanation it appears there is some confusion in as far as giving out the applications are concerned.  What seems to be a problem is that there is public need for the titles.  Those who acquired through uninformed way the applications that were giving lease to them on their own customary land as he says can transfer but there are two issues here. 

First of all, many of them paid a lot of money to get the title. If I transfer as it is known, how am I going to get what was done in a bad way in return?  If I use a lot of money in this issue unknowingly and there is a much better correct system of doing it, what happens to my money?

Madam Speaker, there is a problem in many of our areas. I happened to have a similar problem as well.  Government came out with a system that is called systematic demarcation.  It failed in Soroti. Some of us who had known of the goods of systematic demarcation traded with Government to enable us do that in our constituency.  Government promised - I even have a letter, this was supposed to have been done in Bugiri last financial year. Unfortunately the minister was transferred to another area and we have not got the information when our people who were promised this will get a similar issue. Those are the two questions I wanted to ask.

5.54
MR NUWAGABA:  I just have one question. My reading of Article 237 (b) which the hon. Member of Oyam South has asked about seems to suggest that there must be particular natural lakes, rivers, wetlands, forest reserves, game reserves and national parks that must be held in trust by either the Local Government or the Central Government.  We know the Local Government has the LCV level and LCIII level.  So, when is the minister bringing a law to operationalised Article 237(b) (ii) detailing which particular rivers, lakes and natural forests and whatever are held by each respective Local Government and the Central Government?

5.55
MR ACHIA: I would like to ask the honourable minister one question.  It seems to me that there is a big move to view land held in freehold or leasehold as superior to land held in customary tenure.  Prior to the 1995 Constitution, in this country there were only few types of land types recognised in this country. These were milo and lease. We fought to lobby to make sure that customary land tenure was recognised as a type of land ownership that must be equal to any other in this country and it is provided for in our Constitution.  

Is it a view that customary tenure on which most of us were like pastoralists is a very important type of tenure? Do we think that is a land type of ownership, which is equal to any other in this country?  Is it in the eyes of the law that customary tenure is inferior to other types of land ownership in Uganda in the eyes of the law? Thank you?

Mr Nsubuga: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We all know that the land that used to house UTV and UBS was given to an investor - AYA Brothers Ltd. Can the minister confirm to this House that the title for that land was dually done in the name of AYA Brothers Ltd? And is the minister aware that the sub divisions on this land were done in different titles?

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to reaffirm and say that those people in Northern Uganda who could have got leaseholds on their customary land are free to have conversion to freehold. It is provided for in the law and there is no contradiction. 

Hon. Okello-okello said that there are people in Northern Uganda who are asking many questions on land.

DR OKULO EPAK: Let us not deal with issue, which are not in dispute. My question is that those who have already suffered by the wrongful and expensive misallocation by getting leasehold instead of freehold titles, when they convert, what recompense will they have, because they have spent money on a wrong thing. That is absolutely wrong to begin with; it is not a question of asking anybody to be merciful about it.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, unless you have got specific cases, and seen them, I cannot say that they are there. But I am saying that in case it happened, the procedure is there in the law; it is very clear.

On the issue that hon. Okello-okello raised concerning the questions asked by the people of Northern Uganda, the minister has intentions of going to Northern Uganda to have dialogue with the people and answer many of the questions, which are being asked and I think after that they will have a way forward.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, this is a national matter, which has been raised in this House, and the minister is narrowing it to Northern Uganda. I think that is not right. Let the questions put here be answered here. Up there, we handle workshops and sensitisation. 

Now, my question is, if you say that freehold is provided for in the Constitution, is customary land tenure system also provided for in the system? If it is, why do you push us from one to another when we are comfortable with one of the provisions?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Okulo Epak raised about five supplementary questions, which we have been eagerly waiting to hear the Minister, my friend Dr Kasirivu answer. But I have seen him jumping to hon. Okello’s question and leaving these other four questions, which were raised first. And he knows very well the issues concerning land. He comes from Bunyoro so he understands the issues of land. We need to be clarified on the questions so that we are able to explain and help you in mobilising people in any policy regarding land in our constituencies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should let him to answer. When he has finished and missed out something, then you will remind him, but you are not giving him time to focus.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I was answering the questions the way I saw them logically following each other, and that is why I related the question of hon. Okello to the freeholds and hon. Odit has also asked another question, which is within that line.

The issue of whether one wants a customary certificate depends on ones preference. If one wants a customary certificate, it is provided for in the law, if you want freehold, so be it; it depends on your choice. And that is why I was saying that when we go up there – and I want hon. Odit to invite me to Erute South –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to finish please –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: So, we shall give more information to the people in relation to what is relevant. 

On the issue of pool houses, at the time these pool houses were sold, there were leaseholds, which would be given by Uganda Land Commission, and this exercise started way back in 1992, before the 1995 Constitution came in force. 

Now, with the new Constitution and the new order, those who are buying pool houses are free to get freeholds and those who got their titles before are free to apply for freeholds, because when the exercise eventually resumes, people will get freeholds.

On the issue of National Housing Construction Cooperation, it is jointly owned; Government has shares and the Libyans have shares.

On the issue of systematic demarcation, I want to say that systematic demarcation did not fail in Soroti. It had a hick-up – the problem was that those who went to under take the exercise did not sensitise the people or give them information; however they have since learnt. 

Now we are in Iganga, and the exercise is moving very smoothly. What happens is that they sensitise the people and the people are appreciating the exercise and it is moving well. We shall go back to Soroti and correct the mistakes that were done and give people information on the necessity of Systematic Demarcation and when we feel that it is adequate, we shall proceed. 

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I know that this issue of systematic demarcation, caused problems in Teso and we remember raising the matter here that Parliament be educated on this issue of systematic demarcation. Up to-date, we have not heard from you, because from your explanation, it is going to roll over the whole country. We do not want a repeat of what happened in Soroti. So when are you bringing this to the House such that all members are blessed with an understanding of what this systematic demarcation is?  

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I was not there then. I am now there and I intend to do exactly that. We are going to come and give as much information to this Parliament about this systematic demarcation; it is a very important exercise that people should be helped to acquire certificates of titles for their pieces of land.

We have a very important exercise we are taking on in the Ministry of Lands, that is the issue of producing a land policy in this country.  Madam Speaker, you are aware that we enacted the Land Act in 1988. Ideally, a law should be enacted after a policy, but since the Constitution dictated that in two years a law must be enacted, there is no time to have a policy. We are now developing a policy and we are going to involve members of Parliament as much as possible to contribute ideas to this policy. We are going out to the regions and we shall bank on the members of Parliament’s mobilisation abilities to discuss and get more information.

Madam Speaker, customary tenure is not inferior –(Interruptions)

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I hate to be forced to do this kind of thing. Surely that ministry can get a report on the land policy, which we debated in the Constituent Assembly. Now you come here and tell people that we promulgated the Constitution without a land policy. How did we get there? Is the hon. Member in order to mislead the House, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I am not sure whether we have had a land policy in the past, or it is just coming or being redrafted. I am sorry I cannot rule on that.  

MR ACHIA: I have been doing studies in this area of land policy in Uganda and I am actually fully informed that we do not have a land policy for Uganda at the moment. We made a Constitution, we made a Land Act, but there is no land policy in this country.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, there are many studies and at an opportune time, I will sit with my brother hon. Dr Okulo Epak, and take him through from 1983 when the secretariat was established in the Bank of Uganda and how we have moved on the issue of land. There have been very many studies, but there has never been a land policy and I am trying to have one developed- (Interruptions)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the House should get this thing very clear. During the process of constitutional making, Government set up a technical committee of 10 people. Hon. Ruhindi is here, he was a Member; I lead that committee to all the 45 districts to consult the people of Uganda what they want their land to be - who should control it and who should own it, and we went in all the 45 districts. 

We wrote a report and when Government adopted it, it was the first document to be given to CA Delegates and that is what the position on land in the Constitution was based upon. You cannot have one land policy; you may have a land tenure system policy, a land use policy and a soil policy. I think what we lack now is a land use policy; which crops should be grown where. That is what we do not have as a country. But to say that we do not have a land policy is not correct. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Well we should not go into arguments; the truth is that we do not have a land policy. The study that he is referring to - I have said that there are many studies and indeed there are many studies, which we are going to consolidate into the land policy. From a land policy, we shall get the land use policy, the housing policy, the urban policy, and so forth.  

Finally, Madam Speaker is the issue of AYA Brothers Ltd, I cannot say that there have been sub-divisions and so forth; as far as I am concerned, AYA Brothers Ltd applied for land from Uganda Land Commission, they were given an offer and we have not witnessed any sub-divisions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we going to exhaust these matters today? What was missed out?

MR AMURIAT: There was a matter that was asked by a number of members to which the minister has not responded. There is this business of the pool houses. The question was asked to the minister as to who would be responsible for the expenses that would be involved in changing the ownership system from leasehold to freehold? I do not hear the minister answering that question. It is an outcry from the members of the public; they were mislead into acquiring properties based on leasehold and now it dawns to them that they have got to put in an extra cost. Who will pay that money?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker may be it would clear - there is what you are supposed to do when you are applying and most of the money goes in this element of lease offer. You apply, and then they give you what they call, a “lease offer”. A “lease offer” is the amount of money that you pay per acreage or decimal. This kind of thing, and it is not little; it is a lot of money. Even in the village, we are talking about a million, two million, and three million; people have paid it but they paid it wrongly. 

What is the fate of this money? You have made me to pay my money out of a customary land, which was mine; you have given me a lease offer because I want a title. If I have paid, what happens next knowing that it was wrongly done?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think it was the people who during the process of making the Constitution said that they wanted the customary land to be formalised and they wanted title deeds – they asked for it and that is how it came into the Constitution. 

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, there were different applications, which were supposed to be made. The reason why most of these land boards insist on the lease tenure is that they get something out of the lease offer. This is my problem and it is not little money, it stands in millions, one million, three millions - to a villager if you want a title that is what you have to part with.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I want to help on the matter of the pool houses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to help the minister?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I want to help the minister on pool housing. When Government decided that Government pool houses should be sold off, there was a law in place called the Land Reform Decree of 1975 and Clause 10 of that law had prohibited sell the of Government property. 

I did point out this to the committee that was set up, a committee of five permanent secretaries to sell off the government pool houses. So, the committee decided to go round the law by turning sell into leasing, but selling and leasing are not the same thing. People pay the market price but what they get is a lease, that it is a contradiction. The Land Act only repealed the Land Reform Decree in 1998, but at the time when the sell started, sell was illegal. 

So, they found a way round and I was summoned by that committee to defend my position. I put it in writing and I appeared. I told them that they were doing things incorrectly. So, the people who have bought deserve the right to get freehold without any further charge. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the question of the pool houses, which was asked - I want the Minister to answer it because I am one of those affected.  Why some people are given 49 year’s lease, others 99 and others are given freehold, why is this so? 

DR KASIRIVU: First of all, the amount of money that is paid by the person who is requesting for the title depends on the amount of land you have requested for. If you have requested for 10 square miles, you will pay much more than when you are requesting for half an acre. It depends also on where the land is located. 

So, it is not good, to say that there is a lot of money paid without referring to whether the land is either in Kololo or somewhere in Mayuge. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, can Government make a policy on issues, which have not been properly identified? Can it not be resolved by the  judiciary by the individual people; haven’t those individuals who paid been cheated? Because I do not know how you can make any formal policy for all of them without understanding the circumstances. 

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, the sell of pool houses, if members want, we can have an exhaustive explanation and how it is moving so that we do not have past piece meal. But, of course, someone must ask for it and then we shall explain the 49 and so forth, because some of these issues, which are coming up - I also need to go and check.  

But people should also come with documented evidence that someone was given 49, another one was given freehold, and so forth. So, it is not good just to say, “Others,” it is almost hearsay. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.

STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE ACHOLI PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

6.20
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (Independent, Cha County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I read the statement, I would like first to say that I am standing here on behalf of the entire Acholi Parliamentary Group and therefore, on behalf of the entire people of Acholi.

Secondly, the media has tried to restrict the issues of Acholi land to Government and Acholi MPs, but that is not our concern. Our concern is the threat over Acholi land, whether by Government, by company, by individuals or even by our own people. It is wider than the media has been putting. I make this statement under Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Introduction:

Madam Speaker, over the last couple of weeks, Acholi land has become very topical. It is being discussed in various forums, such as meetings, the media, both print and electronic, including the Internet and so forth. from morning to evening, Sunday to Monday. It has attracted much attention not only here in the country but overseas as well. But all this accrues to the control and management of land in Uganda. 

In 1900, the Protectorate Government signed an agreement with the Kabaka of Buganda, which was the Uganda Agreement. This was amended in 1909 to read as Buganda agreement. In this agreement, land in Buganda was shared out among the Protectorate Government, the Kabaka, chiefs and notables. 

The unit of measurement used during this land settlement was in square miles. Those who were allotted square miles of land started calling their percels “Mailo,” a word which was given recognition by the land law of 1908, and hence “Milo land.” The term is now official and you do not have to put it in quotas. Milo land tenure is found in the districts formally known as East Mengo, West Mengo, Masaka, Mubende and the former lost counties, now Kibale District. 

In 1900 and 1901, the Protectorate Government replicated similar arrangements but on a much smaller scale in the kingdoms of Ankole, Toro, Kigezi and Bugisu. Land was given out to the Kings and rulers in freeholds instead of Milo. In Bugisu, only the Colonial Chief Administrator Semeyi Kakungulu was given ten square Miles. 

In the North and East, people rejected the idea of sharing out the land between the leaders and the Protectorate Government. Any land that was not allotted to the kings and other rulers automatically fell under the control of the protectorate Government that is under the crown of England and became known as “Crown Land” until independence in 1962. 

Anybody who wanted to lease land would apply to the governor in Entebbe. After independence, the UPC Government decided that the control and management of the former Crown Land be returned to the respective districts. There were 16 independent districts; but now I don’t know how many they are. District land boards were formed and land within the boundaries of their districts was vested in them. 

 In 1969, the government decided that the control and management of land should be decentralized in order to speed up development. Parliament accordingly passed the Public Lands Act, 1969, which abolished District Land Boards and established the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) to hold in trust for the people the whole country minus Milo Land and freeholds. 

The dictatorial regime of the late Idi Amin, in 1975 promulgated the Land Reform Decree No.3 of 1975, which abolished all interest in land greater than 99 years for individuals. Freeholds and Milo interest was reduced to 99 and 100 years for individuals and public boards, religious organisations and other charitable organisations respectively.

This was nationalisation of property without compensation. The actual conversion of Milo and freehold titles to conform to that decree never happened for reasons I cannot go into here.

The 1995 Constitution vests land in the citizens of Uganda. Article 237(1) Clause (3), that article provides for tenure systems under which land can be owned, namely: customary, freehold, Mailo and leasehold. This means the majority of land in Uganda is now private property and is no longer under the control and management of Government. 

The position of land in the Constitution did not originate in the Constitutional Assembly (CA) the people of Uganda demanded it for. Please refer to the report of the technical committee on Land Tenure Law Reform June 1993. This is a public document, which can be found in public libraries. 

When one flies over Acholi land, the entire county side is just a dark jungle; it looks like land that was created by God yesterday and God is still thinking about creating human being to occupy it. The owners of the land have for the last 10 years lived in IDP camps, which are around the roads and trading centres. The entire rural land now belongs to wild life.

Madam Speaker, for the last twenty years, we have talked about peace in the North. We have prayed in churches and mosques, we have held meetings, seminars and conferences without tiring. This is because peace has eluded that part of our country for so long.

In the same vain, we have talked about Acholi land for more than a decade now. We shall continue to do so until there are no more threats over Acholi land, as the following incidence will prove:

Madam Speaker, there have been real threats over Acholi land as the following incidences will prove:

In1992, the government of Uganda signed a protocol with the government of Libya giving away the following chunks of land:

(i)	Bukaleba Beef Ranch – 4000 hectares; Bukaleba is in Mayuge District;
(ii)	Aswa Ranch – 46,000 hectares; Aswa is now in Pader District; and
(iii)	Maruzi Ranch – 16,376 hectares.

Madam Speaker, I have been challenged now and then to show evidence that these pieces of land were given to Libyan investors. On the 15th of September, we accompanied the Rt hon. Prime Minister on his tour of Acholi sub-region. A meeting was convened at Gulu University. We were challenged to show to the people of Acholi, one square meter of Acholi land that had been given away to investors. I rose and mentioned Aswa Ranch, but I was told that it was not true. 

The following day, on the 16th of September, while in Kitgum, the Prime Minister informed me that he had checked all Government offices here, and there was nothing like that. Madam Speaker and the Rt hon. Prime Minister, I have the document here: The protocol signed between Libya and Uganda. And on page 3, these chunks of land are laid out.  

I personally attended this meeting where this protocol was signed. I represented the Permanent Secretary of Lands then since I was the Commissioner of Lands. My Permanent Secretary was indisposed and he asked me to go and represent him. That is how I came to know about this thing. But my brothers and sisters in Government continually call me a liar. I am now placing the lies I have been telling on the Table of this Parliament. It is right here- (Applause)

 I was Commissioner of Lands for the entire Uganda but I saw this thing for the first time at the Conference Center where the signing was going to take place. At break time, I pulled aside our political leader who was hon. Kaijuka, the then Minister of Commerce, Industry and Cooperatives; I asked him, “What do we do, I am the Commissioner of Lands and I am just seeing this thing here. Can we postpone it?” Honourable Kaijuka told me: “Okello-Okello, we cannot change anything, the land was given to Libya when the President last visited that country. We are just here to implement.” 

I then came to our technical leader who was the Permanent Secretary, now retired like me, Francis Kasirye who actually signed the document. I said, “Francis, what do we do, can I go and consult?” Francis told me the same thing: “There is nothing you can change. Those parcels have been given and the documents have been prepared. We are just here to implement.”

 The document was signed and I returned to the ministry. When I went to my Permanent Secretary; he had no idea. With him, we walked to the minister; the minister had no idea!  So, it is possible that you can be in the Ministry of Lands without knowing what is happening! - (Laughter)- Because this happened -(Laughter)

MR OMARA-ATUBO: Order! Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order -(Laughter)

MR OMARA-ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am not defending myself on anything because when all these things happened, I was not in the Ministry of Lands.  But I thought – strictly in our procedure, we should stick to the written statement. Really, if we don’t stick to that, then it becomes difficult for anybody to respond. There is a written text of a statement and we should stick to it. Thank you for that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please observe Rule 41 strictly.

OKELLO –OKELLO:  Madam Speaker, in 1999, a company called Divinity Union Limited came up with a proposal to turn Uganda into what it called “The Bread Basket of Africa.” The land targeted for this proposal was basically in Acholi sub-region.  The Acholi Parliamentary Group (APG) in the Sixth Parliament of which I was part, fought this proposal and it never took off.  The document by the company is here in Uganda: The Bread Basket of Africa” I lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also lay on the Table the response to this by the Acholi Parliamentary Group at that time.

In the same year- 1999, Uganda Wildlife Authority moved to acquire Lipan Controlled Hunting Area and turned it into a national game park. The Uganda Wildlife Authority dealt with the then Chairman LCV of Kitgum and the technocrats without involving other elected leaders like members of Parliament, district councillors’ and the District Land Committee. 

As a Member of Parliament of the area then, I was contacted when the matter was about to be tabled before Cabinet for approval and subsequently to Parliament. I fought and stopped this matter. The final letter written to me by Uganda Wildlife Authority is here. I lay it on Table.

In May 2003, a programme entitled, “Security Production Programme (SPP)” was produced. The author of this programme is difficult to pinpoint. However, the implementing agents were listed as the Ministries of Defence, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and Ministry of Health. The proposal was to turn IDPs camps into permanent settlements. 

The three districts of Acholi then - Gulu, Kitgum and Pader convened a meeting of about 380 people in Kitgum in October that year and the proposal was unanimously rejected. I personally attended this meeting, save for two or three people who supported the idea. Madam Speaker, here is the document; the three districts of Acholi are at the back. Unfortunately, the districts are surrounded as you can see by soldiers with guns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, who is the author of that document?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I said the author is not mentioned, but the implementers are the ministries I mentioned. Inside is a planned permanent IDP settlement, turned into a permanent settlement with roads and land users separated – dispensaries, administration etcetera, but with detaches to protect them all round. I lay this document on the Table. 

Again in December 2005, as the presidential election campaigns were gaining momentum, the office of the Senior Presidential Advisor on the Reconstruction of Northern Uganda, Luwero and Rwenzori came up with yet another project called “Food Security First, 2006-2010 Gulu, Kitgum and Pader.” The Senior Presidential Advisor was none other than Gen. Salim Saleh. The project was costed at Ugshs 92,181, 230,000. 

This project proposed to allocate two hectares of land to each family in the three districts of Acholi. Each family would then choose two crops to grow from among the list of crops given. The list of crops does not include millet, which is the main staple crop in Acholi land. (Laughter) The question is: If the Acholi are on their land, who was going to allocate them these two hectares per family? What would happen to the rest of the land? How does one provide food security in Acholi without millet? -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, this is the document. I lay it on the Table.

During the recent tour of Acholi sub-region by APG, we received reports that some unknown people had surveyed a huge chunk of land measuring 10 square miles under the protection of UPDF, at a place called Got Apwoyo, in Purongo sub-county, Nwoya County, Amuru district. The APG went to this area and walked the thick grass looking for mark stones. One freshly planted mark stone was found. It was photographed and recorded on video by the journalist accompanying the APG. The APG also saw two large farms being guarded by UPDF soldiers. 

One was reported to belong to Col Walter Ochora, RDC Gulu and the other to Col. Charles Otema Awany, the 4th Division Commander. In addition, the APG had received reports of a serious land dispute between a lady called Harriet Aber and hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta in Amuru sub-county, Kilak County, Amuru District. This matter is now before court and I cannot say much about it.

 The cultural leader of the area had also put an announcement over Mega FM, appealing to the parties to the dispute to stop using UPDF soldiers and the gun. The scenarios listed at paragraph 10 above are some, but not all the attempts that have been made to grab land in Acholi. 

In view of all this, the APG met here in Kampala before the commencement of its tour of Acholi, which ran from 23 November to 2 December 2006 and resolved on the issues of land as follows:

a)	That it is wrong for any body now to start acquiring large chunks of land in rural areas under the pretext of investment when the entire population of Acholi is still interred in squalid IDPs camps. They should wait until the people have returned home and are peacefully settled on their land. We think this is a reasonable demand, which any reasonable person should accept. (Laughter)

b)	We do welcome investors who wish to assist our people to develop the land. However, such investors must go direct to the people when they are already back home and should go through the state or state agents.

c)	That the investors should partner with the landowners where land will be used as equity in the intended investment so that the profits can be shared between the investors and the landowners. The investors should not carry such profits wholesale back home.

d)	Outright sale of land or long leases such as 49 or 99 years to investors are not acceptable because our people have been made destitute and are not capable of negotiating fair deals with the investors. The idea is to avoid landlessness to our people or another Kibale situation.

e) 	That those investors who may not want to partner with our people should hire or rent the land on short term basis of between five to 10 years renewable. 

f) 	That when we talk about land, we do not mean plots in urban areas. Any investor may acquire those any time. We mean farmland in rural areas that can be acquired in large chunks- “The land that feeds us.” 

g) 	Land grabbers who use force or tricks to acquire land will be fought in all possible ways. We cannot go back on this one. They are not different from any bank robbers. (Laughter) Land is the only asset that the people of Acholi are left with. It should not under any circumstances follow their livestock. 

h) 	Government pays compensation to people on whose land IDP camps, Army barracks, Army detachments, and any other Government projects that have been established without their consent. The fertility of such land has been completely destroyed and will take years to restore. 

APG put its position on land as above to the people at all the rallies – we addressed over 20 rallies. The people enthusiastically and unanimously approved APG’s proposal on land. Anyone who doubts can go and find out. 

Our Brothers and Sisters in High Positions in Government: 

Our brothers and sisters in high Government posts, including ministerial posts, we appeal to you to really go slow. They should use their high positions to rescue our people who are being exterminated in IDP camps. Calling us names, insulting us, or abusing us will not help our people. For whether they like it or not, we are currently the elected leaders of the Acholi people at the highest level - Parliament. Remember, there were many like you before.  Some of them are now like us. You will also one day be like us- (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, I am sorry I did not read the entire statement before you brought it. But our Rules do not allow us to bring the kind of matters you are bringing in.  Those are petty and personal. Just stick to the facts of the situation. Don’t threaten this side or the other side of the House.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Gulu Meeting: When we first saw in the Daily Monitor of Wednesday, 29 November 2006, that my brother hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, had called a meeting in Gulu to sensitise Acholi leaders on the issues of land – we were at a breakfast table in one of the hotels in Gulu – I straight away called the minister and tried to persuade him to call off the meeting. The minister insisted that it was a Cabinet directive that must be implemented.  The APG met on the same day and wrote to the Minister. Madam Speaker, I will provide the letter later. 

The meeting went ahead but in the end it was a big flop. Many categories of the invited leaders boycotted the meeting, namely; members of Parliament, all the district executives of the four districts, religious leaders except three, and cultural leaders except four. This is the reason why the meeting had to be hurriedly shifted by radio announcement from its original venue at World Vision Centre to Ker Kalkwaro at Lawirwodi’s Palace. 

First, to make it appear that Lawirwodi was now in support of the meeting. Secondly, by tradition, no one can be sent away from Ker Kalkwaro, unless one has committed a crime there. 
The attendance of the meeting was 90 percent NRM (O) people. 

It is absolutely false to say that Lawirwodi blasted the APG members for boycotting the meeting. He could not have done that and at the same time told the meeting “No one should think that MPs are fools. There is no smoke without fire”. This statement is on tape – the APG warns politicians who cannot convene their own meetings to steer clear of Lawirwodi. Please do not soil him with your dirty politics. He is for everybody. 

Kampala Meeting:

The Minister of State for Lands, hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, invited the APG to meet with officials of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in that ministry’s Boardroom last Friday. However, when we pointed out the inappropriateness of that venue, they kindly accepted to meet us in Parliament. 

The meeting was called off mainly for two reasons: First, the Rt hon. Speaker had granted permission for this statement to be made on the Floor of this august House. Secondly, the notice of the meeting was received when most members of the APG had already committed themselves elsewhere and could not attend the Friday meeting. 

As things stand today, we do not consider it feasible anymore to meet the hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on this particular matter of Acholi land because of the following reasons:

a)	Stakes have now been raised to much higher levels than that of the Minister -(Laughter)

b)	The Minister has no olive branch to offer as illustrated by the following incidents:

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I just mentioned the incidents but I want to elaborate what happened. These are just headings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But they are clear.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Yes, but people will not know what they are. 

Madam Speaker, I was on the 26th of November interviewed by a sister paper of the New Vision called Rupiny, in Luo. The interview was supposed to come out in this particular issue of the Rupiny, but when the paper came out, there was nothing. What happened is that there are two page 20s. There is this page 20 here and then just after page 18, there is another page 20 of identical content with the actual page 20. I have investigated this matter. I have been informed that my brother, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, stopped the publication at the last moment, and these people had to transfer page 20 to fill the gap, but they did not even change the page number. So you have two page 20s in the paper, with the same content.

Two, on the 4th, _ on the day of the meeting in Gulu, the honourable minister and his colleagues had a radio talk show in Gulu. They really blasted Acholi members of Parliament. I have heard part of the tape. The honourable minister said he did not care about us. He had other Acholi leaders to work with. 

Lastly, we were given airtime to conclude our tour with a radio talk show on Mega FM. Mega FM is a community radio station. The Government is solely responsible for policy matters. The Government does not fund it. It is self-sustaining. At the last moment, we were told that we could not be hosted and that if we were hosted the management would lose jobs. We are very few working, so we spared our people, we shied away and we did not hold the talk show. They said that it was an order from Kampala and we had to obey it. I would like to request the Rt hon. Prime Minister, in the interest of togetherness, to help us. 

However, if Government still thinks that the matter should be discussed further after this statement, we shall be willing to attend a meeting convened at a higher level than that of the Minister of Lands, for example, if a meeting can be convened by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, but we are not demanding it. We are just giving an example. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not demanding it? But this is what you say, “but we are demanding it”. You are demanding the meeting.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: No, we are not demanding. We are giving an example.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a typing error. Okay.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: We are suggesting. Sorry, we are not demanding. It was a mistake. It should read, “We are not demanding it.”

Government Land:

Governments all over the world must own some land. There must, however, be proof of that ownership. The Acholi Parliamentary Group has been requesting those who claim that Government has a lot of land in Acholi sub-region, to come up with clear proof. We shall obey it. They must, however, know that land owned by Parastatals is not Government land. Parastatals are legal entities, which own land in their own right. The current saga in the National Forestry Authority (NFA) proves the point. The only body that owns Government land is Uganda Land Commission (ULC). 

After the inauguration of the current Constitution on the 8 October 1995, there was some confusion as which was now Government land. It will be recalled that at the inauguration of the Constitution, His Excellency President Museveni did not hide his dissatisfaction with the position of land in the new Constitution. Subsequently, a management meeting was convened in the boardroom of the Ministry of Lands and Surveys, as it was then known, where I was working as Commissioner of Land Administration, to discuss land and agree on a common position. It was agreed that Government land was: 

a)	That land with a title in the name of Uganda Land Commission.
b)	Any land that had already been gazetted as Government land before 8 October 1995.  

I personally attended that meeting.

Threat to Life:

Madam Speaker, we have been receiving some reports of unfortunate statements being made by irresponsible leaders in the Acholi sub-region. These careless and reckless leaders reportedly make statements to the effect that those of us who are educating the people about their land rights do not know the forces behind the land grabbing in Acholi.  We shall either be arrested or killed. We have no means of stopping anybody killing us. We place our lives in the hands of the Almighty God. But our message to such people is: “There is no better cause to die for.”

Working with Government:

It is a fact that for the time being NRM (O) Government is in charge of the country. Therefore, all law-abiding citizens must work with it to deliver the much-needed services to the people of Uganda. On our part as the APG, we pledge our commitment to work with Government to particularly restore dignity, freedom and human rights to our dehumanised people in Acholi sub-region, Northern region, Eastern region and elsewhere in Uganda. 

We appeal to Government likewise, to work with us to serve our people. For now we are the leaders of our people, a fact no one can wish away. In particular we appeal to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business to crack whip on some of his ministers who seem to regard those in opposition as less human beings.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude I would like to say that we decided to treat this matter in great detail because it was, for no reason becoming contentious. I sincerely thank you for giving us this opportunity. I thank the honourable members for listening to me. For God and My Country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Now honourable members, under Rule 41 a statement such as this attracts some debate but taking into account the length and the content, I would propose that we defer debate on this matter to next week. At least we have received the copies and members can read and re-read it. So, debate on this matter is deferred to next week.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, in order for members to have a professional debate, aren’t we privileged to have the attachments if they can photocopy? In order to analyse this report, you need to refer to those attachments to get a well-balanced debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The documents are already part of our records - they are part of the House property.  So, I will ask the Clerk to make available a number of them.

6.55
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara-Atubo): I only want to inform you of what I intend to do next week if you don’t mind. If it is procedurally acceptable, Madam Speaker this is of course a very long statement and it deals with very broad issues not just touching Acholi land but goes into the historical perspective and steps on a few individuals who might not be even privileged to be in this House. 

Since the government has been handling the matter at Cabinet level, I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker and the House that I have already prepared a Cabinet paper on the statements made by my brothers and sisters of APG. Cabinet will handle it on Wednesday and after that I will also be able to give Government’s position on this matter. 

So even if it is debated on Tuesday or Wednesday let me assure you that because of the importance of this statements, the reverberations and anxiety it has created, Government in its own right will also make a ministerial statement, which will touch this matter, give a report to the House on the meeting in Gulu, press statements and a few other issues. 

As you know this issue of land especially has been quite high up in the agenda and therefore I think this is the right forum - I want to paradoxically thank hon. Okello-Okello for bringing this matter. I think this is the right forum for it and I will be handling it at that forum. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon, what is the problem?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, he is thanking me paradoxically! I don’t -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what he means is that you have given him an opportunity to be able to answer. That’s all.

Honourable members, the debate will be deferred to next week. Now when I was communicating I was informing you that members of Parliament and staff participated in the Third MTN Marathon but when I read through the list, it was incomplete. So, I had to abandon the exercise, but I am delighted to present to you this award from MTN Uganda. It says, “To Parliament, thank you. You ran for fun and saved a life.” 

You may recall that this run is to raise funds for the Mama Bag appeal, which handles issues of reproductive health in the IDPs. So in participating, you contributed.  I want to thank the following members of Parliament; hon. Asuman Kiyingi, hon. Erias Lukwago, hon. Bernard Mulengani, hon. Milton Muwuma, hon. Dan Kidega, Vice President Emeritus Dr Kazibwe, hon. Tim Lwanga; the following members of staff: Mr Peter Busiku, Mrs Ann Mugunga, Mr Peter Odeke, Mr Steven Mayinja, Mr Robert Kayigwa, Mr Fred Bbale, Mr Moses Shiku, Mrs Agnes Nabasumba, Mr Kassim Nsimbe, Mr Charles Lwanga Kizza, Mr George Muwonge, PC Emuna Simon, PC Wanda Bernard, PC Charles Olicho. Thank you for representing Parliament.

Honourable members, it is time to adjourn, the House is adjourned to Tuesday next week, 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 December 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)


