Tuesday 15th December, 1998

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope you have realised from the order paper that we are supposed to continue with a motion which we debated last week before we adjourned. But at the same time, you note there is item number 4 on the agenda, and I have been advised by the Minister of Energy that time is running against us in as far as this loan is concerned, in that by tomorrow, the effect of the resolution must be communicated to the people concerned, otherwise the loan will abbot. In view of that, I am using my powers to re-adjust the order paper so that we deal with this item, dispose of it and continue with last weeks motion.

RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW APPROXIMATELY US DOLLARS 1.26 MILLION FROM EKSOPORTFINANCE OF NORWAY TO CO-FINANCE THE REFURBISHING AND UPGRADING OF THREE UGANDA ELECTRICITY BOARD PRIMARY SUB STATIONS

MR. AGGREY AWORI:  Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Energy on a matter of responsibility for energy. Early this week or last week, we learnt from the press that the portfolio of Energy, specifically UEB, had been moved to the Ministry of Finance. Could the hon. Minister holding the portfolio of Energy, among others, confirm whether this directive is true or an illusion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You mean you would like this to come from the Minister of Energy himself or some other person?  

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I would have preferred to hear this from His Excellency the President, but since he is not a Member of this august House, maybe a representative or hon. Kaijuka or the Leader of Government Business or the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, any of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would think that it will be unfair to hon. Kaijuka to explain the arrangement of Government when we have a Minister in charge of Government Business. Perhaps the Minister may assist us on that if he can.

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. M.ALIKER):  Mr. Speaker, whenever there has been a government reshuffle, no Member has come to the House to ask how the duties are assigned. This is the prerogative of the appointing authority, and none of us here is empowered to say so.

DR. CHEBROT:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori asked a very, very simple and straight-forward question. The question is this, is the UEB still under the Ministry of Energy or has it moved to the Ministry of Finance?  Does the Minister of Energy approve that?

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to clarify the point raised by hon. Aggrey Awori and state that as far as I am concerned, I happen to be a Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, and all matters relating to Energy remain my responsibility as is constitutionally provided for. However, that does not stop newspapers discussing or writing about any option; and that is also not to suggest that Government may not even be talking about some aspects, particularly matters relating to the process of privatisation.  The process is not the same thing as UEB. I can assure you that if ever, I am called a Minister of Energy and then I am not, that is when I would make my position absolutely clear. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think really, because we have a lot to do, I suppose we go ahead with item number four and then the other matter, when it arises -

MR. DICK NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I was seeking some procedural clarification. A few times back, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning has come here to seek monies on behalf of other Ministries, telling this House that there was a mechanism of borrowing such monies. I was going to expect that this resolution would be moved by the same Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be very grateful if the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development can explain to this House how he intends to go about getting this money from outside this country without the intervention of the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But honestly, why do we not deal with the substance?  Substance is the resolution. When the money is received, how they deal with it, that is in between the Ministry of Finance and I suppose the Ministry concerned. But the Minister of Finance is here, maybe he will assist.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Speaker, I think it was an error in printing the Order Paper. The motion for this resolution is from the Ministry of Finance, and I am rising to move that motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So there is a correction here; instead of Ministry of Energy, we say Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Well, the correction has been effected on the Order Paper.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr.Gerald Ssendaula) Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to move that this House considers and permits the Government of the Republic of Uganda to borrow funds which we require for the purpose of rehabilitation of a number of sectors of the Uganda Electricity Board. I have already circulated the details of this motion. I am sure every Member has a copy.  I only request that we make a correction on page two, paragraph 6, the third sentence from the bottom there is a word 'loan' instead of 'load'. Can you replace 'n' with a 'd', so that would read " Uganda-Kenya while Kabulasoke handles the load to the industrial, that is Hima... " So can you kindly carry out that correction?  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members will recall that since the Movement Government took power, a lot of effort has been devoted to the rehabilitation and expansion of the power sector which had deteriorated significantly in the 1970s and 1980s.  As a result, the Owen Falls Dam plant was refurbished and upgraded from the low production capacity of 60 mega watts in 1986 to the current 180 mega watts.  At the same time as a result of that, new transmission lines like the Owen Falls - Lugogo, that is a line from Owen Falls to Lugogo, Mutundwe, Masaka-Bukoba, Masaka-Mbarara, have been constructed while some old transmission lines like Jinja-Kampala north, Tororo-Lira and Kabulasoke, Nkenda have been rehabilitated.  

The primary sub-stations: In order to back-up the rehabilitation and upgrading of generation and transmission, there is need to refurbish and upgrade the primary 132 KVA sub-stations on the main grid so that the increased capacity and demand are met.  UEB's system has ten primary sub-stations, namely: Owen Falls, Lugogo, Kampala north, Mutundwe, Masaka, Nkonge, Nkenda, Tororo, Soroti and Lira. Currently, under a Norwegian funding, three sub-stations, Lugogo, Mutundwe, Kampala north are being rehabilitated and expanded to cope with the load, and in this respect, we are talking about the increased load from 60 to 180 and also foresee that very soon the extension of Owen Falls Dam will be complete to provide another 200 mega watts.  

I would like to inform hon. Members that some time back, my Ministry requested for donor support to finance rehabilitation, refurbishment of the rest of the sub-stations.  I am glad to report to this House that the government of the Royal Kingdom of Norway has accepted to offer a mixed credit to finance three sub-stations namely: Lira, Tororo and Kabulasoke. These three sub-stations are quite strategic. Lira sub-station will handle the increasing load in the northern region, and it will also be using the power which will be generated at Karuma falls in the near future. Tororo sub-station handles the load in eastern Uganda and Kenya while Kabulasoke handles the load to the industrial, that is Hima and the agricultural areas again of the south west. So we require the money to rehabilitate these three sub-stations. 

We have had that money procured and the terms under which we are getting this money is as follows: a mixed credit which Norway has offered to Uganda combines an export credit on market terms with a grant element. The total amount is US Dollars 6,300,000 only. The export credit for Messrs Eksoport Finance, a bank in Norway, will correspond to 20 per cent of the contract value and a grant will correspond to 80 per cent of the contract value. In other words, five million is a grant while 1.28 million is the loan.  

Finance costs include a guarantee premium and will be payable on the export credit part of the package amounting to approximately 4.9 per cent.  The payment period of the credit will be a maximum of ten years.  The current interest rate of the Norwegian crooner is 6.99 per cent and 6.36 per cent for United States dollar. The procurement of the grant is conditional upon the acceptance of the credit component.  

I wish to inform hon. Members that the above stipulated terms of mixed credit are concessional and are in line with government debt strategy.  In other words, after Uganda was given a debt relief under the HIPC terms, we are only allowed to borrow or to get funds which have a grant element of not less than 80 per cent and then the rest of the money is the loan which is 20 per cent and this is exactly in line with that.  
I wish to draw the attention of hon. Members to the fact that for Norwegian government, the facility will only be available during this particular financial year which ends on 31st December. In other words, their financial year runs with the calendar. We therefore need to move somewhat faster to secure this facility. The facility has been tabled before the relevant committees of the House. It has been presented to the Committee on the Economy, and I am sure the Chairman of the Committee will be prepared to come and provide his own information; and it has also been presented to the Committee of Natural Resources, which Committee handles Energy, Minerals and Tourism. 

I now request Parliament to note this brief and the attached parliamentary resolution to be passed to authorise Government to borrow the mixed credit of US Dollar 1,280,000 from the Eksoport Finance of Norway which will be on-lent to UEB for refurbishment and upgrading of the three primary sub-stations.  I beg to move.  Thank you.

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Mr. Speaker, actually I am seeking clarification but in a way of procedure. There is a procedure for passing or confirming credits when sought by the Executive from this House; the power from this House to authorise them to borrow. Not long ago, we were pressurised by the Executive to confirm a credit they were seeking from the World Bank on a matter on nutrition. It was the opinion of this House that that credit should be administered by the Ministry of Health. Could the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning confirm whether they have effected the resolution of this House or did he take this House for granted?

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, in this respect, I wish to inform hon. Members that we respect all the resolutions that are passed by this Parliament, and therefore, when a request initially was made that we should move this particular credit to another Ministry, we came back here and told you of the developed misgivings.  But when you expressed your opinion, we communicated it to the donors and your opinion was upheld, and the credit is being administered by the Ministry of Health.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. I.Musumba):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. It is true that the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, and the Minister responsible for the Energy Sector made their presentation for a request to borrow 1.26 million dollars from Norway to finance the refurbishing and upgrading of three UEB sub-stations, and Sir, our presentation derives its validity from Rule 128 sub-rule (1) which says that: " The House shall refer to the Committee on the National Economy, Bills, inquiries and other matters relating to finance and the economy generally. 

(2) The Committee on the National Economy shall, in particular, have the following functions:- (b) to examine and make recommendations to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorised or approved by the House under article 159 of the Constitution."  

Having clarified our legal standing position on this matter, I now wish to return to the report that the Economy Committee has done, having had various consultations among various Members of this House.  I hope everybody had now got a copy of the report which was circulated in their pigeon holes.

By way of introduction, the Committee did receive a request from Government for approval of 1.26 million from Norway to finance the refurbishment and up-grade of three UEB substations, and these sub-stations are situated in Lira, Tororo and Kabulasoke.  I think the Minister has ably provided sufficient background rendering the majority of what is in the report really a tautology, but I will in keeping with the mandate given to me and our Committee, go on to present this report as it is.

The Financing Structure.  The total amount required to refurbish and up-grade the station is 6.36 million; that is what we were given and the Government of Norway has given a grant of 5.1 million dollars with a condition that in order to access the grant, the balance of 1.26 million dollars must be borrowed from a commercial source within Norway. To this effect therefore, the commercial loan of 1.26 million has been secured at the interest rate of 4.9 percent repayable over a period of 10 years.  

The Justification. Hon. Members will recall that earlier on this House passed a resolution for Government to borrow and finance the construction of transmission lines, and these transmission lines are now complete. However, the sub-station must be rehabilitated to enable the power to be boosted. The Kabula substation will boost power supply to the mid Western region, industrial area of Kasese, Masaka, Tanzania and Rwanda, while the one at Tororo will handle the Eastern region including the supply to Kenya, as that of Lira will boost power to the Northern region, Masindi and Hoima.

The Committee raised the following issues in its deliberations: 
(1) The Committee wanted to know what UEB's total loan portfolio was.
(2) The Committee wanted to know UEB's capacity to absorb further loans.
(3) The Committee wanted to know the Government's agenda for UEB i.e how is it to be privatised since more loans are now being contracted to finance it.
(4) What has been done to check on the embezzlement and corruption in UEB?
(5) Why does government continue to lend money to UEB at a very high interest rate as high as 14 percent, when it has sourced money on either grant basis or a much low rate of say 0.75 percent?  

The Minister responsible for the sector gave us the following clarifications.  
(1) That the total borrowing as at 30th September,1998 stood at 356 million dollars for UEB and the amount so far disbursed was said to be 294 million dollars. Hon. Members, attached to the report is a sheet reflecting this position.

(2) That UEB's capacity to absorb further loans is usually ascertained and certified by both the Government and the donor. From the human capacity point of view, consultants for the engineering section are hired and competent firms sourced to carry out work. We were also told that financial management of donor funds is equally monitored.

(3) On the Government agenda for UEB, the Committee was informed that even when UEB is privatised, whoever buys it will need good machines to enable him continue to supply this country with power.  Further up-grading of these sub-stations cannot wait until UEB is privatised because if the up-grading is delayed, the present infrastructure will not sustain the anticipated 10 mega watts from Mobuku which will be ready by early next year 1999 and the 80 mega watts from power 3 extension project expected  by the end of the same year.  The Committee was however assured that transmission is not to be privatised yet, but since it is a key component in the energy distribution network, if it is not sufficiently furbished in time, the value and performance of the entire sector will be affected.  

(4) On the steps taken to check on the rampant corruption and embezzlement within the board, the Committee was informed that there is now vigilance against the thieves in UEB, with some culprits currently in prison while others are assisting the Police with investigations, and that recruitment of new and better staff is also currently going on.  

The Committee was further informed that the size of UEB in itself was conducive to mismanagement and embezzlement, hence Government strategy to separate it into Generation, Transmission and Distribution sections; and this will turn UEB into smaller manageable units that can be run more efficiently.  

(5) The Committee was informed that wastage of power and poor billing are being addressed by acquisition of a computer network for the purpose.

(6) As to why Government continues to on lend at interest rate of 14 percent and for shorter periods when it borrows at 0.75 percent for a period of up to 50 years, the Minister of Finance was not available to explain. The above notwithstanding, the Committee recommends that approval be granted by the House for Government to borrow 1.26 million dollars from Norway on the terms herein set out.  Mr. Speaker, that is generally the presentation of the Committee.

However, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity also to say something that came to my attention arising from this very loan application.  We have been having discussions with the relevant Ministries on the matter of their loan applications as a Committee in consultation with other Committees. The last correspondence on this matter was a letter dated 9th December,1998 in which we were receiving clarification on a number of issues. I was surprised therefore, when I was informed that in some forum  His Excellency the President of Uganda had expressed concern on the 10th when we had just received clarification on the 9th. The President of the Republic of Uganda in some forum expressed concern that this Parliament had not considered and passed a loan of the energy sector from Norway and I consider this very unfortunate, because I would have believed that Parliament which has been mandated by the Constitution to do this job be allowed ample time do its job. I would believe that in the same vein, when the Ministers realise that there is a need to borrow, let them come to us in time. It would be very difficult for us as a Committee, and indeed as Parliament, to be rushed into approving loans with which we have not thoroughly satisfied ourselves. 

It has come to my attention that whereas it was a very heavily debated matter in the Constituent Assembly, putting into the Constitution provisions allowing Parliament to have a say in who borrows how much,  prior to that provision, there are some loans which have been given to this Government, a list of which is on my desk, which loans I can say were not only obtained in a manner that is professionally negligent, but can amount to fraud. So much money given to such a small sector and for no defined work to be done, and this is supposed to go on up to five years; these are things we want to avoid, Sir. The efficient utilisation of our loan facilities is something that Government feels very strongly about.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MALLINGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of the critical need for electrical energy in this country and that we have been subject to a very intolerable system called load shedding, and I am aware that by treaty we export electricity to Kenya and there is nothing we can do about that but it is being negotiated. Could the hon. Minister clarify to me whether we have an existing treaty to export electricity to Rwanda? This is never mentioned in any discussions; and how much electricity are we at this time exporting to Rwanda? Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have two small points of clarification I am seeking from the Minister. One is from the Minister of Energy and the other is from the Minister of Finance. The Resolution attached to the Minister's memorandum is asking this Parliament to approve the borrowing of 1.28 million dollars. The Paper from our own Parliamentary Committee is talking about US Dollars 1.26. Mr. Speaker, there is a discrepancy.  Are we talking about the same figures and about the same facts or is there a slight attempt to misrepresentation?  

To the Minister of Energy, I can see he is very concerned about making sure that countries like Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya get power.  Some of us from Ayivu within Uganda have never todate been considered for electricity; should I now pretend that our people in this country are second class people and that the Rwandese are first class people? I thank you.

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister. He says we authorise him to borrow money for electricity project in Uganda and he lists some of the substations which are supposed to be up-graded. I wanted this clarification from the Minister because we are puzzled in soroti. We were told originally that the substation in Opuyo - when work started, this was supposed to boost the power that is going  up to Lira, that it would turn north-eastward and go towards Moroto via Katakwi. But now, I have been made to understand well from his submission that the Lira station is taking precedence.  

Secondly, I am made to understand that even the line of power is not passing through Katakwi District. Katakwi, as you know, is a new District and it is one of the most backward places in the country. We would have thought that the Minister would ensure that this power line passes through Katakwi. So, I am seeking clarification on two grounds.  First, why is Soroti not among those which are being upgraded, and when will it be upgraded? Secondly, can he clarify to us where this power line is passing on its way to Moroto? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I will deal with clarifications because, for instance, I see the figure has to be clarified before Members can start debating; so any clarification from the Minister should be -

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, first I would like to support the proposal to borrow, but I would like to seek clarification from the Minister. When you look at the list of the stock of debt, you will find that from 1991 to 1997, Government has borrowed to finance operations of UEB to the tune of 356 million dollars. In spite of this borrowing, the borrowing between 1991 todate, we still have problems of load shedding, we still have that problem whereby a whole region like that of West Nile comprising four districts, there is no power supply, and yet we have borrowed 356 million dollars, whereby the children and grand, grand children of the people living today in West Nile will also be required to pay that debt. Could the Minister clarify, particularly with regard to why we still have load shedding and we have borrowed so much money?

MR. PINTO:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure.  Earlier on when you were opening this sitting you guided us on the Order Paper and said that this was a very heavy agenda today, but in view of the urgency of the loan you guided that item 4 be dealt with first and that Parliament is aware that today we have other important issues to deal with.  As a matter of procedure following this guidance would it not be advisable for hon. Members to deal in specific with the merits or demerits of this particular loan instead of the general debate on where power is supplied, therefore, fulfil the terms of this loan.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I would prefer, of course, if this matter can be expeditiously dealt with, but Members were seeking material clarifications maybe to enable meaningful debate be carried on. For instance, of the figure, the Chairperson of the Committee said 1.26, the Minister said 1.28, I think there is a difference; it may not be big but there is a difference which had to be clarified before Members can say we approve or not approve. So, I would like to ask the Minister to at least clarify on that, we go on with the debate, then he will later wind up.

MR. SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, the difference in figures is just a fluctuation in currencies because we are talking of a Norwegian kroner as against the US Dollar. So each time a conversion is made you get a different figure because of the difference in the rate of exchange between the Norwegian Kroner and the US dollar. What is crucial here is that we are going to get the facility in Norwegian Kroner, so that is going to be the final figure. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, for purpose of our debate if we have not converted the figure to a currency which we commonly use as US dollar at any one time, that would have made the work pretty difficult. That is the position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you want to use the figure of 1.28?

MR. SSENDAULA:  I want to use it because that is at the current rate, you see, this Norwegian Kroner against the dollar, you get 1.28, and prior to that, you were getting 1.126 but now we want to use 1.28.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chairman of the Committee, is that okay?

MR. NYAI:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, if we are going to be talking about currency up-surges and down-surges and we are also taking into account the Uganda shilling rate to the dollar, but we are committing this nation into a contract which is justiciable, then Mr. Speaker, I would plead with the Minister of Finance that he stipulates the figure in this resolution in the currency we are going to borrow it in.

MR. MUTYABA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the Minister has tried to convince us, I am really confused. He has US $6.3 million only, then you go down, he says the current rate for Norwegian Kroner is 6.36, and now he is telling us that he wants to leave 1 at 1.28.  When you take 6.3, less 1.28, do you mean to say that our grant is going down or is it going up?  Because, if it is in Kroner, your 6.3 should also go up. I wish the Minister could clarify, Mr. Speaker, and my information to him is that these figures are wrong.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. I. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I pray that the House does not spend too much time on this one. The figure presented to the Committee was 1.26, Sir, that is what we have brought to this House for approval.  If the Minister had other considerations like fluctuation rates and - these matters should have come to the Committee, they did not come to the Committee. So, Sir, as a Committee, we are bringing to this House in terms of Rules 128 that amount.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Exactly, that is why I said this point is very important, so that when the members debate the Motion, they know exactly what they are approving. Are we going with 1.26 or we are going with 1.28?  According to the Minister, he is saying, 1.28, so that once this is clear, we can start.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister responsible for Finance and the Chairman of this Committee are people we respect in the House. They know that when you are entering into contractual agreement or arrangement, particularly for the purpose of borrowing in financial terms, in accounting terms, in terms of financial management, you borrow in the currency in which you will also repay. It is not in normal practice, it is not advisable and it is not practicable to borrow in Uganda shillings and say you are borrowing in dollars, you convert Uganda shillings. Supposing the value of the shilling depreciates or appreciates.  So, this is the mistake we have been making in this House. When we borrow from IDA, we borrow in special drawing rates, but we have always expressed it in dollars and when we are paying, we shall pay in special drawing rates. Supposing the rate changes?  So, is it in order for the Minister responsible for Finance and the chairman of the Committee to mislead the House on these matters which are very well known to them?  Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think by putting that point of order you are just asking the Chair to recognise the practice of trade outside the House, and I am not in that position to take judicial notice of the practice outside the House. I think what we are trying to do, is to find out, is 1.28 equivalent to 1.26 as given by - that is what we want to resolve and once this is done, then there is no other problem. I think the Minister is saying, it is equivalent, I do not whether the Minister was saying that.

MR. SSENDAULA:   Mr. Speaker, I think what is very central here -(Interruption) 

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, in view of the prevailing confusion within the figures as presented to this House, and taking into account that this is a matter where we must express ourselves exactly in terms of figures, I would like to move a Motion, Mr. Speaker, that this be referred back to the Committee so that it may be brought back tomorrow when they have clearly stated the exact amount they would like to borrow.  I beg to move.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  After listening to hon. Pinto, I wanted to seek clarification from you, Mr. Speaker, that:-(i)  There was no confusion, because what was happening was a clarification of the currency exchange.  However, which rule has he quoted that he is using to be able for us to defer this discussion, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, under what rule are you bringing that motion - Hon. Members, I think this was a simple matter and we are wasting a lot of time on this small matter, where it was just an error which has to be corrected, so that we go with the gist of the Motion, because we have to dispose of the Motion, and I asked the Member to tell me under what -

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to submit that I moved my motion under 44 (c).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would rather that really, we dispose of this matter and we move on to a more serious matter.  

MR. PINTO:  Yes, I have agreed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He has withdrawn the Motion.  Now, can we really proceed with this matter expeditiously?

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, we are borrowing a total of 48 million Norwegian Kroner and the loan we are talking about is 9.6 million, that is what it is. As it is, the difference between the two of us, where we have 1.28, is a question of converting the Norwegian Kroner at the time of presenting to the Committee and converting today, when we are presenting the motion into the dollar, - that is what was causing the difference.  So, in other words, the figure we have is 48 million Norwegian Kroner and the percentage is 9.6 Norwegian Kroner for which the total amount is 48 million, that is including the grant element, which is 80 per cent and 20 per cent is 9.6 which we are getting as a loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, the Motion is by the Minister. What the Minister is seeking for us to approve is 1.28 million dollars.  So, let us contribute to that Motion.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA  (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am rising to contribute on the Motion.  I have no cause for not supporting this Motion because I think we are a poor country, so if somebody can lend some money, we shall accept it.  I think what we should be concerned about is why is this man lending us money; that is the first question.  Is he creating his own employment or is he helping us also to create employment?  

I think the Minister should have clarified to us that this money he is borrowing is going to create more employment in Kampala or it is going to create employment in Kamuli, for example.  I think the main problem with the Minister, you should have told us where does this money you are borrowing fit in the industrial master plan of this country?  Because you cannot say you are going to rehabilitate the power sector when do not have a master plan for industrialising this sector, later on, the master plan for agriculture, because without producing the  primary production in agriculture, you will not have secondary production industries.  So, we are borrowing to do nothing in short.  However, the main demerit of this is that, the executive has not tendered an industrial master plan for developing our agriculture in a sustainable way.  We are borrowing and we do not know why the Norwegians are forcing us to borrow but since they are lending us the money, really, we should  accept it in the first instance.  With those few words, I think that is what I want to get from the Minister.

DR. NYEKO  (Kilak County, Gulu):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Motion except I am very disappointed.  This late presentation of loan request to Parliament, this is not the first time.  Each time they come, they give us the impression that there are World Bank officials waiting in the Minister's office to sign the loan. The Minister comes here to beg us to pass the resolution, then they return back to the office and say, Parliament has accepted.  I think this is not correct.  

Secondly, this particular loan is to work on three stations, but if you look at the transmission lines, I am happy it is indicated somewhere that the transmission lines between Tororo and Lira had been worked on, I do not know, but even if you correct this station or you rehabilitate the station in Lira for instance, the transmission line between Gulu and Lira is absolutely broken. Every time, there is no electricity in Gulu, you cannot even do small scale manufacturing in that place.  
So, besides correcting or rehabilitating the sub-station in Lira, I would ask the Minister responsible for the UEB to make sure that they rehabilitate the transmission line between Gulu and Lira. Each year, when students are sitting 'O' and 'A' Level exams there is no power in Gulu and Kitgum, I think we cannot accept this. I do not have much, but I would like to stress that the transmission line between Gulu and Lira be rehabilitated. Thank you.

MR. BAKU  (West Moyo County, Moyo):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Motion but also I wish to raise concern about the way loans are being sought to be approved by Parliament. I think there is a lot of pressure being put on Parliament to rush in passing loans.  This does not augur well, because, Members of Parliament would like to have a thorough scrutiny of loans before they are approved.  

Having said that, I would like to acknowledge that electricification is a very important programme in Government programmes, because we have a very big agenda of industrialisation and of modernising agriculture.  These two important programmes cannot be achieved until we improve on the generation, supply - (Interruption)

DR. ALIKER:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for strangers to read newspapers while the House is debating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Strangers, you are advised that when you come to this House, you only concentrate on the business of the House, not to read newspapers.  

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Speaker, before my contribution was interrupted, I was emphasising the fact that the Movement Government has a very important programme of modernisation and also of industrialisation of this country and this cannot be achieved unless we improve on our capacity to generate, transmit and distribute electricity.  So, this loan which is being got is going towards solving the problem we have been experiencing. 

In Kampala, we have got a lot of embarrassments, even on domestic level, where we have to experience load shedding every other day. This is something very unwelcome for a country like Uganda which has got a very high potential for generating electricity, a country that is exporting electricity to Kenya, to Tanzania and to Rwanda. So, if we can improve on our capacity of generation and distribution internally so that we have full benefit from our electricity supply, that will be very good for the people of Uganda

Secondly, the terms of the loan and counter part grant element which is within the loan is very attractive.  I think this should be an opportunity that we should not miss, because, it is very rare that you get a 20 per cent loan attached to 80 per cent grant.  So, we should look at the grant element which is very important and very significant in put from the people of Norway, which we in Uganda, should appreciate as a good will extended by the people of Norway to the people of Uganda. 

Having said that, I think after this programme has been achieved, we must start seriously addressing the issue of electricity which has been talked about over and over for West Nile region. West Nile region has been suffering, Moyo district in particular has been suffering from lack of electricity. I think this is now the time when we clear this other urgent need from other areas. We must focus in those areas. West Nile is the only region in Uganda where there is no electric power - maybe also Karamoja; I understand in Kotido, there is electricity. 

I would like us to put Uganda on equal footing so that these complaints we have as politicians on the ground are removed. When we have problems in West Nile or in Northern Uganda, in Gulu, in Kitgum, a lot of it goes to lack of industrialisation because our youths who are very industrious, who would like to get employed in gainful employment cannot be absorbed because of lack of industries and there are no industries because, of lack of power. So, if we are able to generate power and distribute it equitably throughout the country, we are going to take a very big step towards improving the welfare of our people and also solving the problem of insecurity.  

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I support the Motion.

MR. HASHAKA: Point of procedure. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since we started debating this Motion brought by the hon. Minister of Finance, nobody has given any dissenting contribution, and everybody has accepted that this is a viable project. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of procedure, in our Rules of Procedure, Rule 63, I wish to move that the question now be put. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Motion is that the question be put. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that the Resolution to borrow 1.28 million dollars be approved.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION, DEBATE AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PRIVATISATION 

(Debate Continued)

MR. AWORI:  Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the privilege for allowing me to seek clarification in a way of procedure on this important matter on the Order Paper.  Mr. Speaker, not long ago when His Excellency the President was interacting with the leadership of the donor community that came here for a consultative group meeting, he was reported by the press, among other things, saying that the noise you hear in Parliament about corruption is from opportunistic, simplistic politicians. Mr. Speaker, if indeed those comments came from His Excellency the President, indeed it is a serious matter for some of us who believe we are discussing an issue touching the core of this nation and a matter which was brought up at a consultative group meeting.  Mr. Speaker, could the Leader of Government Business clarify whether indeed His Excellency the President was correctly reported?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You want me to talk about what the President was put to have said?  What do you exactly want, hon. Member for Samia Bugwe North?

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, if I had time, I could go in greater depth.  But since we do not have the time, essentially I am saying this Motion is about corruption and if we read in the papers that the Head of State is saying, the noise you hear in Parliament about corruption is from opportunistic and simplistic politicians, then it betrays the confidence we have in this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is an expression of disapproval, but what do I do with it?  I am not saying this happens or this and this can happen. This is a disapproval, but now, how can we handle it here when we are dealing with this particular motion? I suppose if we feel that we are doing the right thing, let us continue dealing with this motion and then on what happens later we shall decide. So, I should say that we continue with the debate.

The motion we have is of the Report of the Select Committee.  This is what we are dealing with now.

MR. ANTHONY BUTELE (Madi Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we are discussing a straight number seven of the Ten Point Programme which says elimination of corruption -(Interruption)

MR. HASHAKA:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, at the close of the day on Thursday last week, you had ruled that the debate on this motion was over and the Ministers were the ones giving their defence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We were unable to complete the business last Thursday.  In fact I pointed out that I see hon. Members like the one for Aswa County, Kilak, who were disappointed, and I said that we shall continue with the debate on Tuesday, and exactly this is what we are doing.  

On the question of Ministers, I cannot force a Minister - for instance if he will stand I will point him out.  But now, I assume that we are continuing with the debate until such a time when I will see that we are exhausted, then we shall pronounce ourselves on the Motion.

MR. BUTELE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was saying that what is before us if you relate it to number 10 of the Ten Point Programme, it is a straight number seven which says 'elimination of corruption and misuse of power.'  Africa being a continent that is never in short of problems has also the problem of corruption that goes on, on and on. Therefore, to enable the tackling of our backwardness, corruption must be eliminated once and for all. If we do not tackle the issue of corruption properly, it will drag us to number one of the Ten Point Programme which says among other things that the problem of Uganda is not economic but political.  So, if we do not handle the issue of corruption nicely, it will bring us the problem of politics now.  

I was one of those people who supported the sale of UCB on two principles. One, that the law governing privatisation could be used to the last word. Two, that there is an alternative. If UCB is sold, there is an alternative bank. Mr. Speaker, which is that bank?  That bank is Co-operative Bank. You sell UCB, Co-operative Bank is there.  But, Mr. Speaker, I am now getting worried. It seems if no actions are taken, maybe the Minister responsible will assure this House that Co-operative Bank is not going to go through the same mess as UCB has gone. The information available to me, Mr. Speaker, is that Co-operative Bank was registered under the Co-operative Act.  Now it has been turned round, it is registered under the Company's Act.  So, the thing has been taken away for the Co-operatives even though the Co-operatives are a private sector.  How can you begin changing a private sector to a limited liability company?  If that one is done, Mr. Speaker, then we are going to head for another problem.  Now, if Co-operative Bank is messed up, Mr. Speaker, there will be no credit institution in the rural areas at all.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I wish to inform hon. Butele that 700 million shillings has been stolen from Co-operative Bank near Kasese.

MR. BUTELE:  Mr. Speaker, I take note of that information.  But it does not mean that if money is stolen from an organisation that organisation should be given to dogs. Now, how are we going to phase out this corruption?  We are going to handle this corruption.  Mr. Speaker, if you read the Report of the IGG page 2 which says, ' partner institutions in the fight against corruption in Uganda.'  It is realised that corruption is an evil and therefore, its eradication calls for combined effort to do this and joint efforts have been forged with various organisations and institutions to fight corruption. The institutions and organisations with which the Inspectorate of Government cooperates include: one, the Auditor General; two, the Human Rights Commission; three, the Uganda Police Force; four, the Director of Public Prosecution; five, the Judiciary; six is Parliament this is why we are discussing this issue here; seven, the Anti Corruption Unit in the President's Office; eight, Inspectorates in various Ministries; nine the Press; and then ten, Non Governmental Organisations.

Those institutions are there.  Instead of saying that we should scrap them, to me will not be very, very fair.  I know in their Budget estimates they complain about shortage of staff, shortage of money, shortage of personnel, but I think we should support these institutions.  

The other institution which we left out here is the moral and spiritual revolution. That is if we want to fight this corruption squarely we must involve Jesus Christ our Lord.  That is why some of us here have formed the prayer breakfast.  Every Thursday we go and pray and see if corruption can be eliminated through Jesus Christ to change the minds of these people.  

Under this situation, what are the ways forward now? The ways forward are three. One, we are to take a political decision as Parliament.  Two, the affected people should also take political decisions.  Three, the Executive must also take political decisions. 

The next thing is to take administrative decisions now. Some of the people we mentioned in the Report are not Members of Parliament here.  So, Mr. Speaker, it will be very unfair for us to talk about these people here because they are not being represented.  But our Colleagues who are here, we can talk that issue.  What I am trying to say is, all the people who have been implicated administrative measures should be taken so that they can step aside and then the other organs I have read here should now take part in trying to find whether the political decision we as Members of Parliament have taken is correct.  That will be outside this.  But to save the Movement, the political system, I think the political decisions would save this situation.  

I would like to repeat that people who are affected, if they feel that it will affect the politics in the future should step aside and action should be taken against the staff who are involved in this matter.  Because political decisions are taken after the advice from the civil servants. They give advice and it is up to the Minister to take a decision.  When you take a decision, then you take full responsibility.  
With these few words, I think this Parliament is in a position with the facts being available to take political decision if it warrants.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN ( Aswa county, Gulu):   I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity, I also thank you for steering the House very well since this debate began, I also would like to thank the Committee for work well done, and I would equate it to a daring stand to come out with revealing information the way it came out with their recommendations. I totally agree with all the recommendations they came out with and I am hereby standing to support the Report.  

I also would like to thank the general public for the concern they have put in this Report in public debates, over radios, Tv's, in work places, on the streets, in schools and almost everywhere, even in villages, even in homes, even in slums. I would like to thank them so much for the concern they have given Members of Parliament a lot of courage to speak with all the boldness that they may require; and I would equate that to a spirited stand which should continue.  

The civil society should also wake up and speak out loudly on some of these matters, especially on UCB. This is a bank that was put in place in 1965. It came because our people were not benefitting from the foreign banks in this country. Today, UCB has got branches all over the country, but with all this mess, with all this raping of the bank, it is going to affect our people, especially the peasants.  

In Acholi, traditionally, we had a way of dealing with the corrupt and if this were those days, we would have done this to those ones who are suspected - The Acholi had a very simple way of doing things. They would dig up an active ant hill, open it up and force all these people to enter. Those ones who are not bitten by termites are declared incorrupt. (Laughter). These were traditional ways, because nowadays it is very difficult, people today talk about evidence, people today come up with arguments and defence that sometimes becomes very difficult to interpret. But if we were to go back to those days, I would have asked Parliament to recommend that all these suspected fellows be dipped into the anti hill.

I think the question of corruption today lies entirely in Parliament.  Our people are almost giving up in all the other institutions except Parliament.  They look at Parliament today as the last resort.  Should we fail here, our people are going to surrender hope. We should give our people hope. Their last hope is in Parliament. I would urge Members to stand very boldly and reject the corrupt.  

We should also re-organise ourselves in this House.  I have not been very happy with the performance of the Public Accounts Committee. They have not done a wonderful job in as far as I am concerned. We should be able to amend the Rules of Procedure to allow changes to be effected so that PAC takes up its responsibility and fight against corruption.  
Over the weekend I received a letter from my LCs. I picked a bit which I want to read to Members so that you know the concern of the people and how this concern is going to affect the political process we are in, how this concern is going to affect the stability of our Country.  I quote, "Great is the combined voice of men, forget about Movement or Multiparty belongings. Parliament should provide the basis for unity, but lack of such unity, society also lacks moral authority and degenerate in the state of terror, anarchy and corruption.  NRM top brass today pretending to be carrying the ordinary duty of society argue that questioning and criticizing time or people honoured institutions like the Movement is destructive and threatens to undermine all social life."  They give the example of peace, sugar distribution and other things. The letter went on to say that: "corruption is a symptom of social and moral anarchy in Government and are the result of lack of political check points and ideological anarchy within the NRM's lack of consistent, but contradictory manner of running public business.  They concluded by saying, "we pray that God saves Uganda".  

This is a very big concern and this letter was written by my LC.3 Chairmen. When they started reading this matter in press, they were very concerned and this sends very powerful signals that we, at Parliament - the people really have hope here, not elsewhere.

What about the other anti-corruption organs?  Like the CID.  the CID is charged with the responsibility of prevention, detection of crime and apprehension of offenders.  But today some of us are surprised, with all these massive looting of the UCB Bank, CID was not even able to detect a single loot of the Bank, it is very unfortunate. I call upon the Inspector General of Police to wake up.  Otherwise, we will look at him as a sleeping dog.

The IGG is a place where I worked before I came to Parliament. The most unfortunate thing with IGG is that they cannot catch big thieves and that is why I am saying that the concern should really be Parliament because it is Parliament who can stand up to these big thieves. If I could quote for you a few other cases of the IGG in their Report to Parliament.  One of the case was, a Chief Administrative Officer and a Treasurer Mbarara District were relieved off their duties, charged with embezzlement and the District Tender Board dissolved.  I personally investigated this matter which took very long to end.  Unfortunately the very man who left being Chief Administrative Officer was given a bigger job elsewhere. This is very unfortunate and this is what is happening here.  IGG can carry out investigation, but later on the political elements come in to again appoint these same people to higher posts. What signals are we sending to our people?  

The other case is, a Police Woman from Jinja Road Police Station was charged with taking a bribe of Shs.50,000/= from a private citizen.  Now, you can imagine these are the cases IGG is handling.  Definitely the billion of dollars cannot be handled by the IGG.  The likes of Muwonge now appointed Secretary to the Electoral Commission should actually not be there because these are fellows who are implicated.  But unfortunately for some of us who participated in the investigations find it unacceptable to agree with the Appointing Authority.

MR. KIRENGA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the Member on the Floor that the case of Muwonge was investigated and they could not prove anything. He was innocent. So, he was as free as anybody else - it is for the state to bring him to Court, charge him, but if the investigators say, there is nothing against him, we cannot proceed, then should he be denied the opportunity of getting a job?  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: The Member who informed me was one time also on the Front Bench and perhaps that is the method of work.  I find it hard to believe and understand.  

The Acholi have a saying, on this point I would like to say that, "latong palatek ladit aye gamo" literary meaning that, "what is held by a big shot - it is a big shot who collects it" - that is precice.  These fellows up, it is Parliament who can stand up to them, not the IGG, not the CID. I personally went to investigate some ministries when I was still in the Inspector General of Government.  They would tell me, you wait and I would wait because I was a small man.  But today if I am sent to investigate the Minister, I do not think he will tell me to wait and I sit there for 30 minutes.  So, the last hope of the people of Uganda is really Parliament.  Let us not let them down; let us stand by their feelings.  

I also read from the Press that there is an investigation by the CID on the same Report which was already in Parliament.  I would say that let the CID continue doing their work while Parliament also goes ahead with the necessary political sanctions.  I would like to emphasize this, while CID continues, Parliament should carry on the necessary political sanctions which the CID will not be able to put in place.  But we are capable of putting this necessary political sanctions in place -I would not like to mention it, but Members are aware.  

Those ones who are named in the Report, who might not be affected by the Parliamentary sanctions - I am meaning those ones outside the Parliament - those who still hold offices should actually go on forced leave to allow CID carry out investigations. For them to remain there, I find it unacceptable, I find it dubious and I really do not understand it.  

Thirdly, I would also wish that the CID gets involved into the involvement of hon. Sam Kutesa's law firm in regard to payment by the Finance Ministry to the MEHTA group of Companies against the will of Parliament.  I do not know when this payment was effected, but this one should actually be investigated because here is a Minister of State in charge of Investment, his law firm is involved elsewhere and payment is effected - I think CID should also take keen interest in this matter.  

MR. KUTESA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Reagan Okumu for giving way, and I would like to inform him that at no stage whatsoever has my law firm acted for a group of MEHTA with regard to payments for funds from the Ministry of Finance since I became the Minister of State for Finance. Thank you.  

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Maybe by extension. I would also feel that the CID should get involved and investigate the Investment Ministry together with Internal Affairs. I find it today unacceptable the way we are issuing work permits to non Ugandans especially of Indian origin.  Where are they coming from? 

The other day, I read in the Papers - the Second Deputy Prime Minister was saying that he is wondering whether these people came to invest in form of selling muchomo on the street. It is really unfortunate. They are enslaving Ugandans; Ugandans are not free.  If you go to all these Indian companies, you go to Trust Bank, just opposite here, after the closure of the Bank, they are sending away our people; they are giving them verbal dismissal, why?  These are the so-called investors, we are inviting them, but when they come here, they cannot even give employment to our people.  They bring their own people who are not even qualified.  

You go to this place on 7th Street - the KEM PAC - it is the same problem. I think this is a matter of concern. This is Uganda, the majority of the people have certain kinds of looks. So, we would not condone this kind of approach to employment in some of these firms.

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to chip in what I referred to as 'Ssendaula's Commission of Inquiry'.  We also read in the paper that the Minister of Finance came in to institute a Commission of Inquiry.  I find this unfortunate.
(a) The Secretary to that Commission, Sarah Timalwa, who is supposed to be the Secretary to the Commission is first of all a Secretary to the First Lady and you know very well that the First Lady's brother in-law Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh is in the midst of this corruption scandal.

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform my friend, hon. Okumu Reagan, that Mrs. Timalwa is not Secretary to the First Lady as the hon. Member has stated.  So, there is no linkage in that respect and she is there in her own capacity as Secretary of that Committee, not because she is linked with State House through the First Lady.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Additionally, I would also like to say that Timalwa, I know she is a lawyer.  Now, she is supposed to be a born-again and sometime back, she was also implicated in Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation in a corruption related scandal. Now, who is going to do the work? (Laughter) Again, I find this very unacceptable. I think let us not hide. There is a problem. Let us get people with a clean track record. 

The IGG has also carried the investigations and the report is not yet out officially. Why hurry?  Why do you not wait for the report of IGG?  If you wanted some report from the executive Branch of Government, why do you not wait for the IGG's report?  Or you have also lost confidence in the IGG?  Because by coming out with this Commission of Inquiry at this particular moment, is a signal that you have lost the confidence in the Office of the IGG, which is very unfortunate. 

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, hon. Okumu.  I think your exposition has clearly shown that we need to do a bit more research before we come to talk in Parliament.  Yes, it is true, the Ministry of Finance did sign an instrument of appointment which has been gazetted.  But because of precisely the fact that the IGG has not presented his Report, a stay has been put for this team to start any work until the IGG has presented his report.  

So, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, it is really important that before we come here to start talking, we ask. Because if the hon. Member had bothered to ask the Minister of Finance, he would have been given the facts before coming here. I think, hon. Okumu, having been an investigator, you know very well that when Sarah Timalwa was one of the people investigated, you were in the IGG's Office, you know that Sarah Timalwa was exonerated. So, how can you again come here and say that because she was Secretary to the Board, she did participate in acts of corruption and did a, b, c, d. She was mentioned in that Report in her capacity as the Secretary to the Board. 

People who cannot come here to defend themselves should really not be a subject to have Parliament make a decision either way. It is not fair and since this is the last resort that Ugandans can come to for fair play, it is wrong to continue to present names of people who cannot come here to defend themselves, even in these instances where they cannot talk for themselves. I really hope that hon. Okumu, being a very good investigator, should use those skills to get better information and be better informed before he comes to the House.  I thank you.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Vice President for giving that information. But I would like to inform the Vice President that before entering this House, I inquired from hon. Gerald Ssendaula about that Commission of Inquiry, and he explained to me the value and the necessity of having that Commission of Inquiry. He did not tell me that the Commission of Inquiry has been put in stay.  But he concluded by saying that if Members think it is not necessary, then we may do away with it. So, you find that the problem is not us.  We inquire but we are not given the right information.  Thank you very much.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, that was the status quo as of Thursday, last week. That is when the Minister did inquire from the IGG to find out so that we can harmonise our movements as of Thursday, last week.  As of yesterday, the position I have given is the true position.  I thank you.  

DR. KAKUNGULU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The public and Parliament have lost faith in the Judicial Commissions that have always been appointed since time immemorial. We are still awaiting the Report on SIETCO and the dam saga - it has never been brought for public consumption. We are still awaiting the Makerere Students' Report when students were killed in Makerere.  It has not been brought to the public. We are still awaiting the Rome crash Report - it has not yet come. So  we are sceptical, very  sceptical about the essence of a further Judicial Commission. Thank you.

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Kakungulu that the Report on the Rome crash was presented three years ago.  So, he just needs to refer to archives or to the Ministry concerned for a copy of the Report. Thank you.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, I stood up in this House and I did commit myself to bring the proceedings or the results of the Report of SIETCO. The interim Report was received and we even went on TV and we asked Members who would wish to read it - members of the public to get copies.  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Members know that when an inquiry is made, many times because of logistical problems we cannot come up with a copy for each one of them. But the interim report was released and in that report, it was recommended that we do carry out further investigations because there were some issues which they wanted to finish but were not in a position to do so. When these investigations are over, we shall come with a complete report and the addendum which will be subsequent to what has been reported.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would think that we continue with the substance of the debate instead of diverting ourselves on other matters that are not really relevant to this particular motion.  Please, wind up.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think the problem that has been exposed is that there is some form of uncoordinated movement of information within the executive which is not fully streamlined.  We thought by appointing the Government spokesman, we would from time to time be informed of the latest development of the same.  
Finally, Mr. Speaker, on that point, I think that Commission is the waste of resource and time diversionary, a mockery to the institution of Parliament and above all, it is a non functional entity and irrelevant at this particular moment.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to pose a question.  Is the President clean?  Why does he not act?  The President always talks of his investigation, does the President not believe in investigation of Parliament?  From time and again, he has talked of his investigation that I am still investigating. The President has also been wondering time and again, that where was Parliament when they were fighting corruption in Luwero?  "Where was Parliament when we were fighting in the bush?  Where were you people now talking about corruption?"  I wonder whether Major Kazoora was in the kitchen during the bush days.  There are a number of people who definitely fought the bush war and by fighting, they were part of the process that brought NRM into power.  But it is very unfair for the President to come up and say, where was Parliament when they were fighting in the bush against corruption.  I think that kind of statement is immaterial now.

When this helicopter thing came up, Major General Salim Saleh went and confessed to his Commander in chief and the comment we got is, "Saleh is a good cadre". Because he was very open, Saleh is a good cadre!  We waited, when Saleh resigned, the President said that is good for the Movement. Now, when our son, Hilary Onek from National Water, the President's investigation got out some facts, and I said, I have the facts. Onek was summarily dismissed.  It is unfortunate.  He was dismissed.  Now, how do we relate this?  Where do we put this?  He was dismissed but later an inquiry found him innocent.  Can the President come up and apologise?  

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO:   Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform my dear Colleague, hon. Okumu Reagan, that no investigation has found Mr. Onek innocent. In fact, my current investigation and the investigation being carried out by the Board of National Water already implicates Onek in the loss of 1.8/= billion, and I have promised that I institute a directive that Onek be prosecuted under Article 164 (2) of the Constitution. He will not get away with it.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:  You know, in this country, we always have so many investigations and the results come according to the interest of the person instituting that and this is very unfortunate for a country like this.  I think some of these thing must be handled in a more transparent manner.  I would like this water investigation to be carried out by independent bodies and these matters should be brought into an open, because, to us, it was very bad and it raises a lot of political question.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, - (Interruption)

MRS. MASIKO KABAKUMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you for giving way and thank you, Mr. Speaker. The information I would like to give is, the Mr. Onek you are referring to has never confessed his sins to His Excellency the President, he has never asked for forgiveness. So, I would like to advise you to advise your brother to go and confess and ask for forgiveness. Thank you.  (Laughter).

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:  Mr. Speaker, if this information was coming from the First Lady, I would have believed in it, because the First Lady is always with His Excellency, the President of this country and she knows accurately the majority of the people who always meet the President.  I must inform my hon. Colleague that actually, Mr. Hilary Onek met the President for over two hours in Gulu, so you also get informed.  How do you confess to something you have not done?  How do you confess? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:   Mr. Speaker, in my final conclusion, I support the report and the recommendations.  I would ask that further privatisation should wait, that we should over haul the whole staff of privatisation and that Parliament should open up investigation in various areas because there are a lot of rotten eggs around and I would like to end by thanking you for giving me this opportunity and I hope that at the end of the day, the victims will be identified to the people of Uganda and justice will be done.  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS  (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to thank you for giving me this opportunity to respond to first, the general observation and recommendation in section 6 page 57 of the report by the Select Committee on Privatisation.  Under the observation/recommendation, the Committee recommended as follows:
"Hon. J. Nasasira on the other hand should be brought to book for having used political influence to run down UAC" - that is Uganda Airlines Corporation.

It is important for hon. Members to note that this is the first and last time my name appears in that report. I was appointed a Minister of Works, Transport and Communications on the 6th of July 1996. This was soon after the Presidential and Parliamentary elections. Prior to the elections, I had served as a Minister of State, and later as a Cabinet Minister in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries from November 1994.  

Issues related to my Ministry in this Select Committee's report are on Uganda Airlines Corporation only.  I personally was not involved in the privatisation process of UCB or Transocean, because these are also parastatals mentioned in the report.  These issues are covered under section 3 of the report, from page 21 to page 37.  In these pages, the Ministry of Works, Transport & Communications is referred to in seven paragraphs, and I will respond to each of these seven paragraphs as follows:-

Paragraph 4 on page 21 states as follows: "The Committee finds that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications acted in contravention of Section 3, 6 , and 28 sub-section (2) of the PERD Statute by assuming the power of 'restructuring a public enterprise' (UAC) and 'reducing Government equity holding in it' which power is legally vested in the DRIC Committee alone. Section 28 sub-section (2) of the Statute states clearly that where any provision of any enactment conflicts with any provision of this Statute, the latter shall prevail over the former."   That is case number one.

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications referred to in this paragraph is not hon. John Nasasira, because I was in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries at the time.  
Paragraph 4 of page 24 states as follows: "Correspondence dating from December 1994 shows that CAA, UAC and Sabena, with the blessing of the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications held a series of meetings to establish a handling company together. This directly contradicts the intention of the public notice. The Committee formed an opinion that the notice was only intended to bluff the public since by 1994 the new partners had been identified as UAC, Sabena, and CAA itself." Mr. Speaker, again, the Minister referred to in this paragraph is not me as by then I was Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The first paragraph of page 26 states as follows: "The Committee concluded that in the assembling of the consortium to take over UCA's ground handling assets, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications and CAA acted illegally and unfairly."  Again, Mr. Speaker, I was not in the Ministry at that time.

The first paragraph on page 30 states as follows: "The agreement to provide ground handling services was signed between ENHAS and CAA on 30th of March 1996 and ENHAS started operations in April 1996.  Again, on 30th March and on April 1996." I was a Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Paragraph 2 on page 32 reads as follows: "Although the Minister for Privatisation was the Chairman of UAC as early as February as 1995, the PU only begun to prepare the company for privatisation later in 1997.  But this time, some of UAC's assets had already been sold to Uganda In-flight Service and ENHAS. The Committee believes that UAC could have fetched a better value if it had not been stripped of its assets bit by bit.  The Ministers for Privatisation and of Works, Transport and Communications are jointly responsible for this situation.  The Committee wishes to point out an inconsistency on the part of the two Ministers. The Minister of Works, Transport and Communications and CAA conducted the first privatisation of UCA's ground handling equipment and the setting up of ENHAS but it was PU which disposed of UAC's ENHAS shares." Mr. Speaker, again, I wanted to emphasise that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications referred to in the first place, is not me.  

Paragraph 1 of page 36 states again as follows: "The Committee was disturbed to learn that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications allocated himself the responsibility of privatising UAC routes without consulting the PU. Neither did he consult the CAA whose legal mandate is to designate routes. The Committee noted that without routes, ground handling operations or in-flight catering services, UAC has been left as a shell and is unattractive to buyers." 
Mr. Speaker, if these routes referred to - (Interruption)

MR. AISU OMONGOLE:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the Minister to stop reading the report to the House.  Let him tackle questions that arise to him. Hon. Nasasira is quoting sections of the report that are not relevant to him.  We know very well that he was not a Minister at that time, may he go ahead and quote sections of the report that are relevant to him? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, hon. Members, hon. Nasasira got a copy of the report and he has read it.  So, he is answering the matters made in the report as he understands them. It is his choice. If you think he is jumping portions that affect him, he does not answer, then it will be up to the House to decide what things -

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling.  There is a purpose why I am quoting these paragraphs, and I am going to explain it.  This paragraph, if it is referring to the routes referred to in the alliance agreement, the Minister referred to once again is not me, because the agreement was signed in November 1994.  I was a Minister of State for Agriculture then.

I have dealt with the above paragraphs in detail and I wish hon. Omongole could understand this to clear an impression that has been created, that I, John Nasasira, as a Minister acted unlawfully to favour anyone. This seems to be the way even the press understands these paragraphs, because the Monitor of 9th Wednesday, 1998, while serialising the Committee's report had the following heading: "Nasasira broke the law to help Kutesa and Saleh".  This is obviously not true because I was not a Minister then and I think as I go on hon. Omongole will understand why I am quoting these paragraphs.  

The New Vision newspaper of 11th Friday, 1998 in its special report had the following heading: "Minister acted illegally on Uganda Airlines".
Below the headline there was my picture with my name and the word 'Minister'.  The New Vision tried to correct this impression the following day, but hon. Members, you know, corrections are always about 100th headlines that happened the day before. They did and I am grateful to New Vision, because when I referred to them, they corrected it, but you can see the impression that has been created in the population through the press and the damage that it has done to me.  In all those cases, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make it absolutely clear to all Ugandans that I never acted illegally at all, and I was not the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications then.  

The matter of illegal actions has been dealt with by my predecessor and senior Colleague, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja when he addressed this House and I do not want to repeat it. The Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  When the former Minister of Works dealt with this House on the accusation against him, it had nothing to do with Uganda Airlines; it was to do with Uganda Railways Corporation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I think what the hon. Minister is referring to is that, last week hon. Kivejinja put up his case and that is the case he is talking about.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you very much.  I want to appeal to Members to give me a chance and I clear my name.  Paragraph 3.5 on page 32 states as follows: " Although the Minister of Privatisation wrote to the Chairman of UAC as early as February 1995, the PU only begun to prepare the company for privatisation late in 1997.  By this time, some of UAC's assets had already been sold to Uganda In-flight Services and ENHAS.  The Committee believes that the UAC could have fetched a better value if it had not been stripped of its assets bit by bit."  I think I have dealt with that.  

The paragraph I want to refer to is in reference to the appointment of the Chairman of the Board, and that one is on page 31. Paragraph 4 says that: "While these agreements between Uganda Airlines Corporation and the directors of Global Airlinks and Efforte continued, the UAC board was terminated and a new one appointed. The Minister of works, Transport and Communication chose to appoint the MD of Caleb's International to lead UAC. Members will remember that Caleb's International and Efforte both belong to Maj.Gen. Salim Saleh. It is not possible that the conflict of interest could have escaped the Minister's notice. Neither is it possible to believe that Efforte and Global Airlinks did not influence this decision. The Committee found this an abuse of power by the Minister."  

I never terminated the Uganda Airlines Board. The term of the Uganda Airlines  Board had expired on 31 November 1996 and a new board had to be appointed in accordance with section 4 of the Uganda Airlines Board Decree 1976.  I extended the term of the sitting Board under cover of my letter dated 31st October,1996 until a new Board is appointed.  Mr. Agard Didi was appointed Chairman of the Board of Uganda Airways Corporation with other 8 members on 20th March,1997.  This was after their names had been approved by Cabinet on 9th March,1997. I presented their names under Cabinet memorandum CT.1997.40. In fact, under the Cabinet memorandum, I presented names of board members for five other parastatals and statutory bodies, and these included Uganda Railways, Civil Aviation Authority, Transport Licensing Board, National Road Safety Council, Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation.  Neither myself at that time nor my colleagues in Cabinet ever knew that Mr. Agard Didi was an MD of Caleb's International.  I have checked on this since this report came out, and I have been told that Mr. Agard Didi has never been an MD with Caleb's International, but worked briefly for the company as a consultant during the negotiation for the purchase of Grain Millers from 26th of September of 1996 to 19th of December,1996; that was before his appointment as a Chairman of Uganda Airlines Corporation on 20th March 1997, there was therefore, in my opinion really no conflict of interest and everything was done in good faith.  

I want to state it clearly that neither Efforte nor Global Airlink had any influence on this appointment of hon. Didi as Chairman. His appointment was not my personal decision alone. I had known Mr. Didi for many years, he was a former Colleague in NRC, he was a former colleague in Government and indeed he was my friend; he did not need really to be introduced to me or anybody for that appointment on the Board. There is therefore, in my opinion, nowhere I abused my power as a Minister of Works, Transport and Communication then. I followed the rules. I went through the channels and eventually hon. Didi and the Board were appointed by the President as the Decree dictates. 

My involvement with Privatisation was in respect with the privatisation of Uganda Airlines, a process I found starting when I was appointed in July, 1996. Among other things, the following were done. I nominated an official from the PU, Mr. Charles Ochichi, to Uganda Airlines Board in May, 1997. I started discussions with my counterpart in Tanzania reviewing the AJAS alliance, because this is between the Tanzania Government, Uganda Government and a South African organisation called 'Trans Net'. The alliance agreement, including holding a council of Ministers meeting AJAS here in Kampala in February 1997; and I have decided, for the benefit of Members, to lay these documents on the Table: the nomination of Mr. Ochichi, the resolutions that were adopted by AJAS during the ministerial council in February 1997. Together with my officials, including UAC Chairman, we held several meetings with the Minister in charge of Privatisation and officials of the PU to map out the privatisation process. These meetings were held between July and December 1997 and I have brought the minutes of those meetings here. They include how to capitalise Uganda Airlines, tproblems in Uganda Airlines, the way forward for privatisation, and I want to lay them here as document number 2.

As soon as the Board started work, I requested them to assess the Uganda Airlines Corporation operations, and for about four/three months they worked on the report which they prepared and handed to me in October,1997. In this report, this is what they said about the Corporation and I thought I should share it with the House. " If the abilities of the Corporation are properly ascertained it was clear that the company was bankrupt as its net worth is negative. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 0.7 (Shillings 4.98 billion as opposed to 6.89 billion) as at 30th June,1997. And the acid test ratio was 0.3" - I think the Accountants will understand this better -"This shows that the Company was in a serious financial crisis as it could not meet its current obligations, and consequently, it could neither meet its long term obligations.  This was reflected in the following things:
1.  An outstanding amount of 900 million due to Shell for fuel at the time.
2. Inability to meet salary payment in time.
3. Limping in paying AITA bills a monthly average of 7,278 shillings. 
A bill for July of over 1 billion was received before conclusion of the report and was paid only after borrowing money from ENHAS.  

Inability to meet rental charges of UCB. It was learnt that in spite of the relatively low rental charges, the Airline had not paid rent for over a year amounting to 48 million.  A large number of debtors reflected in the current assets are either fake or doubtful. Among the creditors, retirement benefits were not properly ascertained.  A UCB loan of 300 million guaranteed by the PU in April 1997 had not been serviced. The debtors level was as high as 7 billion of which 2.4 billion is not collected and is considered bad debt. The latest audited accounts were up to 1991 and now we are talking about 1997.  The latest draft accounts were up to 1994. The company had not drafting accounts  for 1995 or 1996,unlikely due to computer breakdown though the company has management accounts. The records of the corporation were not consistent as there was no proper recording of debtors and creditors in the company" 

That ends the extract from that report, Mr. Speaker. I formerly handed over this Linting Corporation to PU in February 1998. 

Let me now turn on my role in the sale of the 50 percent shares.  My role in the sale of the 50 percent shares of UAC to ENHAS was to participate in DRIC meetings. I want to clarify this. When you are a sector Minister, the moment you hand over a public enterprise for privatisation, your role now is to go to DRIC to attend meetings. The decisions are now under DRIC, and I think that is why in the first part of the report, the Committee was querying the actions of my predecessor, although he explained. They were saying, 'why did you not go to DRIC?' After Uganda Airlines had been handed to the PU officially in February, my only role with Uganda Airlines was to deal with it through DRIC. I just wanted to stress this so that hon Members can understand.  

Eight meetings of DRIC considered the sale of the shares of Uganda Airlines Corporation and ENHAS. These meetings were held on 3rd, 4th, 5th, 9th, 17th, 18th, 19th and 27th of March,1998 and I have brought the minutes of those DRIC meetings which I want to lay on the Table. 

The decision to sell. When I was invited to attend, either I was on other duties and so on, but I attended meetings of 3rd and 5th March -two meetings out of the eight in DRIC.  The decision to sell the shares of ENHAS was finally made on the 27th of March 1998 by DRIC.  I attend the meeting of 3rd, I attended the meeting of 5th, the finally decision was made on the 27th of March,1997.  There is no decision I made on my own and the decision was reached in accordance with the PERD Statute by DRIC. Mr. Speaker, again in my opinion, I have played my role in the privatisation of UAC within the PERD Statute and transparently. There is nothing I have done on my own since the PU took over Uganda Airlines, and I said this was a concern of the Committee at the beginning of the report in those paragraphs that I was quoting.

I want to state also that I found Uganda Airlines Corporation as I showed from the Board's Committee Report, in a comma, and the PU and Government has been keeping it on a drip until a strategic investor is found.  There is no asset I stripped and I have in no way used my political influence to run Uganda Airlines Corporation down.  It has been down for many years and one needs to look at its history for over 15 to 20 years.  It is difficult to say that somebody has fallen sick now when you got the sickness 5 years ago, but because there was no check to see the sickness because if you have no audited accounts from 1991, how could one have one known that the corporation was in a financial crisis in 1997 without even audited accounts?  

In conclusion, I want to comment on the Uganda In-flight Service Limited. Before this Company was formed, Uganda Airlines was managing to cook its in-flight food for its passengers out of Entebbe.  The  Corporation was using a dilapidated cooker and a few big stoves (Sigiris) They had sigiri at the terminal building.  Today the Uganda In-flight Service consortium is supplying food to UAC, and at that time they could only supply themselves, no Airline could take their food.  These are on record. You can go and check I was not even claimed to be the Minister responsible but that was not the problem. Today, the Uganda In-flight Service Consortium is supplying food to Uganda Airways Corporation, British Airways, Sabena, Alliance and Kenya Airways. 60 percent of the shares are owned by three companies belonging to Ugandans, 20 percent by a South African company and the other 20 percent by Uganda Airlines Corporation. At the end of last year Uganda Airlines Corporation got dividends of 5000 dollars. Entebbe Airport is more attractive because Airlines can come and get food and many Ugandans are supplying food to this company. This In-flight company buys food from Ugandans, the food they produce. When Uganda Airlines had its stoves and could not supply itself, these Ugandans were not selling that food at the Airport. The Company is employing more people and I am sure it is paying taxes. I am convinced that the 20 percent shares of Uganda Airlines in Uganda In-Flight Catering Service will fetch more value when Uganda Airlines is privatised than if it still had its sigiri in the kitchen at the terminal building. I am really convinced that it will fetch more value now. The 20 percent it has ,you can see it started having dividends of 5000 dollars. I would want to know what money it earned when it was catering. It is of more value to Uganda Airlines now in its capacity than before, I therefore, would not agree with the officials of the Uganda Airlines, because I know this fellow was brought by officials of the Uganda Airlines. When they told the Committee that there was assets striping, what did they strip when this company was formed? The sigiris? Because really we must see what they did strip from that kitchen at the Airport which would not supply food. If what is there now - because apart from this there is a big investment at the Airport. I have myself invested in it. If now that one was sold, then you would strip, but you cannot tell me that when they removed charcoal stoves; the manager of Uganda Airlines told the Committee of Parliament lies as far as In-flight Catering is concerned.  
Similarly, the routes Alliance used, especially the Entebbe-London route, would not be operated by Uganda Airlines because it had no capacity. In fact, Uganda Airlines in 1992 had given this route to Kenya Airways, if we check the record. Secondly, Uganda opted for the handling consortium because it feared that if another company was licensed and invested heavily, it would have only continued handling itself, and therefore, earn no revenue.

I want to clarify on this, I have also done my research. By 1992 - I have a file on airport operators, exporters of perishable goods writing to the then Minister that the handling at the Airport was poor. Hon. Kivejinja even said how he found vegetables stranded there and so on.  The Airline's Board and Uganda Airline were given two years to do either of the three: one was to re-equip so that they have capacity to handle the aircraft and at that time Uganda was attracting operators here.  Option one, re-equip so that you have the capacity; two, go into a joint venture; three, handle and let another company come in and compete with you so that, because the Minister responsible then and CAA, their main role is to ensure that the Airport is user friendly.  The main interest of the airport is to ensure that the airport is providing the services for the operators. It is not only to look after one airline that is national but is not competent. So, the two years passed and they tried to go in with Sabena but in those two years the complaints were on. I did not want to bring all these letters because it is a whole file of complaints from Ugandans' companies, from operators from outside and so on and so forth. Until CAA carried out a study that was approved by the Board and decided the only option was to form a consortium - that is the study that they referred to in the report which was discussed with the Minister then - the Minister gave them guidelines of how to form that consortium and that is how it was formed.  I personally could see a situation that if the Minister had allowed another company to operate and left Uganda Airlines alone, eventually Uganda Airlines was going to lose customers and eventually have no revenue that it was claiming to get when it was still a monopoly.  We have to see it from both sides when we are talking about asset stripping.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much hon. Minister.  My clarification is, after establishing the ENHAS, have you liberalized handling services at the Airport or it is still ENHAS handling services alone for the sake of competition.

MR. NASASIRA: I am just reporting from what I have researched from the files. I said, when CAA studied they opted that the best thing was to have a consortium. In fact, they were following an example like another company in Dar-es-Salaam Airport - you could go and check that - there was one company which had formed a consortium with Tanzanian Airways, because they said their capacity then was too small to handle big clearing. What they did was to give ENHAS a concession of five years, and after five years to open; but then they also allowed Dairo which carried 30 percent of our cargo - this is a Uganda Airline company owned by a Ugandan - that they could handle themselves. That is one thing I can say I did when I had just arrived in the Ministry. Dairo claimed that their concession had delayed and we called CAA and their concession was signed on the 31st. I had just been in office for three weeks. They are now handling themselves and the agreement that was done with a concession was for five years and I think that is why even the Committee recommended that after five years we legalise.

As I conclude, I want to reaffirm my support for anybody, for any institution fighting corruption in this country. In my 22 years of working, both in the private sector and Government, I have not involved myself in corrupt practices.  In the last two years when I have been in Works, I have stopped faulty contracts. Examples are the Bukakata contract and part of Entebbe Road. I have suspended payments, I have interdicted Ministry officials involved in these faulty contracts, and recently, even arrested those that were stealing spares from our own Ministry stores.  

Personally, my family, and all those who know me closely, were anguished when my name was dragged into corruption headlines for reasons I have failed to understand. I am trying to find out, because when the whole story came up, it was combined with th UCB saga; every time they referred to the UCB saga and other sagas, they said that four Ministers are about to be sacked, and the general population looks as if all the four Ministers were involved in all this. I really want to appeal to the community that maybe when reports come, let each report referring to one parastatal be brought so that it can be dealt with and if the Committee wants to refer to any Minister for that parastatal, then you can answer.  But you know, when the three are combined, then it looks as if everything that is in that report refers to everybody that is mentioned.  These are injuries that one receives through the press, they take very long to heal if ever.  I hope I have given enough facts to Parliament to judge on the allegations about me in this report and through you, Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Members for their attention.  Thank you very much.

MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PRIVATISATION):  Mr. Rukikaire:   Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, first of all, I want to begin by thanking members of the Select Committee for their report. Unfortunately, although at the beginning of the work of the Select Committee, I was able to meet with them to chart out the work programme, I was not invited to discuss the various issues contained in their report. Many of my officials were interviewed, but in my case, although I did write to the Chairman of the Committee requesting to appear before it, I was informed that this was not necessary as there were no questions they wanted me to answer.  

Therefore, with the exception of some comments I gave on Transocean, my views on all the general points made in the report on Uganda Airlines Corporation, on ENHAS, and on Uganda Commercial Bank were not sought or given.  This is in spite of the fact that I am considered the bearer of the political responsibility for privatisation.  My role as Minister responsible for Privatisation is mentioned more than five times in the report in connection with various transactions. I would have thought that in order to ascertain the correctness of statements being made in the report concerning my role, it would have been only rationale and fair to interview me, and I believe this would have contributed to the overall findings of the report. 

Secondly, despite our request, my staff and I were not provided with the terms of reference for the probe exercised by the Select Committee.  The terms of reference would have assisted us both to prepare appropriately, and therefore, be able to respond to queries as quickly as possible. We would also have been able to furnish the Committee with a lot more information that exists within the PU and Ministry of Finance of which the Committee might not have been aware and consequently not asked for it yet the information would have been vital for the investigations. I will stress here, Mr. Speaker, that as I did promise, my staff have at all material times fully cooperated with the Select Committee and provided all information available to them as requested by the Committee.  It would have been fair of the Select Committee to acknowledge this fact in their presentation.

At the outset of my response this afternoon, I would like to point out that the Committee itself admits on page 6 of its report that it selected three enterprises which it exhaustively looked at, and therefore, based its recommendations on these findings.

First of all, there have been 67 divestiture cases and choosing only three cannot be seen as choosing a representative sample.  The three represents slightly over 3 per cent of all the divestitures carried out.

Secondly, out of the three, only the Uganda Commercial Bank has actually been privatised. For the other two, that is Transocean and Uganda Airlines Corporation, those slated for actual divestiture, this has not yet taken place. Furthermore, it seems the selection was unduly influenced on part of the writers to examine only companies that have had major problems and ignore those which have been successfully carried out. One cannot help but conclude that the selection of the companies could have been done with the express purpose of supporting certain views and opinions.  

I certainly object at the ad hoc selection which is unrepresentative, and thereafter, the biased findings which I am sure cannot be representative of the actual process. I also submit that findings made from an unrepresentative sample of 3 per cent should not be used to make sweeping recommendations both on the process itself and on the personalities involved.  

I submit that this report is subjective, is based on an extremely narrow and skewed sample and seems written to highlight certain aspects of the investigation not discussed with me as the Minister responsible for privatisation nor with the Attorney General, nor with the Solicitor General and DRIC, parties who play a major role in the whole exercise.  I submit also that the report which may satisfy political sentiments is unrepresentative and does not do full justice to the process as mandated by Parliament, especially if you look at the terms of reference.  

The terms of reference for the Select Committee:
Under its own terms of reference the Committee has its first item set out to review the objectives of privatisation and whether they were being achieved. The report merely states that the objectives were not being achieved as laid down in Section 3(2) of the PERD Statute of 1993. The report does not contain substantive argument to support this statement. Mr. Speaker, I will in a short while review the objectives of the programme against what has been achieved to-date and I think at the end, I will be able to demonstrate that the Committee report assertion that the objectives are not being achieved will be seen as incorrect. In actual fact, a great deal has been achieved in terms of realising the objectives as set out in the PERD Statute.  

The second item in the terms of reference is to examine the management and administration of the proceeds of privatisation. The report casually deals with only the hiring and the cost of consultants. Under this item, the information contained in the report in no way suggests that a careful analysis and evaluation of costs against the professional reports submitted was carried out. The report does not present information on the divestiture account and its operations, it does not consider the debts that are accumulated as a result of divestiture, the report actually fails in all ways to grasp the overall financial picture of the  divestiture programme.

The third item in the terms of reference is to identify specific public enterprises whose divestiture has caused public outcry and make specific recommendations. The report then cites ENHAS which is not a public enterprise, Uganda Commercial Bank, Uganda Grain Millers, Hima Cement, Nile Hotel, Apollo Hotel Corporation, Uganda Air Cargo and the Steel Corporation of East Africa.

I am saddened to note that the Committee report was able to identify only UCB in this category. This again demonstrates that this particular term of reference has not been properly dealt with.  

The last item of the terms of reference is to study and make recommendations about any other aspect of the divestiture process as the select Committee may deem fit. The comments on page 54, 55 and 56 are relevant and I entirely agree with the observations of the Committee. The issue of Parliamentary presentation on DRIC and the suggestion to remove this representation is correct. I must however, inform you that your members sitting on this Committee have made considerable and significant contributions to the process, and I am grateful for their contribution. However, the recommendations made on the possible amendment to the PERD Statute while relevant do not suffice to uplift the divestiture process.  I would be very happy to share with Parliament a more comprehensive list of issues which need to be attended to as well as the relevant policies to apply to these issues.

I have laboured to demonstrate that the Committee report presented by the Select Committee on Privatisation based itself on technically unacceptable assumptions like a non representative company sample, limited reference to information available at the Secretariat and non- consultation with key players like myself. The report has failed to address itself to the specific terms of reference the Committee has indicated at the beginning of their report. The report does not substantiate assertions made therein.  

A review of the Privatisation objectives.
As mentioned earlier, the Committee report observes that the objectives of privatisation have not been achieved. The report does not actually spell out these objectives or match them against achievements or failures. I wish to correct this misinformation by the Committee by briefly reviewing the objectives of reform and divestiture with you.  
Objective No. 1.
The reduction of Government equity holding in the public enterprises.  At the outset, the Government approved a divestiture plan with a target of 105 by the end of 1997. There is a brief table which shows what happened,that up to the end of December 1994, the target was to divest 22 enterprises; we ended up by divesting 24, two more than originally planned.  By the end of December 1995, we were expected to have divested 29, we had divested 44, by the end of December 1996, we were expected to have divested 52, we had divested 61. By end of December 1997, we were expected to have divested 105, we had done unfortunately only 78 and to -date, out of the 105, we have been able to divest 87.  The number above do not include the suspended divestitures such as Nile Hotel, Coffee Marketing Board Limited, Uganda Consolidated Properties Limited, Uganda Spinning Mills Limited, SAIMMCO and Apollo Hotel Corporation.  

From 1994 to 1996, the Government exceeded all the planned divestitures targets in the programme having achieved a total of 61 divestitures against the target of 51 by end of 1996.  

The projection to divest 53 enterprises between 1996 and 1997 was unrealistic, as it was based on the assumption that additional divestitures would take similar time and resources regardless of size and complexity. The evidence on the ground is that for larger enterprises like Uganda Commercial Bank, Uganda Posts and Telecommunications, which were placed in the 1995 work plan, it took longer as the divestiture process is more complex in nature.  This included having to go through Parliament to achieve political consensus, investor researches and a host of other factors not foreseen at the time. The other major factor was the post divestiture experience in which lack of proper divestiture procedures left many divestiture processes incomplete, e.g. lack of clear titles, ownership conflicts, higher than anticipated divestiture costs and disputes with the buyers over the difference of what was advertised and finally sold.  

Out of experience gained from 1993 to 1997, new guidelines for divestiture were instituted through an amendment of Schedule 2 of the PERD Statute.  In addition, there was a re-classification of public enterprises reducing the categorisation from four to three and many enterprises moved to category four which allowed 100 per cent divestiture.  Now, new privatisation procedures to enhance transparency and efficiency have been introduced and shared with the public.  

Interim Results.
Results from divested public enterprises show that not only have they been revived, but they have also been expanded in terms of volume of production, increased investment, improved quality and quantity of products and attendant labour forces. The very encouraging results signify that our divestiture strategy has been and is a correct one as demonstrated by some outputs below.  You can look at Pepsi Cola there at the top and you see that with divested Pepsi Cola Crown Bottlers they were producing only 1.8 million crates per year. After divestiture, they are now producing 6 million crates per year. You can look at the taxes. They were paying in taxes 200 million per month; now they are paying more than 1 billion per month. They were employing 300 people, now they are employing more than 700 people and they have an investment of 15 million dollars. I have also given Nile Breweries. You can see it. I have given Hima Cement, I have given Tororo and Nytil Jinja, all show very clearly that after divestiture, there has been considerable improvement in the performance of those companies.  

One must therefore conclude that not only has divestiture been achieved, but that new rules and regulations to correct flaws in the programme have been developed and there is ample proof that the programme is paying economic dividends in terms of increased investment, production, taxes, and employment of labour.

The promotion of institutional arrangements, policies and procedures:
The PERD Secretariat was established in 1992 and restructured in 1995. Over this period, it has trained staff, established policies and procedures, especially the divestiture guidelines through instrument No. 12 of 1997.  More recently, the divestiture procedure manual providing for a standardised and more transparent technical process has been developed and is being followed to the letter for all current divestitures.

Objective No. 3. Rehabilitation of public enterprises where appropriate:
The policy of rehabilitating enterprises was abandoned in 1994 when it was determined that there was no guarantee that rehabilitated public enterprises would eventually fetch a higher price upon divestiture, or that they would not be run down again before divestiture.  It was therefore decided that the public enterprises be sold on an 'as is' basis so that the idea of rehabilitation was limited to those cases that would ensure their survival to divestiture.  

Objective No. 4. The Promotion of Local Entrepreneurs.
I wish to inform hon. Members that out of 59 Public Enterprises sold so far, 37 have gone to Ugandans and 22 have gone to foreigners.  Of the 22 that went to foreigners, 10 have been sold under the exercising of pre-emptive rights by foreign shareholders, and of the remaining 12, a majority had Ugandan partners. This has been achieved despite the fact that there was no securities market through which shares could be openly traded in order to broaden ownership to take place.  Even if the stock exchange did exist, most of the enterprises could not qualify for listing on the stock exchange as they would not meet the minimum criteria set for listing even under waiver by the capital markets authority.  

Realising that it was not possible to place most public enterprises' shares on the stock exchange immediately, Government established a policy of obtaining core investors to turn around management of these public enterprises, to provide further essential investment and prepare them for meeting listing criteria before any public offer could be made. It was believed that this would result in higher value of the Government's shares and would in turn benefit the investing public.  This policy has now been reviewed and the public participation strategy is now shifting emphasis to allow workers to be the first beneficiaries through Employees Stock Ownership Plans. Targeted public enterprises for this form of public participation will include, but not be limited to the New Vision, National Insurance Corporation, Kinyara Sugar Works, Uganda Airlines Corporation, and the Central Purchasing Corporation.  
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the first Government's shares to be floated on the stock exchange will be those held in Uganda Clays which will be sold in the first quarter of 1999. The Uganda Security's Exchange has already began work on preparing the company for sale. Also the sale agreement for Barclays Bank and Stanbic Bank incorporate a provision for public floatation within a period of five years after their sale.  Government negotiations on-going with the Bank of Baroda and the British American Tobacco Company have secured commitments to be incorporated in subsequent sale agreements for shares to be floated on the stock exchange within three years of the sale of Government's shareholding. It was not possible to achieve the immediate sale by public floatation of the Government's shareholding in the above mentioned public enterprises because of the other shareholders insisting on exercising their pre-emptive rights. Despite the limited avenues available for broadening local participation, one cannot therefore, convincingly argue that the process has not promoted local entrepreneurship as claimed in the Committee Report, because as pointed out, more Ugandans own privatised companies than foreigners.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the facts above speak for themselves.  The divesture process has largely achieved its objectives and targets as provided and empowered within the PERD Statute.  I do not know why the Committee did not consider these facts during their investigations, or if they did so, why they chose to remain silent in the face of overwhelming evidence contrary to their conclusion on this matter.

Terminal Benefits.
The Committee Report is also wrong regarding terminal benefits paid to workers of divested companies.  I wish to state that all terminal benefits due have been paid and totalled to 23.3 billion shillings.  This accounts for 31 percent of total cash collections from the proceeds of divestures as at 30th September, 1998.  The benefits have been paid in accordance with the law and established terms and conditions of service of the individual public enterprises after verification by the office of the Auditor General. In fact, in the case of People's Transport Company and Uganda Transport Company, workers were paid in excess of 1.5 billion from the proceeds of divested companies even those the companies had been liquidated and not divested through the Privatisation Unit, and no funds were received by the Unit from the receivers of these public enterprises. This was at the special request of Government. 

In the case of Foods and Beverages, terminal benefits should have been paid by the buyer, but he did not fully honour this obligation.  However, the new management of the company has now fully settled all outstanding terminal benefits. 

The only outstanding terminal benefits are government contributions to the pension funds of Uganda Commercial Bank and former Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation for amounts of 1.3 billion and 15 billion respectively; these will be settled in due course.  

Again, I want to state that all workers who have been terminated have been paid their terminal benefits.  Court cases received are from workers dissatisfied with the sizes of their terminal benefits or their not qualifying to receive terminal benefits.  The Privatisation Unit has not failed to pay at all contrary to the views of the Committee.

Assets Stripping.  
The Committee notes that the Privatisation Unit encouraged assets stripping in some enterprises for the benefit of some individuals, created monopolies for the benefit of the individuals and ignored the Boards of Directors and management of some enterprises for the benefit of the purchasers.

As I said earlier, the use of selected examples in an unrepresentative figure of divesting companies is evident here. The Committee also misunderstood the normal packaging of companies for sale. Take the example of Transocean. Government decided that Transocean had strategic assets, both in Kampala and in Mombasa, which should be retained by the State.  Hence, the Mombasa properties were retained and the inland port at Nakawa transferred to Uganda Revenue Authority. These assets will remain in the hands of Government. It is just a mere transfer from one body of Government to another, Uganda Revenue Authority. There is no asset stripping by any measure in the sense that there is no financial loss to Government which will still own the assets and directly collect the proceeds from the port. Nevertheless, the transfer of these assets deprives the Divesture Account of immediate cash inflows while saddling it with the liabilities of Transocean. In general, packaging of company sales is a result of assessment of Government and public interests and those for achieving good divesture in general.  I categorically refute the allegation by the Committee that the Privatisation Unit deliberately caused asset stripping that was meant to benefit other parties.  It was a matter of twisting facts within the Report.

Management and Administration of the Divesture Process.
Again here, the conclusion of the Committee Report is not fair at all.  As much as possible the process of Privatisation has followed the law, Over time, policies and procedures have been developed and put in place.  The  Committee did not see it fit to examine the Privatisation Process at work and did not interview the Divesture and Reform Implementation Committee which is the final authority on approval of Policies and Procedures. To the best of my knowledge, the Committee did not bother to consult the six monthly reports that have been prepared to demonstrate compliance with the law. All the examples used by the Report are out of context, and again, I must conclude that they were used to drive home points not borne out by facts. I do not, therefore, know what scale they used to assert that there was no compliance.  

Divesture Account and its operations.
The collection account for divesture proceeds is in Uganda Commercial Bank and it has always been there. In addition, there is a redundancy account in which funds to pay terminal benefits are kept. At one time, the divesture account had fixed deposits with the following banks approved by the Bank of Uganda with specific limits at a general interest of 15 percent per annum as term deposits on a monthly basis:  Uganda Commercial Bank, Orient Bank, Gold Trust Bank, ICB, Bank of Baroda, and Trans African Bank. All these fixed deposits were withdrawn by June, 1998 and earned a cumulative interest of three billion which was deposited on the Divesture Account.  

The summary of the Divesture Account Operations is as follows, and  I will not read through it, because you hon. Members have knowledge of accounts and accounting. On the left hand side it shows the inflows, and on the right hand side it shows the manner in which these amounts were used. As the record above indicates, the total value of divesture proceeds has been shillings 149.7 billion of which only 94.6 billion would ever be paid out in cash to the Privatisation Unit for deposit in the Divesture Sccount.  The difference between cash receipts and gross sales is reflected in the liabilities; for example, terminal benefits, outstanding public enterprise loans and creditors, sold to the buyers of divested public enterprises. Also, almost 20 billion is still unpaid despite vigorous attempt to recover it from these buyers.  Over 85 percent of outstanding claims relate to ATM in Mbale, Hima in Kasese, Nytil in Jinja, and these are now subject for legal action to recover the amounts due.  

Out of the above money available, 2.4 billion is with Stanbic Bank, while the balance is with Uganda Commercial Bank Limited. There is no active account in any other bank.  Unlike other accounts held by Government agencies which are only audited once a year, the divesture account is audited every six months by the audit firm, Deloitte and Touche and the results published in the two leading dailys. In addition, all expenditures are pre-audited by the Office of the Auditor General.

Appointment of Consultants.
In the Committee Report, the appointment of Consultants to undertake assignments is portrayed as if it is carried out in haphazard manner.  That the appointment and determination of professional fees is done arbitrarily and is one of the biggest drain on the divesture account.  I wish to inform Members that the appointment of consultants is governed first of all by Government regulations, IDA procurement rules and the Privatisation Unit procurement guidelines.  These rules are observed and there is evidence that there is general compliance with procedures as provided. 

In the specific cases of auditors, the process of selection of firms and determination of fees is in almost all cases by the Auditor General. The Privatisation Unit accepts these recommendations. The selection of advisors, legal consultants and others, is approved by our partners, the IDA. Except for advisors, for instance Merchant Banks etc, the rates paid to the consultants are standard per man hour. There is evidence to this. The cost of hiring consultants is about 10 percent of total sales which is considered normal and cannot therefore be seen as the biggest drain on the divesture account.

On the question of enforcing sales agreement - yes, there were instances of lack of enforcement of some sales agreement, for instance, in the case of Hima cement, Nytil, for reasons advanced by the buyers.  However, most of these cases have now gone for litigation.  The process for contract enforcement has been tightened through the adoption of a new Divesture Procedure Manual recently adopted.  

On the question of managers running down the enterprises during the process of privatisation, this is true in many instances and asset stripping can only be tackled through honest managers. No matter what safeguards one puts in place, the process  is extremely difficult to stop.  This notwithstanding, Government has replaced managers or Boards of Directors where necessary. In extreme cases, enterprises have been closed and some later re-opened to minimise further financial haemorrhage; for instance, Coffee Marketing Board Limited, Uganda Consolidated Properties Limited, Uganda Development Bank. Cases involving fraud have been referred to the respective bodies, for instance the IGG and CID. Members will appreciate that while the PERD Statute specifies the need to monitor the Privatisation Unit's performance, it does not have specific penalty clauses and thus the monitoring unit has no legal mandate to enforce compliance.  The present structure tends to give powers of management and supervision to the Managers, Boards and line Ministries. We are therefore left only to recommend to Boards in many cases. Stopping asset stripping is a responsibility of all players, including Parliament.  

Political Interference.
On the question of Political Interference, what I can say is that where Government feels it must take action as in the case of Transocean Uganda Limited to maintain some assets considered strategic, or the two houses of  Uganda Consolidated Properties Limited, this maybe considered genuine political interference which, though distorting the programme, is still a very vital input into the overall programme.  Each case quoted by the Report has a plausible explanation why it is, where and how it is.  I would have wished that the Committee actually considered these circumstances.  

I would not like to create the impression that political interference is only experienced from the Executive Arm of Government. This House has also expressed its views many times on many matters that affect the timing and the final disposal of the public enterprises. Other interventions occur when the programme must take into account genuine and desirable national and regional objectives that affect divestures.  A case in point is the extension of telecommunication services to Northern Uganda under the NURP project to be managed by UTL, rural subsidies, as well as the issue of air routes under the AJAS
accords for the Uganda Airlines Corporation. 

The above are my general comments on the findings by the Select Committee.  I now wish to react specifically to the three enterprises the Select Committee examined and reported on. 

I would now like to respond to the observations and recommendations made on Transocean (U) Limited by the Select Committee.

Close down of Transocean (U) Limited.
At the point when the Privatisation Unit closed Transocean, the Company had failed to finance its operations. It had failed to meet its monthly wages and it could not meet the bills from its operations. A quick look at the company operations showed clearly that the money being generated was not being banked on the company account. Staff were diverting company officials business to their own small private clearing and forwarding companies, the management was fighting the Board of Directors and vice versa. An investigative audit was then carried out which revealed serious financial impropriety, besides those exposed  by the Parliamentary Committee on Statutory Corporations and Authorities. On the basis of the findings, DRIC authorised a move to salvage the company.  One did not need to go to the press to advertise that the company would be closed.  After careful planning therefore, the company was closed and arrangements made for a hand over by staff and thereafter, instituted a caretaker manager until divesture.  This action was both recommendable and justified.

Retention of Transocean External Properties at Nakawa Inland Port.
The decision to remove some assets from Transocean was based on a Cabinet decision to retain all external warehouses and commercial buildings belonging to public enterprises, and a resolution of the dispute over the ownership of Nakawa inland port. This was useful for the divesture of these entities as experience has shown that some buyers could strip the company and fail to pay outstanding obligations as was the case in Foods and Beverages. The rationale was therefore to down size the company before divesture, sell the non core items like old vehicles etc, transfer strategic assets to Government, and then sell a rationalised Transocean that can continue with a forwarding and clearing business. This would ensure that there is no asset stripping which would result in a loss to Government, and there would be no windfall profits for the buyer if he decided to sell the assets.  Assets worth  Shs.5.7 billion  would be transferred to Government, non-core assets would be sold off. The remaining assets of the rationalised Transocean were sold or would be sold at approximately Shs.300m/=, therefore there was no loss to Government as claimed by the Committee Report.

The Nakawa Inland Port.  
The matter of the Inland Port has been a subject of controversy whose ownership had been for a long time been contested by both URA and Transocean, and this was a matter for the Court. Privatisation could not proceed unless this matter was resolved. The Minister of Finance, being the supervising Minister for both institutions, decided that the inland port be transferred to URA to be used as the Long Room.

The Select Committee, in their recommendation did not take into account those facts, and hence its recommendation that the new offer for Transocean should include a management contract to Nakawa Inland Port is really a shot in the dark. First of all, if Transocean is to be sold 100 per cent, what the buyer does with the Company or how he runs it becomes his responsibility. Whether he wants to manage it through a management contract would really be his business. Government would have ceded the responsibility.

The sale of Rationalised Transocean.
On the question of the buyer for Transocean, I am prepared to take the Select Committee's recommendation to DRIC for its consideration.  But this would have to be seen against possible litigation by the currently successful bidder.  In fact, Coin's lawyers have given notice to the Attorney General of its intention to sue for interest and damages for breach.  

I have not been able to establish that there was undue influence in the award of sale by DRIC as claimed by the Select Committee. The decision to sell to Coin Ltd was in accordance with the bidding procedures in which case they ranked highest. In fact, a contrary award would certainly attract bidder challenges as has happened in the past. The bidder was to pay 50 per cent on signing and provide a guarantee for the balance on signing the sale agreement. No agreement has yet been signed as this was delayed by the period of suspension. In any case the bidder has paid 50 per cent and provided a bank guarantee for the balance.  

Payment in Transocean.
On the question of payments, all payments are made in accordance with divestiture audit reports and are further pre-audited before release.  However, in case there have been improper payments, these should be handed over to the appropriate Government investigating agencies.  

Uganda Airlines Corporation.
This is to clarify the role of various Government organs in the privatisation process of Uganda Airlines Corporation to date. Since 1991, the aviation sector has experienced several reforms. This include the establishment of an autonomous Civil Aviation Authority; the promulgation of the African Joint Air Services (AJAS), accordsand agreements; and the implementation of the multiple designation policy on international air routes. All these reforms have affected the Uganda Airlines Corporation and its value. They have been adopted by the Government of Uganda and implemented by its various organs.  

Under the CAA Statute, Section 30, the power to grant commercial concession for various services related to the operations of aerodromes including ground handling services, was vested in the CAA. At the time Uganda Airlines provided ground handling services as a monopoly and paid a concession fee to CAA for the right to provide these services.
When the CAA sought, therefore, to liberalise these ground handling services, it was not a matter of restructuring the UAC Corporation or even of privatising one of the parastatals functioning. It was merely a change in licensing policy, which it had the statutory authority to make.  In this regard, it was not the function of DRIC to implement this policy even though it had a material effect on the operations and value of UAC. Furthermore, under the Uganda Airlines Decree of 1976, the powers operate ground handling services were not vested in Uganda Airlines Corporation.  

I wish to point out therefore that it is incorrect to state that there was an illegality in the exercise by the CAA of its statutory powers, and the Minister of State for Privatisation was fully aware of this illegality but made no attempt to halt it. There is no conflict between the exercising by CAA of its powers and the PERD Statute Section 28(2).  DRIC is responsible for the reform and divestiture of public enterprises but not for the general restructuring and reform of sectors under which parastatal enterprises fall, particularly where sector specific legislation is in place.  This is a weakness in the PERD Statute which Parliament can address.

The sale of UAC shares in ENHAS.
The sale of UAC shares in ENHAS has been criticized pointing out that they were sold out at a very low price compared to the valuations received.  It is also stated that the pre-emptive rights enjoyed by Global Air links and Efforte Corporation should have been overlooked and the shares sold on the open market due to the failure to obtain a higher price.  

It should be noted that the sale of Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS would never have arisen had the airline been operating profitably or even had it been liquid enough to meet its recurrent obligations. Only when the airline was completely incapable of meeting its obligations, and therefore jeopardising its very existence, and the PU had exhausted every channel reasonably available to secure funds for ensuring the survival of the corporation was the sale of these shares considered. 

The need for expedited sale.
In 1997, due to its severe liquidity problem of UAC approached the Privatization Unit for support in the settlement of its bills with IATA. Initially the unit supported UAC indirectly by guaranteeing a loan to the company through Uganda Commercial Bank of US Dollars 950,000 and a further guarantee of 650,000 dollars was provided to Orient Bank to enable the Corporation settle its IATA bills. PU eventually settled both guarantees on behalf of the airline. UAC also routinely borrowed from ENHAS to finance other obligations. As at the time of the sale, the shareholders UAC owed ENHAS over one million dollars and were enable to obtain further finances from this source.  
In February 1998, the UAC management approached the Privatization Unit for further support in paying its IATA bills. This time, it was found impossible for: UAC to borrow from its bankers or ENHAS; the Privatization Unit to guarantee further funding as it would have violated agreements under criteria for meeting eligibility for the HIPC debt relief; the Divestiture Account itself held only Shs.178 million free funds by 25th February, 1998.

UAC advised that IATA had communicated to them that unless its outstanding bill of Shs.632,850,000/= was settled  by 6th March, 1998, Uganda Airlines would be expelled from the clearing house which would effectively ground the airline.  

Faced with the eminent closure of the UAC, PU advised UAC Management on the 17th February, 1998, to inform the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications of the closure of UAC unless funding was obtained from other sources.  

A subsequent meeting was held at the Ministry office on February 27th 1998, with the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications, with officials of PU and UAC at which the sale of UAC's shares in ENHAS was considered subject to independent evaluations.  At this meeting, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication informed all present that he would from then only be involved in issues of statutory nature and that EDP was taking over all the responsibilities for UAC. This was subsequently confirmed in writing. The Minister of Works, Transport and Communication also considered its strategically dangerous to ground Uganda Airlines.  

In view of the failure to obtain funding by both PU and UAC Cargo, the matter was referred to DRIC who approved sale of UAC's ENHAS shares- as well as the Fokker Friendship aircraft which was not operational to obtain funds required to meet IATA obligations and support UAC operations.  

Pre-emptive Rights.
The articles of association of ENHAS, in Article 43 confer pre-emption rights upon members of the company in the event that anyone of them decides to sell its shares. Under these provisions, shares would not be available for offer to a third Party, for third Parties or non-members of the Company until after at least 60 days from the date of offer.

In order for the PU to pursue the option of soliciting bids from the public, it would have had to find alternatives sources of funding to support UAC for at least 150 days before the shares could be sold to the public at all.

Due to the critical need to secure financing to meet the IATA bill to keep the Airlines flying till eventual divestiture, this option was clearly not available. The only viable alternative was to quickly conclude the sale on the pre-emptive right basis and obtain receipts of an advance of US 1 million dollars on signing to clear the IATA bill for March.  I also confirm that the Divestiture Account received all payments due from the purchasers of the shares.

The Evaluation of Shares.
The evaluation of the shares was done by, among others, Deloitte and Touche who were ENHAS's External Auditors and Ernst and Young who were at the same time on appointment by the Auditor General, auditing UAC's accounts. Both firms are reputable audit firms and have been appointed to carry out various audit assignments for the Auditor General.  

The value of UAC's ENHAS shares was computed by Ernst and Young between 5.2 million and 8.5 million. On the other hand, the Deloitte & Touche computed this to be between 3.3 million and 4.8 million. The variance in values was due to the different assumptions and methods used by the firms during the evaluation. The key difference was that the assumption by Ernst and Young that ENHAS license would be reviewed on similar terms perpetually whereas the Deloitte & Touche made the evaluation on assumption that Ground Handling would be liberalised after the expiry of the current license in the year 2001. In addition Ernst and Young valuation did not take into account the fact that the tax holiday enjoyed by ENHAS under the Investment Code would lapse in two years.  
Furthermore, both valuations did not consider sale under pre-emptive rights where the shares would not attract a price as high as that that would be obtained from the open market.

On reflection now, perhaps the terms of reference given to the valuing companies should have covered the question of exclusivity so that each of the valuing firms would have factored this in their prices so that they use the same criteria all through. Never-the-less, the price finally approved by DRIC was considered the best price within the circumstances.

The recommendation by the Select Committee that strong and transparent leadership for the divestiture of UAC is accepted and Government has already taken action to centralise authority responsible for divestiture.  If there is any wrong doing on the part of the officials in the divestiture of parts of UAC, let this matter be investigated.

I would now like to put a correct record of the process of divestiture of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  

Background.
Preparation of Uganda Commercial Bank for divestiture started in 1994 with an internal assessment undertaken by Ernst and Young. The Bank was then put under technical management of Louis Berger International. These actions were taken under the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit - a World Bank Project implemented by Bank of Uganda.  

The level of non-performing assets and overall inefficiency of the Bank had reached a level which was  no longer acceptable to Government and its development partners -International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
The liquidation of UCB had become a distinct possibility which was considered unacceptable by Government that opted for the divestiture of Uganda Commercial Bank.  

The level of non-performing assets, including Uganda Commercial Bank indebtedness, had resulted in losses in the Bank of over Shs.100b/=.  It was resolved that Government would inject Shs.72b/= and waive Shs.27b/= of Government liabilities.  

There is a general perception which is wrong that the Shs.72b/= bond was a mere recapitalisation of the Bank. Let it be understood, in layman's language, that this amount of money was to be placed into UCB to provide for depositors funds eroded due to bad loans and that Government had resumed responsibility for these bad loans by transferring them to the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust known as NPART.

Having commenced the restructuring of the Bank, Government then decided to work out a divestiture plan, and it was agreed that up to 51 per cent should be offered to a core investor while the balance of shares would be sold to the public through the stock exchange.

The process of divesting Uganda Commercial Bank started with the recruitment of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell who was recruited after a competitive bidding process. This process again was carried out but not financed FSAC under Bank of Uganda.  

The Bidding Process.
Invitations to bid were placed both in the local and international media for the acquisition of up to 51 per cent shares in UCB.  In the meantime, Morgan Grenfell had contacted over 100 banking institutions.  However, because of the state of UCB and the weak financial sector in Uganda, coupled with the controversy surrounding the decision whether or not to divest UCB, it created a negative international response resulting in a handful of bids. Even out of 7 bids, only 4 passed the evaluation by Bank of Uganda, and finally, 3 were pre-qualified.  Those who failed to meet the criteria included Pride Africa, Marathon, News Africa and Greenland Investment Limited. Those who qualified were City Bank, Nedi Bank and Westmont Holdings.  

Jointly with Bank of Uganda and Morgan Grenfell, Government of Uganda carried an evaluation of the three and it was clear that both City Bank and Nedi Bank were only interested in the Trade Finance and the Corporate Banking business of the Bank, which would have left the Government to deal with the bulk of the country-wide branch network and would not in any way be tantamount to privatisation of the Bank. Consequently, only the Westmont Holdings offer met the original objective of the Government of Uganda.

Due diligence.
An offer was made to Westmont Holdings to undertake due diligence in UCB. After the due diligence, Westmont Holdings chose to use Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd as the bidder and the final bid proposal was therefore, presented by Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd.  

Government on the advice of Morgan Grenfell decided to carry out its own due diligence on Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd by sending a delegation led by myself and including my staff, senior Bank of Uganda Officials and Morgan Grenfell representatives.  

Confusion appears to have arisen as to why the initial offer proposal was different from the final bidder. Westmont Holdings on completion of their due diligence, presented their final bid using Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd as the investment vehicle. Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd is a listed Company in the Kuala Lumpur stock exchange and is the one that owns the 40 per cent stake in Westmont Banking in the Philippines.  This information was fully checked with the Malaysian Security Commission during our visit, and clearly there was nothing irregular.  Westmont Holdings has a majority stake in the Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd while the rest of the shares are held by various share-holders through the Malaysian Stock Market.

During our visit to Kuala Lumpur and Manila, the Chairman of the Security Commission and the Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines confirmed the operations of the Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd as industrial operator and bank owners in the Philippines, respectively. They had a satisfactory track record and were recommended as  suitable investors in the Ugandan Banking institution.  

During the period of our due diligence, the South-Eastern Asian economies had started experiencing serious economic trauma and financial market turbulences. Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd has then found difficulties to externalise the US Dollars 11 million to complete the divestiture of UCB.  

The sale to Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd. After extensive consultation with Morgan Grenfell and the Bank of Uganda, the Government of Uganda felt the process of selling the 49 percent shares of UCBL to Westmont Land(Asia) Bhd must go ahead, and therefore, an extension was granted.  A final extension was granted to Westmont Land to complete payment by  30th April 1998. On 16th March 1998 and 8th April 1998, 4 Million US Dollars and 6 million US Dollars respectively was paid by Westmont.  A supplementary agreement was thereafter signed on 22nd April 1998 to cater for the variations in the payment schedule, and also to cover the costs for the extensions, including the existing management agreement with Loius Berger, professional fees and interest incurred as a result of payment delays.  

The Share Sale Agreement provided for a capitalization of 6 million, in an institution in which the Government was still a majority shareholder, and US $ 5 million consideration to the Government of Uganda.  The confusion seems to arise from the misunderstanding by the Select Committee on the means by which Government subscribed for shares in UCBL. The US $ 6 million in Share Sales Agreement is first paid to Government of Uganda, who then buys shillings from Bank of Uganda at the ruling rate, and subscribes for 15 million shares in UCBL paying the shilling equivalent to UCBL. Therefore, there was no amendment of the Share Sales Agreement and Westmont was never awarded a discount as purported by the Committee.  The supplementary agreement took care of the re-scheduled payment but did not change the structure of the transaction as stipulated in the Share Sales Agreement.  

Subsequently, the Bank of Uganda undertook its statutory responsibility in implementing the management agreement by vetting the management team and the Board of Directors. It thereafter undertook the supervisory role over the operations of UCB as the regulator of all commercial banks in Uganda, whether privately owned or owned by the Government.  
Alleged sell of shares by Westmont. 
Regarding the recent statement by Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh on UCB, I wish to state categorically that at no time was I, or my staff aware of any secret agreement buying  the shares after Government had sold them to Westmont Land (Asia)Bhd - 'Westmont'. What I know for a fact is that sometime in February this year Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh and Dr. Kiggundu did inquire whether Westmont could assign their shares in UCBL to Greenland Investment Ltd. On the advice of the Attorney General, the Minister of Finance and myself told them that it was not possible as in the first instance Greenland Investment  limited was disqualified in the bidding process, and secondly, the Sales Agreement did not allow any share dealing unless approved by the Minister of Finance and endorsed by DRIC.  

However, reports linking Greenland Investment Ltd to UCB persisted. I therefore called Dr. Kiggundu to my office and asked him about the press allegation. Dr. Kiggundu assured me that he had not bought into UCB. Later, Westmont, Greenland Investments Ltd and Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh in press conferences categoricaly denied having any share dealings.  

I was therefore shocked, like most of you were, to learn of Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh's involvement through the press report and further from  a copy of the statement he circulated. In his statement, Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh  stated that he had a secret deal with Westmont Land (Asia) in which he used Greenland Investment Ltd to pay for Westmont's 49 percent shares in Uganda Commercial Bank and he would take  ownership of the shares at a later date.  

The Sales Agreement entered with Westmont provided, among other things, that Westmont shall not transfer or deal in any way its shares without the consent of the Government, which consent can only be given by the Minister of Finance with the approval of DRIC. 

The relevant provisions restricting the sale transfer and other dealings in Westmont shares in UCBL are produced below:

"1. The Shareholders Agreement signed on the 27th October 1997 between Westmont, the Government of Uganda and UCBL provides in clause 19(c) that: for the duration of this agreement...Westmont shall not be permitted to create or permit to subsist any pledge, lien or charge over, or grant any option or other rights, or dispose of any interest in or transfer or otherwise dispose of shares registered in its name without the prior written approval of Government of Uganda (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld)" 

It further provides in clause 18 that: "Westmont shall not assign or transfer or purport to assign or transfer any of its rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of the Government of Uganda. 

2. Approval of Government of Uganda for purposes of clause 18 and 19(c) of the Shareholders Agreement is clarified in clause 4(c) of the Supplementary Agreement dated 21 April 1998 as follows: '...consent of Government of Uganda shall be given by the Minister of Finance with the approval of Divestiture and Reform Implementation Committee.  

3. Section 41 of the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993 also prohibits the transfer of shares in a financial institution representing more than 15 percent of its capital stock or voting rights without the prior approval of Bank of Uganda."  

The Minister of Finance and or DRIC have not received, considered, or approved any request by Westmont to sale transfer or otherwise deal in any of its shares in Uganda Commercial Bank limited. To our knowledge, the Bank of Uganda has not received or considered such a request either. It is clear, therefore, that Westmont is not in a position to sell or assign any of the shares presently owned nor cede control of the Bank to Greenland Investment or any other interested party. Any agreement entered into by Westmont for this purpose is therefore not enforceable.  Furthermore, such  an action on part of Westmont would amount a fundamental and profound breach of the transaction agreement which entitles Government of Uganda to terminate the agreement and or seek damages against Westmont.  

I therefore wish to further confirm as follows: that I, Matthew Rukikaire, hon. Mayanja Nkangi and the Privatisation Unit where neither privy nor party to any secret agreement to sell UCBL shares and have only formally learnt of it through the revalations attributed to Maj. Salim Saleh. 

The Government of Uganda entered into an agreement  for the sell of UCBL 49 percent shares with Westmont Land (Asia)Bhd after a due diligence exercise conducted by representatives Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, a Merchant bank that advised Government of Uganda on the transaction, Bank of Uganda and the Privatisation Unit.  The Bank of Uganda subsequently gave its written approval of the sale by the Government of Uganda of 49 shares of UCBL to Westmont as well as to Westmont's acquisition of management control.  

In light of the above revelations, Government has now taken action to verify the statement made and on the basis of this verification shall take firm action to remedy any breach of the sale transaction and management agreements.  On confirmation that there has been fundamental breach of the agreement between the Government of Uganda and Westmont appropriate legal action will be taken.  

Government has already set up a commission of inquiry into the divestiture of UCBL while Bank of Uganda has since intervened in the management of the bank. You will note from the above presentation that the problems facing UCBL today did not arise out of the mismanagement of the process of divestiture but rather the bad faith exhibited by Westmont as an investor for UCBL.  

The events that took place after signing of the agreement and the subsequent takeover by Westmont, including loans, accelerated payment of management fees, and a host of other deeds must be taken as issues of management or mismanagement and overseeing after divestiture. The recommendation by the Select Committee are matters that are now being attended to.  

The report by the Select Committee while welcome did not really capture the framework for divestiture. In my view the report did not address the terms of reference as provided in it. Consequently, the recommendations contained in the report must be seen against inadequate background, and therefore their usefulness will also be limited in the same manner.  

I have provided, in my view, the actual sequence of events and explained where necessary what influenced these events for the three companies mentioned which the Select Committee examined. I have also indicated that the recommendation by the Select Committee are being examined by Government and appropriate action will be taken in due course.  Mr. Speaker, that concludes the long, but first part of my presentation, I have one other task to perform here, if you will permit me another five minutes or so.  
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I wish for record purposes to react to what hon. Naome Kabasharira alleged against me in this House last week concerning my role or my record in the struggle. Those that served with me during the days of the struggle know my personal contribution and the role I played at that very difficult period in the history of this country. Some of those who know about my contribution, including financial contribution, are in this House today. I do not recall the hon. Kabasharira having been part of that struggle; I only met her recently.  It is sad that an hon. Member can stand up in this House and feel free to make any allegation she or he feels will serve the purpose of the hour against the other Member without any shame.  I would like to state for the record -(Interruption)

MISS. BYANYIMA: Point of clarification. I am seeking clarification about the struggle. I would like the hon. Senior Member of this Movement to tell us when the struggled started and when it ended, because my understanding is that Naome Kabasharira is part of the struggle.  What I would like to know is if it ended, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RUKIKAIRE: Mr. Speaker, I am referring to that part of the struggle that phase of the struggle to which the hon. Member referred to, when I am supposed to have embezzled Movement funds. That is the period I am referring to. The struggle continues of course, and I believe that hon. Kabasharira must be part of the struggle today.  I would like to state for the record, and for the sake of my Friend -(Interruption)

MR. OKELLO OKELLO:  Point of clarification. Mr. speaker, I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether membership of the Movement is categorized according to participation in various phases in the struggle.

MR. RUKIKAIRE: Mr. Speaker, I think the explanation which I have given really answers the question which is being sought by this hon. Member.  So, I would like to state for record purposes, and for the sake of my Friends and my constituency, that during the many years that I have served my country in different capacities, I have  done my best, and my motives and intentions have been for the good of my country. I am of course only human, with many failing and falls, but I have never defrauded anyone, least of all my country. Let us in future not get carried away and portray people as monsters.  Let us try to examine issues soberly and with maturity, and demonstrate that there is a difference between this august House and the mob looking for a lynching.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I will now turn to the issue of my resignation which has been a matter for speculation in the mass media recently.

I have tendered my resignation as Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development responsible for Privatisation to His Excellency the President. While I have not personally engaged in any act of wrong doing, I am the political head of the Privatisation programme and must, therefore, be held politically accountable for the mistakes, omissions and commissions which may have occurred in the process of divesting public enterprises.  

The National Resistance Movement is founded on the principle of serving the common good, a principle which must never be sacrificed or compromised for the sake of an individual. As much as I take pride in the achievements of the Privatisation programme, I must also take responsibility for the mistakes when and where they have occurred.  I believe that the principle of serving the common good will be best served if I immediately and unconditionally relinquish the anointment of Minister of state to pave the way for His Excellency the President to appoint a new person in my place. The privatisation policy is coordinated collectively to do the divestiture and reform implementation by a committee, that is DRIC, but the immediate formulation of policy and advisory role are handled by myself as Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development chairs DRIC meetings but it is guided on policy issues by the Minister of State for Privatisation, and in this case, only I as the Minister responsible for Privatisation must be held politically accountable. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi should therefore, not be held politically responsible, even less the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, Mr. Emmanuel Mutebire, who is a mere civil servant and takes political directives from the Ministers.  

I would like finally, Mr. Speaker, to express my deepest gratitude to all those among you hon. Members who have encouraged and counselled me during the tenure of my office and finally who have stood with me and by me in the difficult times that I have experienced lately. For those who have felt that I was not so helpful when they needed my support, I extend my more sincere apologies - the omission was never intended.  I would also like to extend my appreciation and thanks to the staff of PU for their dedication and support given to me during the period in which I have been Minister of State responsible for Privatisation.  

Let me finally appeal to all of you, hon. Members, together to re-dedicate ourselves to strive for the development of our country and work for the unity of this land and to purge from our midst the evil of corruption.  I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Rukikaire.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS: (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I do not want to make it a habit of apologizing to you each time about my voice, but I think it will clear some time say next week. 

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, you have heard the statement of my colleague, the hon. Matthew Rukikaire, concerning the various matters raised by the report of the Select Committee on Privatisation. You have also heard the statements of hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. John Nasasira in connection with matters raised by the report that touch them specifically.  

The case against me is stated at page 57 of the report. It is that I failed "to supervise the privatisation process to achieve its stipulated goal," and therefore, I should take political responsibility for this.  This observation or demand of the Select Committee is made on the basis of three most grave statements, namely: "(i) The Privatisation process has been derailed by corruption. (ii) Corruption should not just be treated as a matter of morality to be forgiven upon confession. (iii) The economy has greatly suffered through the actions of such corrupt officials who should be relieved of their duties." 

Let me declare here and most categorically that any organisation or system that is infested with corruption is septic, so to speak, and it behoves such an organisation or system to rid itself of that disease.  It follows that the Uganda body politic must divest or purge itself of corruption wherever it is found. Whereas corruption is spiritual and moral decay - a sin which according to the christian belief the Lord Jesus is prepared to forgive upon confession - corruption is a crime according to the rules of our country and must be treated as such,  whether it is I who is proved corrupt or any other Ugandan. (Interruption)

MR. ONZIMA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am not interrupting the hon. Minister, it is only that he is touching on a very important matter that we cannot hear from him from behind if he could at least speak louder than that. Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I apologize, Sir, and maybe let me repeat this one, I am going to shout.  I said, Sir, that I am not corrupt -(Laughter)- and I said that any organisation or system that is infested with corruption that system is septic is decayed and it behoves such organisation or system to rid itself of the disease. It follows that the Uganda body politic must divest or purge itself of corruption wherever it is found. And I said, whereas corruption is spiritual and moral decay, according to my own belief as a christian, it is a sin which Jesus can forgive upon confession. However, the laws of this country make corruption a crime. For that reason, therefore, it must be treated according to the law of this country whether it is found in me, the speaker now, or in any other Ugandan. Mr. Speaker, in saying this, I am not merely refusing to admit to or to make a confession of an act or acts of corruption. I am not just saying nor going to admit nor confess, in the sense in which a prisoner say in a court of law could plead 'Not guilty' to a charge of corruption, thereby saying to his accusers, "You prove me guilty". I am simply saying, I am not corrupt. In fact, this is not merely because the laws of this country might find me out and punish me. It is because the Lord Jesus Christ my saviour would never let me accept bribes or otherwise be corrupt.  This Sir, and hon. Members of Parliament, is the bedrock of my conduct. 
Besides, I would never let myself rob this country, the country which I believe, in all humility, I have served with single mindedness and rectitude for the best part of 36 years, rising from the lower position of a Parliamentary Secretary in the  Ministry of Economic Affairs in in May 1962, through the ranks of Minister without portfolio to various cabinet positions. I became Prime Minister of Buganda in 1964 where the treasury was lean, but I remained morally standing. I am not going to start being corrupt in the twilight of my public carrier. And I say, Sir, with humility, I shall be able to do everything morally upright and legally proper by him who alone makes this possible, and some of you know him.  

Happily the Select Committee does not accuse me of corruption but for failing to supervise the privatisation process which, according to the  report, means that I failed to thwart political influence peddlers, prevent bad legal contractual advice, or stop some individuals from behaving corruptly - and, Mr. Speaker, in saying this, I am making no value judgements at all about this, I am just referring to what the report says. I  do not say those they referred to are these or the other I am simply saying that is not what I am stating.  

So, Mr. Speaker, please not the word 'privatisation process' used in the report. It is elastic and would appear to impose on me unlimited political liability.  But, hon. Members let us try now and gauge this liability.  

Hon. Rukikaire - and let me say this now, I have served with him for 9 years, I have served with the other Ministers as well. For me, he is one of the very best, very supportive as a junior Minister,but let me go on.  Hon. Rukikaire has asserted in no uncertain terms that he is the Minister responsible for privatisation. And so he was before I was myself divested from the Ministry of Finance -(Laughter)- as the Minister of Finance in May this year.  As such, he is, so to speak, in control of the command post which is the Privatisation Unit, that unit of technical administrative experts. In relation to me then as Minister of Finance he derived his authority from article 114(1) and article 114(4) of the Constitution, and these read as follows: article 114(1) "The President may, with the approval of Parliament, appoint other Ministers to assist Cabinet Ministers in the performance of their functions."  And article 114(4): "A Minister referred to in this article shall have responsibility for such functions of the Ministry of which he or she is appointed as the President may, from time to time, assign to him or her..." 'Shall have' is mandatory for those responsibilities which the President gives him or her. I might even say that even if you are a senior Minister, once these functions are delimited by the President, I would consider it ultravirus for the senior Minister to try and usurp those functions. 

Under this sub-article, therefore, the appointing authority, that is His Excellency the President, conferred special authority and specific functions on hon. Rukikaire to handle Privatisation matters within the Ministry of Finance. It was, I dare say, like a Commander-in-Chief curving a battalion out of a military brigade and putting it under the special operational responsibility of a battalion commander. It is this commander who is in daily and intimate contact with his men and women in the battalion. Of course, the Brigade commander only commands from a distance. This used to be the functional relationship between myself as Minister of Finance and hon. Rukikaire as the Minister responsible for Privatisation. In this capacity, he sits in Cabinet on the directives of the President himself, and initiates and implements policy on Privatisation. Indeed he has been coming here to address Parliament on issues, policies on privatisation and it has not been me who has been working on this.  

Privatisation has since the days of National Resistance Council been one of the centre pieces of the country's economic policy, as one of the engines of growth. This is why the President created a special department for it within the Ministry of Finance. And this strategy has on the whole yielded dividends. Have there been some mistakes, Mr. Speaker? Yes. some technical or administrative deficiencies in the prosecution of this policy of privatisation? Yes - human institutions, Sir, are all too often dogged by human error. However, have these mistakes, these deficiencies, have they been intentional?  No, they have not been, except where there has been a question of corruption,  because by definition, corruption is intentional, but apart from that case, these deficiencies, these mistakes, these shortcomings have not been intentional. So, my plea to you, hon Members is, that you visit this crime of corruption on the criminals and not on me.(Laughter). You do not visit this on me, the distant and innocent overseer. There can be no vicarious liability in this case.  

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I readily apologize for the few human errors -(Applause)- for the less than 100 percent successes in our efforts. Since no corruption is involved in these errors however, confession is allowed -(Laughter)- and upon the declared judgement of the Select Committee, page 59, forgiveness is not excluded.  But in weighing these, I invite you, hon. Members to look at the other side of the balance sheet of the Privatisation exercise. It is here asserted, I am glad to say, in black. It is not in red despite some debts, and the figures speak for themselves. This balance sheet is in black, as black as my face. Every action, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I have ever taken, every decision I have ever made, whether in DRIC where I was a Chairman or elsewhere has been guided by one consideration and one consideration only, Mr. Speaker; and that is the benefit of our country, the public good - that has been my driving force. While the Minister responsible for Privatisation has at one material time been in charge of the experts for Privatisation Unit, which has been responsible for preparing an enterprise for divestiture, the Minister of Finance had assigned to him a special function as Chairman of Divestiture Reform Implementation Committee (DRIC). And I was deriving my powers from sections 4 and 5 of the PERD Act 1993.  Section 5 provides as follows: "The Committee shall consist of the following Members:- the Minister responsible for Finance who shall be the Chairman; The Attorney General; the responsible Minister meaning the Minister for the time being responsible for the affairs of a public enterprise; The Chairman of the Committee of the Legislature on the Economy; The Chairman of the Committee of the Legislature on Parastatal Bodies."

I must say,Sir, this statute was made in 1993, not in 1996, but we are using it because it had been saved by that article of the Constitution.  Also member by the statute is the Chairman of the Uganda Investment Authority and last and but not least, three eminent Ugandans none of whom shall be a Minister. Who are these people?  Appointed by the Prime Minister, my Master here. And how? On the advise of Cabinet. So you can see that this body is high powered, this body is not constitutional or politically on political consideration; this is why NRC never allowed only politicians to be there. Never. In fact, they are outnumbered on that Committee.  

Article 6(1) provides that "The Committee shall be responsible for implementation of the Government's policy on reform and divestiture of public enterprises under this statute." Mr. Speaker, this Article 6(1) spells out what I call 'legal responsibility', and it is outside political responsibility.  This legal responsibility is imposed by the Statute on the DRIC Committee.  

However, Sir, as I have already indicated, the political responsibility under the Constitution is given by Article 114 from where the Minister in charge of Privatisation derives his authority. In this capacity of course, hon. Rukikaire sits on DRIC. DRIC takes its decision to privatise or not to privatise collectively. DRIC takes decisions to privatise or not to privatise, and it does this collectively. The Minister of Finance has no veto power over DRIC's decision. Thus, the enterprises which the Select Committee on Privatisation discusses were privatised by the collective consent of DRIC and not by myself alone; which would be illegal and void were I to purport to take unilateral decisions or seek to override the decision of the rest of the members of the DRIC Committee.  

In other words, Sir, let me take a leaf out of scriptures.  Every decision to privatise or not to privatise has all along been made by DRIC and without DRIC, no decision was taken that was taken. No decision was taken that was taken. I am glad some of you recognise where I got this from.  In saying this, Sir, I am not repudiating my own responsibility as Minister of Finance, I am only putting the matter in its legal context.  If therefore, any wrong decision was made by DRIC in the privatisation process, it was never my act or my decision, the sort of decision I would make in the Ministry of Finance administratively, it was not that sort of thing. This was a decision of DRIC.  

Sir, hon. Members, I ask you to ponder over this, what I have been saying, which is legal, which is constitutional. When you apportion liability for any shortcomings in the implementation of the privatisation policy, was I there?  Let me go back to my favourite metaphor.  Was I there?  The Brigade Commander?   Yes, most of the time, except when I was abroad on Government duty, but one properly circumscribed by the law in the public interest. For as the Minister of Finance, I could not be allowed to dispose of public assets by relying on my own capabilities, if any, or my own good sense. I could, therefore, not claim to be omniscient, all knowing. It was, therefore, proper that these vital decisions should be entrusted with the collective capabilities and wisdom of DRIC. DRIC, as I have said already, on which, as the law enjoins, this Parliament is currently being represented by hon. Members in the persons of hon. Musumba and hon. Mwandha, both of whom are outstanding in their contributions and deliberations of DRIC.  Yes, for that reason, I will probably say to the recommendation that Parliament should distance itself from these decisions, that okay, if Parliament wants to find fault without being part of it, they should distance themselves; but I think in public interest, they should be there, not them personally, but Parliament should continue to have two members there and it is important for DRIC.  
At this point, Sir, let me ask this question and I hope, Sir, that you will not consider this question as impudent. What weight would you put on the Minister of Finance in all this process and medley of decisions?   Consider this.  The Privatisation Unit under the Minister responsible for Privatisation preparing an enterprise for sale, that is to say, dealing with all the technical, administrative aspects of the matter and convening a DRIC meeting; a DRIC that has its own independent mind to do or not to do, a Mayanja Nkangi, as Minister of Finance, who can only sign away an enterprise with the express consent of DRIC and upon the legal - because it is so constitutionally provided - upon the legal advise of the learned Attorney General.  What is this weight the Minister of Finance has, legal, political or other in this process?  I am asking Members of Parliament to weigh what I am in fact, and they should be able to say, this much weight you had, this much legality you had, this much authority you had, therefore, you failed to influence the process to supervise it.  My decisions and my responsibilities in this regard have always been made - being the decisions and responsibilities of a team acting upon the technical advice of the Privatisation Unit experts. I am simply stating facts as I know them, because I have been there for some time. My own position has not always been particularly enviable from the stand point of attracting political blame in these matters.  This position of mine, has always been that of Brigade Commander looking after something at a distance and when I was somewhere near the distance, the centre as Chairman of DRIC, even there, my powers were severely circumscribed as I have just shown.

I think that I have said enough to clarify the modus operendi of the institutions dealing with Privatisation. My hon. Colleague, Matthew Rukikaire has discussed extensively the various important issues, facts if you like, which are the subject of the report. Therefore, I am not going to repeat them. If I dared to, you would have a whole night here sitting.  

The other Ministers, my hon. Friends and Colleagues mentioned in the report have stated their respective positions and you have heard them.  I cannot however, conclude my statement without commenting on one important matter. The others I can forget, but not the UCB one. The basic facts are known, they have been stated, discussed on the radio, not 100 per cent correct, but they have been discussed. Hon. Rukikaire has narrated them.  Let me add this.  Sometime after DRIC had authorised the sale to Westmont and the contract had been signed by me, I received a telephone call from Engineer Kabanda, the then Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, and I am saying this with the authority of the President, there is nothing to hide.  Engineer Kabanda wanted to know the legal position, whether or not the 49 per cent shares or any part of them which had been purchased by Westmont could be assigned. That is what he wanted to know, he is an engineer, the other one is a lawyer. So, he asked me. I told him that Westmont had according to the agreement of sale nothing to assign, nothing at all, until after three years. Then almost a few minutes later, I received another call from the learned Attorney General. The Attorney General asked me about this, we talked about it, argued as lawyers and we agreed it was not possible. So, I said to him, "let us have a meeting in Finance, let us have this settled once and for all as we felt."  So, we agreed there was nothing to assign and we would have a meeting in the Ministry of Finance. We did have a meeting which I chaired, he was there, hon. Rukikaire was there, Mr. Tumusiime Mutebire, the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance was there, Mr. Leonard Muganwa the Executive Director of Privatisation was there, Mr. Charles Byaruhanga, a Commissioner in the Ministry of Finance, an economist, was there, and I believe, a Mr. Keith Muhakanizi who used to be my economic adviser; but I have not been able to establish the exact date of this meeting, since both Mr. Muhakanizi and Mr. Tumusiime have gone to Arusha on public duty. They should have been able to find out, because, I thought the date was very important, I could not be able to find it.  However, I did consult the Attorney General. He recalls that this was soon after the Westmont had failed to pay first the instalment. So, it must be somewhere between say, November and December/January. 

This meeting in Finance concluded the following as follows:-
1.  The UCB could not be allowed to go the way of Uganda Grain Milling Limited without a Cabinet decision;
2.  Westmont had defaulted on payment and therefore, they had nothing to sell or to assign;
3.  In any case, even if Westmont had not sold or defaulted at all;
4.  The Sale Agreement expressly prohibited transfer of any shares or part of them of the 49 per cent until after three years.  Indeed, even then, with the express consent of the Minister of Finance, with the express consent of DRIC.  

That is what we agreed and determined, and just before we went away, Major Salim Saleh and Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu came. I told them what I have just read out. It was absolutely out of the question for anyone at all to seek our assignment of the 49 per cent shares in UCB or any part of them. These two gentlemen went away. Subsequently, the Attorney General advised the President, the President wanted to know the legal position on this.  He advised him and the President has himself acknowledged this publicly; those of you who have been here, he has acknowledged this.  So, therefore, as far as I was concerned as Minister of Finance, that was the end of the matter.  

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just one other point which my hon. Colleague, may have overlooked. One other decision in that meeting was that, Greenland Investments had been disqualified by Bank of Uganda as not being capable of managing Uganda Commercial Bank and we could not allow it to come in through the back door.  That decision was made.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I am indebted to the learned Attorney General and except that since we are  Learned Friends, I will say that was something not so important for our major decision.  However, he is right.

I was saying that as far as the Minister of Finance was concerned, as far as the hon. Attorney General is concerned, as far as anyone with any authority to transfer or not to transfer the shares in UCB, that was the end of the matter. Apparently, the Major General did not think so.  Apparently from what he said and the revelations you see show that he did not think so. Actually, I have heard him say, commenting on the sale, when he was not allowed to succeed to buy the bids we have been talking about, he said that was a battle lost not a war. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me ask hon. Members of Parliament, eminently fair. If, and God forbid, my young daughter, Namazzi, came to me and said, "Dad, I would like to marry so and so, and he is a young man", and I said, "Namazzi, that is the brother of your mother!  It is not possible."  And I went away to London, and when I was away, Namazzi elopes. Would you in your fairness hang me for that?  (Laughter)
Mr. Speaker, why should I really - because your answer, your verdict has been resounding and I am very grateful for it - why does the Select Committee seek to blame for the business escapades of Major General Salim Saleh in the name of failure to supervise the privatisation process?  This process, for me, had actually ceased when I signed the Sale Agreement under the DRIC PERD Statute. This process for me never extended into the mind or thought processes of the Major General.  We lawyers say and you know the dictum, Sir, the mind of man is not triable.  It is inaccessible. This is why you see people go to court and are asked, "What do you plead?"  They just keep quiet. As you are entitled to do that, you cannot read their mind.  Even if there is fidgeting or not, but the mind of man is not triable.  We could not read the mind of Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh.  We should not really be held responsible for the subsequent - he himself says he acted by himself.  This is a position.  

So, I utterly deny responsibility in this regard. And besides, after DRIC had disposed of the shares, leaving UCBL with 51 percent, that is Government share, the Bank of Uganda had the duty to continue its statutory supervision of the Commercial Bank. Shall I repeat that?  After DRIC had disposed off 49 percent of our shares, UCB remained a Commercial Bank. Assets have been shared, in part divested, it remained in the Commercial Bank, therefore, under the Financial Statute, that clearly gives a responsibility on the Bank of Uganda to supervise the operations of any Commercial Bank and most of all, the largest of them in the country because deposits alone were almost 50 percent of the total.  The Bank of Uganda could not relinquish its duty.  

Secondly, the Board of UCB too had to do its duty to supervise Management of Uganda Commercial Bank. The Ministry of Finance was entitled to rely on these two bodies for the wellbeing of the Uganda Commercial Bank. It was not a matter of political liability, Mr. Speaker. It was both Management necessity and Statutory duty of the Bank of Uganda. But even then, hon. Members, without any such responsibility on my part, I did on one occasion, acting on information coming, if you like, through the corridors, through newspapers, through whatever, impressions, whisperings, I did contact the then Head of the Bank of Uganda's Supervision Department, his name is Mr. Kibirige.  I do not know the other one. I did ask him about these whisperings, funds moving. He told me, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the movement of funds were perfectly proper transfers having to do with foreign exchange transactions between UCB and Greenland Bank.  So, you can see, Mr. Speaker, that even where I had no direct responsibility I never sat on my haunches, but clearly cared for the wellbeing of UCB.

Lastly, on this Sir, the Governor of the Bank of Uganda yesterday sent me two copies, one of each, first of all of a letter sent to him by my hon. Friend Matthew Rukikaire. This letter is dated April the 8th, 1998.  It is here.  It reads:
" SPES 0900,
The Governor,
Bank of Uganda,
KAMPALA.


SALE OF UCB TO WESTMONT LAND (ASIA) BERHAD.

At its 187th meeting held on Monday 6th April, 1998, DRIC considered the sale of UCB Limited.  DRIC decided that we should formerly write to request you to establish the source of the funds used to pay for the final amount of 6,000,0000 US dollars as well as another sum for 450,000 US dollars paid to exercise the option to buy the additional two percent paid by Westmont.

It was further agreed to request you to establish the mode of transfer of these funds to Greenland Bank..."  It is signed by hon. Rukikaire.

Now, on the 11th of April, a reference number is G1511/1, 
Bank of Uganda,

" GOVERNOR'S REPLY

HON. RUKIKAIRE MATTHEW, MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION.

Dear Minister,

SALE OF UCB TO WESTMONT LAND ASIA

I am writing in reference to your letter of P0900 dated April 8th, 1998 conveying DRIC's request to Bank of Uganda to carry out investigations into the transactions concerning Westmont Land Asia payments of 6,000,000 dollars, 450,000 US dollars respectively for their 51 percent share participation in UCB.

Our inspectors have looked at the foreign business transactions of Greenland Bank and established that Westmont payments for their shares in UCB originated from outside sources and they were rooted through Greenland Bank Limited account in City Bank in New York. Westmont (Asia) opened a foreign exchange account No. 0808737 in Greenland Bank Limited here on the 19th February, 1998 with a deposit of 200,000 US dollars. Following the liberalisation of the Capital account assumptions, effective from the 1st July, 1997 and in accordance with the 1997/98 Budget Speech and in line with the Bank of Uganda circular, Reference GO011 dated 3rd July, 1997 to all banks, non resident persons are free to hold foreign exchange accounts for domestic banking system."

Then he shows the figures.  Then he says, "The transfers were subsequently reflected in Westmont Land (Asia) foreign exchange account in Greenland Bank. It was on the basis of the credit balance on their account that Westmont issued written instructions to their local bankers to issue bank drafts or pay by telegraphic transfer as deemed fit.
I am not seeking to be the devil's advocate, I have quoted letters.  Here is DRIC, here the Minister responsible for Privatisation, upon the instructions of DRIC which I was chairman of says find out, we hear things, find out. Someone who knows says, nothing to worry. A normal person, I dare say, in the circumstances would set his or her anxieties at rest.

This is what we did, until of course the Major General said something else.  Now, what then in the name of Finance have I got to do with self piteous, secret transactions, negotiations? Would I have had eyes all over the place even where I had no responsibility to be held responsible?  I did not have liability, Mr. Speaker.  

Now, my hon. Friend took a long time, he laid all the statistics, he laid all the facts, so I just came to add a little bit here and I am about to finish.  I am happy because I have heard that the CID has initiated investigations, opened files, Mr. Speaker, one on me and one on the other. And I am saying it is good. I have always done business through the front door at the Ministry of Finance for six years. I never had business at the rear. So, I am glad an investigation is coming, criminal at that. I repeat to say, Brigade Commander yes, commanding in a distance.  But with a very good commander, a battalion one, nobody else, who says as I told you here, day to day, I was in control since.  Very imaginative myself, but it is true.  

Finally Sir, let me say this. When you look at that Report at some pages, say 36 - 37, you will see that some of the matters discussed there for instance UAC divesture, they came after I had been divested from Finance. So, I cannot be held responsible for those decisions.  And therefore, Sir, I want to end up like this, Mr. Speaker and hon. Ladies and Gentlemen. I have today faithfully and truthfully told you what I know about this matter. This Parliament is the Parliament of our people of this country.  This Parliament as far as I am concerned, you are the arbiters in my case.  I am a public servant, do you know whom my servant is, my master?  Uganda. For the last 36 years, off and on, exile and whatever, off and on, I have been a public servant, my master is Uganda. If Uganda says, "Mayanja Nkangi, I am done with your services", I shall go, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I serve at the pleasure of Uganda, and I wait upon that pleasure.  Thank you so much. (Applause).

MR. PINTO : Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I request your indulgence to move a Motion, first for the adoption of the Committee Report, and secondly for a Resolution of Parliament following the replies as given by the hon. Ministers.  Mr. Speaker, I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, it is true you have moved this motion, but do you think it is fair?  Because you see, when we started this debate, a Member rose and said, before the debate he would like to hear from the Members who have been named. They have just made their position known to the House. But do you not think that Members in view of what has been stated by the Members, would like to make some contributions? So, if you really bring this motion it means that the House should not be given opportunity to comment on what has been stated.  And I saw the Vice President standing, maybe she wanted to put the position of Government because these were individuals named, and this was an attack on a policy of Government on Privatisation.  Do you not think it is fair that the Government position as presented by the Leader of Government Business should be known? 

Unfortunately time has come and this is the normal time, we have come to 7.00 O'clock. I would see that the thing is balancing, that we have heard the other side, if it was for the time, I would have thought that some contributions should have come in and then I would request the chairperson to wind up, and then we pronounce ourselves on the Report.  In view of that, I adjourn this House to tomorrow when we shall hear all the sides on the matter. Thank you.

(The House rose and adjourned until 16th Wednesday, 1998 at 2.00 p.m.)

