Wednesday, 16th December, 1998

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.  

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr.Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities:)
Q1.  Would the Minister inform the House whether it is true that Government is sponsoring private students  in institutions of Higher Learning, including Makerere University?  

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, in reply to hon. James Mwandha's oral question, the following are the answers:
A1.  Government, through State House, is sponsoring students in institutions of Higher Learning, including Makerere University.  The programme of sponsorship started in 1986 when some of the children were in primary schools. A number of these children are now at the University and other institutions of Higher Learning, while others have already completed their studies.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Q2.  If so, would the Minister provide details of the names of the students, courses being pursued and dates of completion?   
PROF NSIBAMBI: A2. It is so, and I wish to give the following answers:
The list of names of the students, courses being pursued and the duration of the courses is attached for your information. The students who will be completing their studies by June, 1999 are 56 and out these, 42 are from Universities. In total, 156 students are beneficiaries of State House sponsorship.

MR MWANDHA: Q3.  Would the Minister state the criteria used in selecting these beneficiaries?

PROF NSIBAMBI: A3.  The criteria used in selecting the beneficiaries have primarily been: (a) Families of the deceased officers and men of the UPDF and families of the wananchi who lost lives and property during the war of liberation, 1981 to 1986.
(b) Deserving individuals who were identified by the President during his tours in the Country and during his meetings with the masses.

MR MWANDHA: Q4. Would the Minister further indicate how much money Government is to spend on this sponsorship and/or the Votes to be charged against?

PROF NSIBAMBI: A4. Government spends Uganda shillings 112,178,000/= per term or semester in sponsoring these students. This expenditure is charged against Vote 002 - Programme 01 - Item 6040 on State House Budget.

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, as much as I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his answer, Mr. Speaker, I note that such a question should have come, according to our Rules of Procedure, tomorrow, Thursday, afternoon. Mr. Speaker, in the last five weeks, I have repeatedly requested your office, "what is happening to the questions we have forwarded to Ministers through the Office of the Clerk regarding various issues in this House?"  We have been told, "no 

