Tuesday, 11 December 2007

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon Members, it is my utmost pleasure to inform you that the Parliamentary Commission, using its own funds, has installed a new, state-of-the-art public address system in the parliamentary chamber, replacing the old one that was donated to us by our development partners, DANIDA.

The new public address system before you will considerably ease the manner in which our debates are conducted and will operate in the following way:

Once a member catches the Speaker’s eye and is given the floor, he/she should press the button on top of the microphone which will result in a green light shining on top of the microphone. The member should only commence to make his/her contribution once a red light shows on the microphone. 

Once the member has finished contributing, he/she should press the button on top of the microphone once again to deactivate it.

I hope that you will make good use of this new public address system to effectively articulate the views of your constituents. I thank you. 

My second communication concerns the participants in the MTN Kampala Marathon 2007. The following Members and Staff of Parliament represented Parliament in the annual MTN Kampala marathon that was held on Sunday December 9, 2007:-

1.	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi
2.	Hon. Margaret Muhanga
3.	Hon. Erias Lukwago
4.	Hon. Milton Muwuma
5.	Patrick Henry Kunobwa 
6.	Kiiza Charles Lwanga
7.	Bibangamba Valerius
8.	Bosio Sam Wangudi
9.	Julian Kaganzi
10.	Nsimbe Kasimu
11.	Kiggundu Sulaiman
12.	Atuhaire Shallon
13.	Kibanda James
14.	Ojara Fred
15.	Bamuwamye James
16.	Maria Kayondo
17.	Sikhu Moses
18.	Nalusiba Harriet
19.	Bisase Moses
20.	Kayigwa Robert
21.	Mayinja Steven
22.	Mbabazi Winfred
23.	Muwonge George
24.	Fred Oundo
25.	Mbonizana Samuel
26.	Bernard Wanda
27.	Muhiwa Joram
28.	Deogratius Okwalinga
29.	Simon Emuna
30.	Kidi Geoffrey
31.	Najjuma Lillian
32.	Adong Joan
33.	Kalembe Justine
34.	Twagira Paul
35.	Kelly Hellen; and 
36.	Kasadha John.

I would like to congratulate all the participants who helped to raise funds that will be used to resettle IDPs in Northern Uganda. Thank you very much, I am proud of you. (Applause)

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to congratulate our colleagues who participated in the MTN marathon. His Excellency, the Vice President is pointing at me - I would have loved to run side by side His Excellency, the Vice President but that was not arranged. But next time, we shall do that together.

I rise on a matter, which I should not have risen on because it is part of the politics since it is campaign time but since we in Parliament play a principal role, it will be important to correct the impression that has been given. This is in reference to what has been reported in two newspapers where President Museveni campaigned for hon. Kirunda Kivejinja saying that in Parliament there are 240 NRM MPs all of whom belong to the Movement Caucus and where they do everything before they come they endorse what has been decided in the Movement Caucus –(Interference with the PA system)- and I would like to quote him - under such an arrangement, the likes of Kasigwa - if the Opposition MPs have nothing to do other than to toe the line. 

I know it is campaign time but it would certainly be irresponsible of me if I did not draw the attention of the House to this emaciation of the country, and to out rightly tell the country that the President is wrong. He is wrong and he is not being fair to Parliament because there are many decisions, which we make here as Parliament where the Opposition provides their views on what should be and make amendments to what misses government’s eyes. As much as it is their aim to see hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja come to Parliament, I think a better way would be for him to reflect on the merits of having -(Mr Musumba rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, procedure?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am reluctant to interrupt the Leader of the Opposition but he is quoting from a newspaper publication, the authenticity of which in itself can be put to issue. Statements have been made and attributed to people - not just the President - statements which have eventually been known to be untrue. This is today’s paper, I believe. Opportunity must be given to the person to whom these statements are being attributed to come out and either confirm or deny them. For us in this House to subject a statement in the newspaper, attributed to the President, to discussion and debate without verifying the authenticity of it, in my view is a matter upon which I seek your guidance on whether we are procedurally in order. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot say much about this because this is a newspaper report. It may be authentic; it may not be. So, personally I have no way of saying whether it was authentic -(Applause)- but I take it that it is a newspaper report. Sometimes you find that the newspapers put your statements in inverted commas when actually you did not cite anything about that. (Laughter) It is a fact.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. It was never my intention to cause any embarrassment to the President by quoting what I believe may not have been said by him. But that a government newspaper - The New Vision is a government paper - and not only the government paper but also The Monitor made reference to what the President said. 

As Parliament, I thought it was important for the country to know that we as the Opposition are not just here as a rubber stamp as was said and that we have a responsibility. Sometimes if we restrain ourselves, it does not mean that we would not come and cause lots of chaos in this House but we sometimes think that that is what is best for our country. The country must understand that Parliament actually is an institution which, regardless of which side Members sit, works for Uganda and that whether you are on the Opposition or on the government side, first of all you are a Member of Parliament, elected by your people with the mandate to speak for your people. 

Secondly, once we are here as Parliament we become one arm of the state, which works to support the executive and the judicial arms so that together we lead this country and govern it successfully. So if it turns out later that the President was misquoted, we will have opportunity to say, “Since you were misquoted, we accept that it was a mistake.” But to keep quiet about it, my honourable brother, when I am the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition is being made to look like a rubber stamp, would be doing a lot of disservice not just to the Opposition, but to the country. That is why I brought this matter up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been advised that this new system is very sensitive to mobile phones. If any of you have your phone on, please switch it off. 

Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery there are ten delegates from the Gauteng Provincial Legislature in South Africa. They belong to the Health Portfolio Committee and are led by Dr Ram Salojee. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table, guidelines on procurement and disposal of pre-bid meetings by local governments 2007. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the same be studied by the appropriate committee. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table, the guidelines for procurement and disposal by missions abroad. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the same be studied by the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table, the International Development Association Credit of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 8 million for financing the agricultural research and training projects. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take it up.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, as you are all aware, Uganda hosted CHOGM from 23 to 25 November 2007. Since then, speculations and concerns on the use of CHOGM funds have been rife in this House, in the press and the public at large. 

Cabinet has found it essential to request the Auditor-General to conduct a value-for-money audit on CHOGM funds. Indeed at its meeting of 05 December 2007, the Cabinet noted that in fulfillment of Article 163 of the Constitution, the Auditor-General will conduct the financial and value-for-money audit of the funds, which were used to host CHOGM in Uganda.

Of course Cabinet was aware that under Article 163, clause (6) of the Constitution: Subject to clause (7) of this Article, in performing his or her functions, the Auditor-General shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority.

Clause (7) provides that: “The President may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, require the Auditor-General to audit the accounts of any body or organisation referred to in clause (3) of this Article.”

The request by Cabinet to the Auditor-General is to conduct a financial and value-for-money audit of the funds, which were used to host CHOGM and submit his report to Parliament within 30 days from today. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I have received a reply from the Auditor-General and before I lay it on the Table, allow me to read his response: “This is in reference to yours of ADM 601 dated 05 December 2007 on the above subject.

I have noted the contents of the letter and hereby wish to advise that we had anticipated the significance of the CHOGM expenditure as far back as last year and had, therefore, set up a unit within the Office in January 2007 to oversee the audit of those expenditures. I am, therefore, pleased to confirm that the financial audit is already ongoing and I shall be pleased to provide Cabinet with a report of my findings. 

I, however, shall not be able to respond to the Cabinet’s request within 30 days as this time period is far too short for any meaningful work to be undertaken and kindly request for a period of three months because of the following reasons:
1. 	The financial audit that is underway is designed to provide fiduciary assurance on the appropriateness of the expenditure and its compliance with the law. As requested, my audit will also cover value-for-money audits in the broad areas of procurement, civil works and security.

2. 	The value-for-money audit will entail a more detailed scrutiny of the expenditure, which will examine the efficiency and effectiveness of government’s operations in those three broad areas and provide a report or reports on specific issues where the net worth of the expenditure was not met.

3. 	CHOGM utilised Shs 247 billion spread over a period of three financial years 2005 to 2006, 2006 to 2007, 2007 to 2008. The submission of accountability of the funds spent is still being compiled in some instances as the activities have just been finished. The scope of the audit would be principally centered on Shs 247 billion spent, but will also encompass those areas, which were affected by CHOGM activities which did not necessarily receive direct funding. 

4. 	Government entered in various agreements with private companies and monies and/or guarantees were given. My constitutional mandate does not empower me to seek accountability in respect of those financial transactions. Therefore, I shall need to obtain free and unhindered access to various financial aspects of those organisations. Cabinet will need to put pressure to bear on those organisations to avail to my office the necessary information in a timely manner. 

5. 	Complications are likely to arise for some of the CHOGM activities, which up to now have not been completed. Some civil works are still being wound up. 

6. 	A VFM audit of civil works will require the expertise of an engineer to work with our audit team. Since the Ministry of Works was involved in the CHOGM activities, I shall be compelled to source an engineer from the private sector. This will obviously also impact on the timing of my audit. 

	I shall be compiling a request for funding, which will be required for the external expertise and my staff and I am confident that it will receive the necessary consideration in a timely manner to avoid delays in the audit work.” 

It is signed by John F.S. Muwanga, Audit-General. Mr Speaker, allow me to lay it on the Table. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like also to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business for his statement. I think the country expressed itself about the need for full accountability of the activities and expenditures of CHOGM. We note that government has responded to that concern. But I was particularly happy when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister read to this House the letter of the Auditor-General, which reflects the concerns that we expressed last week for a need, first of all, for the CHOGM Committee of Parliament to continue its work because the context of the Auditor-General’s accountability scrutiny is defined by what he can do; and the Auditor-General made it very clear that he cannot compel other people to provide certain things. 

This is where we think Parliament has a crucial role to play, because we have the capacity to demand that certain things be put before us as a way of understanding how things went. Therefore, I welcome on behalf of the Opposition, the initiative of government but particularly the response of the Auditor-General. I do hope that that response, and the statement of the Prime Minister, will not be placed in the way of Parliament when it seeks to use its own way of ensuring that people explain to us in as quick a time as possible what they have done with the money that we gave them. I thank you.

3.01
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Prime Minister for the effort. But the first thing to note is that the Auditor-General does not report to Cabinet, he reports to Parliament. I would advise you to advise him that his findings must be submitted to Parliament. 

Secondly, I am happy that the Auditor-General is mentioning three years. In the past two years only, in 2006/2007, we gave CHOGM Shs 80 billion. In 2007/2008, we gave them Vote-on-Account of Shs 18 billion; a supplementary of Shs 153 billion was given; that is already Shs 251 billion for two years. If you add 2005/2006, it means more money. Again we would tell you, Prime Minister, to tell the Auditor-General that the money he is quoting is less. The money is more than this. Many people are even complaining that they have not been paid. So, it looks like arrears have also accrued as a result. The total bill could be more than that. 

I think the Auditor-General has a point in saying he needs to do this in his own time because he needs to conduct a value-for-money audit but he does not need only the engineer, he will need more people to help him: the procurement sector; PPDA participated, but he will now need experts from outside, not PPDA.

Having said that I think the public is eagerly waiting to hear what value we got from CHOGM. So, with that we can also plead with the Auditor-General that let him reduce the time from three months to two months because it is a bit urgent. Since he started the audit, he had set up an office in January, that means the financial audit is almost finished, what is remaining is to confirm the value-for-money audit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us know where we can stop. The Auditor-General is an independent office, which carries out its work independently. If the Auditor-General has said that the minimum period is three months, we cannot be here in Parliament and say, “do it in two months” that will be invading the independence of the Auditor-General. 

3.03
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I also want to thank the Prime Minister for the statement and I want to thank the Auditor-General for the prompt reply. 

My concern is in the areas where the Auditor-General raised the concern of his accessibility to private organisations because by law, he can access those organisations where government has majority shareholding. In this case, government advanced a lot of money to some companies – and my appeal is to the Prime Minister and government to really prevail over these private companies to co-operate with the Auditor-General. Otherwise, it is going to be extremely difficult for the Auditor-General to access the accounts of these private organisations. It would be good if those undertakings, the agreements and everything, are availed publicly to the Auditor-General so that he can know how to access these accounts. Otherwise, I think the timeframe requested by the Auditor-General should be adequate because I think they know what they are doing. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.05
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I appreciate the statement given by the Prime Minister and the promise given by the Auditor-General. But my concern is that while the Auditor-General has promised a financial audit, there are many other aspects that need to be audited and that we need to consider and for which we must find other ways - like the Leader of the Opposition said - of bringing them to the attention of this House and to the people of Uganda. I am thinking for instance, will the Auditor-General’s report cover the human rights abuse that was meted on people –(Laughter)- it is not a laughing matter because some people are still in hospital –(Laughter)- we need a report. 

Mr Speaker, I say this with sincerity because I know that there are people out there who are maimed; who are listening and are anxiously waiting to hear.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you honourable for giving way. Mr Speaker, I was just wondering. I thought we are talking about money issues as far as the Auditor-General is concerned. So, I really –(Interjection)- I am seeking information. What my honourable sister is talking about maybe should go to the Human Rights Commission or something and not somebody who is going to do an audit specifically for money. I thank you. 

MS KAMYA: I can give information that the people of Lubaga North want a total audit because we sat here for two years discussing CHOGM and CHOGM was not about money and –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I happen to have been a delegate in the Constituent Assembly that made the Constitution and I happen to have also participated here as Speaker in amending the Constitution. When we made the Constitution, we divided the roles of two agencies: there is the Human Rights Commission and there is the Auditor-General. (Applause) The functions of the Auditor-General are well spelt out in the Constitution. Therefore, if there are complaints of human rights violation, this should be addressed to the Human Rights Commission, which has the duty to do that. (Applause)

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your kind advice. I am not actually talking about human rights abuse; I am actually talking about CHOGM. And in talking about CHOGM, I would like an audit of all the aspects including whether the objectives of CHOGM were met, including whether the aspirations of the people of Uganda – you know the people of Kampala were told to stock their shops, to buy eggs, to raise chicken because they were going to sell everything for CHOGM and they did! They invested money in all these –(Laughter)- as far as I know, most of these people sat home, they did not go to the shops; they did not sell anything –(Laughter)- with due respect to the hon. Prime Minister, we would like a total audit of CHOGM particularly in respect to the fact to whether the aspirations of the people of Uganda were met. We would like, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am quite aware that you have been away but this Parliament decided that it has its own committee dealing with CHOGM affairs and the committee was told to give a comprehensive report on all activities including violation of human rights and so forth. So, a committee chaired by, I think hon. Kakoba Onyango, is supposed to deal with all that and report to us. 

MS KAMYA: We shall wait for the committee’s report. 

3.10
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I want to commend government for the urgency with which they have responded to the press cry, public cry and also the cry of this House for a specific audit to be conducted for the funds that were disbursed for CHOGM. But I have two things that I want to seek clarification on. 

The first one, you partially gave counsel on it because the Prime Minister’s statement is dated today and it is dated after he had received a letter from the Auditor-General. Unfortunately, the Prime Minister’s statement is still talking about 30 days when he had actually already received a letter from the Auditor-General talking about three months. So I want to know, if you had not given your counsel, in what wisdom the Prime Minister thought that it could be done in 30 days, like he is giving in his statement when actually the Auditor-General had already written to him saying that it can comfortably be done in three months?

That said and stated, Mr Speaker, we would prefer to know –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Adolf Mwesige): If the honourable member had cared to examine the dates, first of all the Auditor-General’s letter to the Prime Minister refers to the letter of the Prime Minister dated 05 December. So, the Auditor-General is responding to a letter, which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wrote to him, asking him to carry out a financial and value-for-money audit of CHOGM funds. So the initiative of the Prime Minister is not beginning with the statement, which is dated today. The letter of the Auditor-General, which was written on the 10th, is responding to the letter of the Prime Minister dated 05 December 2007. It is very clear and the sequence flows from all these letters.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I do not think the honourable minister’s information has been useful because the Prime Minister’s statement is dated today. He had written it today after receiving all that correspondence, including the letter from the Auditor-General, which clearly stated that he can only do the job in three months. Under what wisdom was the Prime Minister basing upon to say that they would provide a report to Parliament in his statement within 30 days? 

That is my concern, but I think the Rt Hon. Speaker has given wise counsel to say that ordinarily the Auditor-General cannot be directed. I want to find out from the Prime Minister if he had concurred with the Auditor-General to find out if we had specific problems, say financial problems that if Parliament provided further funds this would be done say in a shorter period of time of about one month. That would have a different cause altogether.

Finally, the issue which causes concern is that although we released funds for CHOGM and there are specific task forces that were set up - these funds were released ordinarily like we usually appropriate funds in this House. All the activities that are being conducted fall under respective ministries for which we also have committees of Parliament. 

What surprises me is that the moment CHOGM ended everything stopped yet we have funds we released so late and we would have expected that a lot of work would be continuing even soon after CHOGM had ended. But it seems the moment CHOGM stopped, everything stopped and this is causing a lot of worry as to whether really the CHOGM date was the final date when activities should be taking place. Under such circumstances, Mr Speaker, would it not be wise for our respective committees of Parliament, say the Committee of Works to find out what is happening under the roads’ sector? This would enhance and supplement the efforts of the Auditor-General -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. I listened to the Prime Minister very attentively and there is definitely a recognised need for an engineer to be sourced in order to give advice - a private engineer not one working with Government.  What I have observed with the road works is that shoddy work was done; work was done in haste and these are works that will not last. For the entire process of procurement to be undertaken in order to source an engineer that will befit the purpose for which that engineer will be recruited.  

So the information I want to give is that roads deteriorate; they even deteriorate faster with adverse weather. These paved roads that have been patched with murram; the murram will not be visible by the time the engineer sets out to do the audit. So much more care needs to be taken while conducting especially the value-for-money audit in as far as roads are concerned.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very, Mr Speaker. That information could also have been most useful after the value-for-money audit when actually we find out what the Auditor-General has found out about the exercise. But my concern was those two things: the provision by the Leader of Government Business in his communication and then secondly when CHOGM ended everything ended. Was that the intention because we appropriated money late and we would have expected that some activities would be continuing even after CHOGM had ended, which does not seem to be the case! Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUGISA: Mr Speaker, although the former speaker has told me that I need to give a full submission, I just want to give him information that since I was on the Select Committee on CHOGM, we were told by the Minister of Works that works on these roads would continue until June of next year. Everything is continuing until June of next year when they will hand over to Kampala City Council. So, even if we do a value-for-money audit now, the money has not been used – not all the money has been used yet since work is continuing up to June next year. I expect that they are using the same budget we appropriated to them.  Thank you.

3.18
CAPT. JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank Government for coming up with the report requesting the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit.  I also happen to a Member of the Parliamentary Select Committee on CHOGM and just yesterday we had a meeting and we agreed as a committee that we should ask Government to ask the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit on CHOGM funds.  

Also on what the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo mentioned that the committee should continue with its work, the committee had drawn up a programme and it will continue with its work and give an evaluation report to Parliament. However, what was hindering us most is the issue of the audit report by the Auditor-General. 

On issues concerning the abuse of human rights, hon. Beti Kamya, it is also one of the issues that our committee is going to handle because we also noted that there were those elements of abuse of human rights. So, our committee will look at it again and report back, like the Speaker has mentioned. We shall report to the august House about all those issues.  

Mr Speaker, there are a number of issues that we as the committee will look at. For instance, we have agreed that we shall meet the ministries that were given the money and ask how they have spent the money and also go and see the sites where the money was spent on. Because there are sites that we went to and we were told that it was not Government money that was used on those sites, like Kikorongo.  We went there with Members of Parliament from Kasese like hon. Winnie and others, and we were told that the money was not Government money.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from my colleague is whether that select committee will also look at funds that are rumoured to have originated from without Uganda, and also from NGOs which made some contributions. I want to know whether it is part of that activity because we understand there are some funds, which came from outside and from some NGOs.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, this is a select committee of Parliament and whatever funds we use are from the Parliamentary Commission to enable us carry out the work. Even when we travelled to Kasese, the money had to come from the Parliamentary Commission to enable us travel to Kasese and Jinja. So, we are basically looking at the whole bulk of the CHOGM funds without of course us getting involved in the use of that money. I understood it in that way – money from outside? 

Money from outside - it was very tricky when we went to Kasese because when we got there, managers – the contractors who were there told us straight away that this was not CHOGM money. Even when we went to check the airstrip at Kasese, both the team and the MPs who were there, Winnie and Yokas were told that for Kikorongo where the Queen’s pavilion was that was money from Britain that was sent specifically to work on that area. As for the airstrip, it was money that had been budgeted earlier on in the budget that was being used; it was not CHOGM money. However, we still went ahead to inspect those sights.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait to give your report rather than giving it now prematurely? You were given a mandate; you sit down and bring your report when you have finished rather than reporting in this haphazard manner. 

3.22
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, I am getting worried; I am getting worried because the funds that were appropriated for CHOGM were part of the funds that were appropriated for the financial year and the Auditor-General’s report that will eventually come out will cover funds spent in the whole financial year. 

Two, all the money that went out had accounting officers responsible for it. This is not the first time that the government of Uganda is spending money on activities.

Three, how are we going to start auditing when works are still ongoing? At what point are we going to conclude that CHOGM activities have stopped here? My feeling is that we should stop imagining bad actions prematurely –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The problem is for us to undertake the work of the Auditor-General. Members of Parliament are not auditors. The work of auditing has been undertaken by the Auditor-General; I think he has the knowledge and the staff. The best we can do is to wait for his report and deal with it. We have no way of telling him how he audits and how he does this, I think let us leave it to him.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Mr Speaker and honourable members - more copies are going to be availed to the honourable colleagues in due course - this is a ministerial statement updating Parliament on the status of the various epidemics that are currently ongoing in the country and how we are managing them; moved under rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Health together with development partners and indeed Government as a whole has continued to relentlessly battle the Ebola epidemic in Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole districts and Cholera in Buliisa and Nebbi districts. Investigations and surveillance have also continued for suspected Meningitis in Arua and suspected Hepatitis in Kitgum districts. 

The status of the epidemics is as follows: Ebola; the cumulative cases in Bundibugyo so far are 115; cumulative deaths in Bundibugyo are 29; cumulative cases countrywide are 116; cumulative deaths countrywide are 30; current admissions in Bundibugyo are 29; deaths – yesterday we had only one death; discharges – yesterday were 5; contacts listed are 368; contacts traced and confined or counseled are 187 -(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: I rise on a point of procedure. What the minister is presenting is a very important statement. It is on a very critical issue. According to our Rules of Procedure, when a minister is presenting a statement of this nature, copies are made available to all Members for us to be able to follow all the deliberations very accurately and clearly. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister did a very wonderful job when he presented his own ministerial statement, but we do not have the statement, which the minister is presenting right now. Are we proceeding in the right direction? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the copies for Members?

DR OTAALA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I did point out right from the very beginning that my ministry is just making the rest of the copies [Hon. Members: “No.”] and since this is a very urgent matter I thought that I would start with the presentation and in due course the statement would be availed to the Members.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think hon. Ndeezi has put us on the right track. I do not think that it has been the practice that when a minister comes up to make a ministerial statement, that it is the parent ministry, which produces the copies. Once you come here on the Floor of the House, your papers’ production is the responsibility of Parliament. You should have come up here to say, “I have left it with the Office of the Clerk and it is being photocopied,” or, “It is going to be delivered,” but for you to come up and say that your ministry is still – I think that is just getting a way out! I do not think that it is your responsibility. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker and the honourable members, the matter under discussion is a very serious one and, therefore, for me in spite of the few copies, I think there are major issues that we should listen to. In fact I am surprised that with this Ebola, the death rate is very small. Ideally - (Interjections)- let me tell you scientific things. Ideally the death rate is between 80 to 90 percent. Therefore, I want to appeal that we allow the minister to present this paper because it is very crucial - (Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am surprised at the way His Excellency, the Vice President is proceeding. First of all he said that the matter being presented is very serious and then later he said it is very small. It is not even proper for us to proceed with a debate on a report that has not been substantially presented. I pray that the hon. Minister of State for Primary Healthcare avails us copies so that we can now discuss the gravity of the problem after he has duly presented rather than beginning a premature debate, the way the VP was attempting to. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems you are saying that the rules demand that copies are given and it seems you feel uncomfortable listening without a copy because you may not be able to contribute to the subsequent debate. Then on the other hand, he said it is an important matter, which the country should hear. Therefore, I am suggesting that we stand over this one, when the copies come, the minister will make his statement and then we continue.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT DEMANDING THAT ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CHOGM FUNDS BE PROVIDED AND TABLED BEFORE PARLIAMENT; MOVED UNDER RULE 44 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.33
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament demanding that accountability for CHOGM funds be provided and tabled before Parliament within one month, moved under rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was held in Uganda from 23 to 25 November 2007 very peacefully;

AND WHEREAS the government of Uganda had earlier set up a committee of Government to handle the arrangements involved in the preparation of this meeting;

AWARE THAT the government allocated substantial amounts of public funds into these preparations;

FURTHER AWARE that the public is entitled and require to know how these funds were spent as stipulated under Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

CONSIDERING THAT the values of good governance and Poverty Eradication Plan (PEP) demand that the exercise of political, administrative and managerial authority be exercised transparently, efficiently and effectively to achieve society’s objectives including the welfare of the whole population;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

That the relevant ministries that were charged with the preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) provide the required accountability and table it before this Parliament within one month from this day.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Motion seconded by hon. Ssekikubo.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I welcome the statement of the Prime Minister, which is equally demanding a special audit in these CHOGM funds, which has been moved under Article 163 of the Constitution. However, we as Parliament - I beg that Members support this motion. The Prime Minister has done his part, the Cabinet is doing its part and has demanded what it wants to be done, but we as Parliament need also to put a fingerprint on this demand for accountability.

Article 164(1) of the Constitution reads that: “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department. 
(2)Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.
(3)Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” 

Equally, in our Constitution, when it comes to the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy, on XXVI on accountability, it reads: 
i.	All public offices shall be held in trust for the people.
ii.	All persons placed in positions of leadership and responsibility shall, in their work, be answerable to the people. 
iii.	All lawful measures shall be taken to expose, combat and eradicate corruption and abuse or misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices.”

Mr Speaker, much as the Prime Minister has given the statement demanding accountability from the Auditor-General, directing the Auditor-General or whatever, we as Parliament also have an obligation and duty to the people who elected us; and the Constitution is very clear and the people of Uganda want to know. How do they demand if they want to know? They demand through the voices of Parliament, so we as Parliament representing the people of Uganda are now making a demand. 

I beg that the Prime Minister actually supports this motion. I think the fact that I was very transparent and I gave him a copy five days ago and then today he has come with a statement - I wish this statement had come after I had moved my motion in support of my motion. Without wasting time, since this motion has the blessing of this Parliament and I am sure it is going to pass, without wasting the time of Parliament, I think let us have the question put and we move on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion by hon. Henry Banyenzaki and as a seconder of this motion, I would request to second it with an amendment and I hope my colleague the mover will concur with me when it comes to the resolution that, “The relevant ministries that were charged with the preparation for the CHOGM provide the status of the implementation of CHOGM activities before the recess of this parliamentary session.” Why I am coming up with this is to run in tandem with the statement of the Leader of Government Business. 

Why we have to come up strongly as Parliament is that ours may not necessarily be the books audit of CHOGM funds, but Parliament with our oversight function, we are duty bound to inquire into the expenditures of public funds. This would put us on board. The letter from the Auditor-General was clear that there are those areas in which we have the joint ventures between Government and private investors which may not be captured by the Auditor-General’s report. And that one is incumbent upon Government to concede on that and then come up to inform this Parliament. 

We would be glad to know in what range in terms of the amounts given to CHOGM bearing in mind that even two weeks to the holding of CHOGM, various sectors and ministries were still coming before Parliament to request for more CHOGM funds and within two weeks it is untenable that they could have gone ahead to expend this money. And in case they did not, what happened to their demands? Did they elapse? Did they somehow find the money? What happened? 

There are lingering press reports which are very clear. Individual ministries are being pointed out, ministers are being pointed out that they used excessive and exorbitant amounts of money. There are reports that for levelling Shimoni Grounds, a whopping Shs 6.0 billion was used and they are pointing to Government and the ministers are not responding to that, when given the circumstances, even Shs 20 million would be just enough to level the Shimoni Grounds. On top of that, each exhibiting vendor was asked to pay $240 and I think that one falls in the docket of hon. Hope Mwesigye and she is seated, she does not come out to tell the country what happened. What happened to the Shs 1.0 billion she was requesting for?

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This House is august and we are called honourable members and, therefore, I expect honourable members to behave honourably and talk with facts. I am not aware that hon. Ssekikubo has done an audit on the activities that I was responsible for. I think really, any reasonable person would know that you cannot level Shimoni with Shs 6.0 billion even if you read it in the newspapers. Is hon. Ssekikubo in order to allege that I misappropriated money, that I am involved in issues which he cannot substantiate before this Floor especially so when he has not audited my activities and the Auditor-General’s report is not yet here? Is he in order to permanently and continuously allege things that he cannot substantiate? Mr Speaker, I would demand that he retracts his statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already told you not to assume work that does not belong to you. The work of auditing these accounts and so forth belongs to the Auditor-General. But apparently, if you have evidence on the matter the Auditor-General is going to inquire into, you will go to the Auditor-General and submit or give your evidence. So, let us restrict ourselves to the motion. The motion is, “Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

That the relevant ministries that were charged with the preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) provide the required accountability and table it before this Parliament within one month from this day.” That is the motion. So what will be tabled whether it will contain this – I think we should wait for this. Assuming we adopt this motion, that is when we shall debate the detail. I think that is the proper way of handling this debate.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable member. I listened to what you were saying and you made no specific accusations. But the information I want to give you is a saying that we have in our language. In Acholi, they say “Layom cwinye poto”. That translates to a situation where if a group of men were seated and you say somebody is not sitting properly, the first person to check is the person -(Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague. I will abide with your ruling, Mr Speaker, and I really thank you for your wise ruling. What appears is that probably the persons being named here and there are not sensitive to the anxiety gripping the country. I tell you, there are many vendors who came to exhibit but they went away crying and the money they were paying was never refunded. And when a finger is pointed at a certain responsible person in this country, and she jumps on a point of order, it is disturbing.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, I have told you that if you have relevant evidence on the issue of accountability, please take it to the Auditor-General. The Auditor General is not going to use the Hansard of this House to audit. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I hope that information could be provided to the Auditor -General as well as the CHOGM committee. Mr Speaker, as a seconder of the motion, I feel that we are duty bound. You know when there is no public scrutiny, public officials can extremely go astray as to indulge in primitive accumulation which really, as Parliament, we should guard against. Once these staggering amounts are mentioned, when we have activities that were earmarked, but never attended to and nobody is coming out to give an explanation, is the reason I moved an amendment to enable us be given the status of the CHOGM activities so that if there were any collections, we are told; so that if there are any ongoing activities, we know at what stage they stalled and what is continuing from there so that people can take political responsibility. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise this, with your permission, that as Parliament we are serious on this matter; we cannot allow this because somehow we have to give an explanation to Ugandans. Parliament should not allow the primitive accumulation I have talked about, by some individuals. Parliament should never allow the gluttonous appetite of some members in this country. (Laughter) Parliament should never accompany them because it is as if some people have already cut out their shares in this country. Parliament should not allow this, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, let us not prejudice the report we shall get from those giving accountability. The kind of contribution you are making is the contribution you will make when subsequently, a report comes here. So, you can reserve that kind of contribution to the time when the report will be here. But as of now, you speak to the motion.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very well known and it is on record, as I mentioned earlier, that even within two weeks to the CHOGM activities, ministers – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, Parliament does not have that record; the record is somewhere. You will take that record to the Auditor-General. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, as I summarise, I would like to say that you should have waited for this statement because it was an honest one to the extent that if within two weeks to CHOGM, various sector ministers were still requesting for funds and they appeared before a committee of this very House but mysteriously abandoned the requests and never told us what happened to their initial demands, then that raises further suspicion. 

Mr Speaker, I rest my case by moving – (Interruption)

MS BETI KAMYA: I want to thank the seconder of the motion for giving way. The information I want to give, Mr Speaker, which raises a serious concern, is that there are many people out there who provided services, but have never been paid. When they go to get paid they are told that there is no money. This means that ministers or whoever is responsible for that, will probably come here looking for more money. So, if you are waiting for the Auditor-General to bring his report in three-months time, we may have a problem. I thought that that information would help Mr Sekikubo to finalise his statement. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, as I rest my case, I would like to thank my colleague for that added information. It is important that we do this so that at the end of the day we remain as patriotic Ugandans. Let us take this in good faith. The motion is honest and I would like to see Members, even those implicated or who may fear to be implicated, stand up to support it – (Laughter)- because it is in good faith. It is a universal standard that we must account. Let us be honest; let us be open. If at all you know you are clean, why are you hiding?

Let us receive this motion in good spirit and with clean hands. This is why I move that we amend, in our resolution, that the required ministries that were charged with preparation of Commonwealth Heads Of Government Meeting (CHOGM) provide the status of the implementation of CHOGM activities before elapsing of this session since it will be putting us all on board –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Ssekikubo, the motion which was tabled here by hon. Banyenzaki was supposed to be prepared by two people: himself and you. Now, when you come here with –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this has been due to the ambush that we have received from the Prime Minister and you must agree with us. I beg to second the motion.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my brothers, Banyenzaki and Ssekikubo. Mr Speaker, aware that this House has been demanding, seriously, the accountabilities of the funds that were spent on the CHOGM and the related activities, I just wish to stand here to request that a question be put. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are requesting what? No, you see, there is a provision that I think allows the Speaker, when he sees that there are other people who want to make contributions, to cut them short. I mean disallow them. I think I will allow other contributions.

2.56
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Ssekikubo, for having brought this motion for consideration this afternoon. At the beginning, I could see faces change because they thought that the Prime Minister most probably had attempted to circumvent this motion.

Anyway, from the financial management point of view, the two are not the same. When you talk about accountability, then you must bear in mind that it is not the same as audit. There are very many financial managers in this Parliament who have held those responsibilities and what I would like to say is that this motion, which has come, is quite different from the explanation and the motion which was brought by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. 

I think let us look at the two from a technical point of view. Actually what hon. Banyenzaki’s motion is asking for is not so different from the amendment that hon. Ssekikubo was bringing. With due respect, hon. Ssekikubo, your amendment was going to be frivolous if it was allowed because the two are talking about the same thing. When we talk about accountability, we are only asking the organs and the government agencies that were given money, to come out and tell us how they used it. What did they do with it and how much of the work did they do? That is what accountability is all about. The bit of auditing and whether there was value for money, whether the prices were inflated or not, is not our role as Parliament. I think by citing Article 164, there is no doubt that it is our duty as people who appropriate resources on behalf of the citizens of this country, to see to it that these monies are properly used. It is for that reason that I say, bravo honourables, Henry Banyenzaki and Ssekikubo, for having timely brought this motion.

You remember the time when a supplementary budget of Shs 153.08 billion was demanded of us – [Mr Wopuwa: “Point of clarification”] - I have not okayed your clarification. You see honourable colleagues, whereas I respect my brother, hon. George William Wopuwa having been an accounting officer before and having knowledge in what I am talking about, I do not think that I have said anything that warrants someone to seek clarification on -(Laughter)

The point I was trying to make was that at the time we gave Shs 153.08 billion in a supplementary form for the completion of the work that the CHOGM activities demanded, there was public outcry. This public outcry was not that members of the public did not want to support CHOGM activities; it was about the amount of money that was to be used within a short time.  They feared there would be a problem of proper absorption of that money. I think that they are still out there eagerly waiting to hear how this money, together with what had already been given, was utilised within that short time. So, the point here is that it is our duty and responsibility, as people’s representatives to see to it that monies that we appropriated were properly utilised. 

I would, therefore, wish to appeal to the entire House to support this motion and leave the nitty-gritty of auditing to the Office of the Auditor General. Ours is only to ask that, if we gave you this money for constructing some road, how many Kilometres have you constructed? We gave you this money for beautifying Kampala, how beautiful is Kampala now? (Laughter) We gave you this money for rehabilitating Entebbe Airport, how well prepared are we as a country? Is each and everything in place, regardless of whether prices were exaggerated or not? 

We gave you this money for planting flowers from Entebbe all the way to Kampala so that as CHOGM visitors come, they would be welcomed by a flowery city, have you done it? That is the sort of audit we want. Are the CCTV cameras in place? Are they all working? You know when you go on Entebbe road you will see some machines up, which are supposed to be working on solar systems. We should be told whether such machines are working or not. What about street lights on Jinja-Kampala road roundabouts and those along Entebbe road? Are they working or were they even installed? That is the type of accountability that we are only asking for. Anything on whether what was put there is worth what has been quoted on the receipts will be the work of the Auditor-General’s Chamber. 

So, I appeal to all of us to embrace and support this motion, which has come timely. As we break for Christmas recess, that should be the good message to carry out to our people as a House; we will have done our part and we shall tell our people that yes, we asked those who were given the money to account for it and they have done so. The rest we shall leave for history to judge. I beg to move that we support this motion. (Applause)

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. I want to thank my chief whip for making a point. I would like to say that what we are asking for is, if we gave you money to construct 10 Kilometres, did you construct those 10 Kilometres? That is the first point. The person, who will confirm that they are actually 10 Kilometres, will be the Auditor-General.

Two, let me comment on the issue of managing resources. I saw, when hon. Ssekikubo was talking, one of our colleagues rising up and down. If you touched any money, you should have known that the law does not allow you, as a minister, to touch money. If you did touch it, I would seek that you go to the church in advance and pray – (Laughter) - because the person who handles accountability in any ministry is the accounting officer.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that we had to erase a school called Shimoni because we wanted to build a five-star hotel. I remember one time when I passed there, I saw only some white tents, which I think were removed the following day and I do not know what type of five-star hotel that was because it is now an empty ground. So, there are so many issues that we have to account for and all these have to come into play. As they come to account to us, they will say, “We did this.” Whether we built the hotel and it was blown up by wind or the exhibitors did the work and were not paid and so on, are some of the issues we want to iron out in this accountability. We are looking at all these because we also need to tell the population that surely for now we understand that your money did this and that. We shall wait for the Auditor-General to establish whether what was done is worth. 

Honourable members, you know that at the time a budget of Shs 153 billion, as an addition to what had already been given was passed, the items were already properly itemized. So, we want to confirm whether those itemized items are the ones that were put in place and how much they cost. I am saying this because we are hearing complaints from some members of the public that although we passed that budget here, they have not been paid.

Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General is going to do receipts analysis, accountability and value for money audit. However, our point is to find out whether the budget, which hon. Okecho came here to ask us to approve, was executed to the latter and whether it did what it was asked for; what is the variance? What caused a problem? Was there a shortfall in CHOGM? All this information is important because it will help us tell the public that as much they gave the money, we are lacking something here and that is why this was not good or that is why we got fewer visitors.

Mr Speaker, this issue of informing the public is very important because everybody will have a mind and believe that taxpayer’s money has done something. We only wait for the Auditor -General to confirm the value for it. 

In conclusion, I would like to plead with the Members to help our wanaichi out there. I am saying this because there are many people, especially the exhibitors, who are crying and whom the Auditor-General may not help. Even the Executive may not come to report that people paid money and they were never given the services. So, tell the public, “Please, if you have any complaint about what happened during CHOGM, take it either to IGG or CID” or wherever we believe they will get a redress because we know there are many issues which took place and have not been settled. You recall for some of our new cars, they were stealing equipment for payment because people had not been paid for the work they did!

In that case, I would also plead with all the Members that we support this motion in totality. It is not talking about audit. It is talking about what we have executed and the verification of what has been done will be left to the Auditor-General. I thank you.

 4.07
MS BEATRICE AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, OYAM): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the beginning, when hon. Banyenzaki moved this motion, I was worried that it would conflict with the work of the Auditor-General but having listened, I am standing to support this motion. (Applause) This is because personally I have been really disturbed about the expenditures of CHOGM. It looked as if either as a country we had not planned properly or we had underestimated the cost of the work. That is why we were behaving as if CHOGM was an accident. 

My little experience in Government is whenever people want to misuse funds they cause a crisis. Everything which is done in a crisis you can be sure has some funny intentions. Therefore, I am happy about this motion, and I think that accountability will even help the Auditor-General because once the people responsible have presented their accountability in writing, then it will be easier for the Auditor-General to do his audit and crosscheck whether what they have presented is true or not.

Mr Speaker, as a country, we are very proud that we hosted CHOGM successfully but it becomes unacceptable to hear that the people who provided services are not paid. I am happy about providing the accountability because it is going to force people who took contracts to do certain work and have not completed the work to actually move and complete and so as a country we are even going to gain.

Thirdly, I want to know whether in this CHOGM work there were provisions for ensuring that what has been achieved is maintained. For example, I always drive around the round about that goes past Electoral Commission and branch off to Hotel Africana, and I am already worried because I can see the beauty of CHOGM already going away. It is already over grown and I did not know who is supposed to maintain that round about to make Kampala continue looking beautiful. 

So, let the accountability come to this Parliament, let the Auditor-General do his work so that we as representatives of the people could also be comfortable when we are being asked questions. We shall then be able to explain to people, “This is what was done, this is what happened” and the country is not in a black out. I thank you.

4.11
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to take the opportunity to thank and congratulate His Excellency, the President and Government and NRM for having hosted CHOGM successfully. (Applause) I would also like to put on record my association with the views of the President. If press reports are to be believed, he has come out very clearly and say, “Whoever touched CHOGM money and has not given satisfactory accountability is going to be embarrassed.” I want to associate myself with His Excellency, on that particular matter.

I would also like to associate myself with the NRM manifesto that brought most of us on the government side to Parliament. It clearly states that it will, as Government, have zero tolerance to corruption. I want to associate myself with that one. (Applause)

I would also, therefore, like to associate myself with the movers of this very timely motion. Even me at first I had said, “Hmm is this a good motion?” But when explanations were given, I started realising that I should not let Ugandans down. Ugandans would like to hear us sound very strongly against any form of corruption, whatsoever. And this is the time for us to associate ourselves with one, His Excellency the President, the NRM manifesto and the wanaichi because this is all that they are expecting from us, and of course hon. Banyenzaki. 

By the way, remember this, even when this accountability is brought, let us not be fooled. Normally works contracts, say roads, buildings, you are not supposed to pay a full rate cash. No. There is what they call retention. A certain big percentage of this money should still be there. We should be able to see it as retention money. If it is not there, then you know you have been duped. I just wanted to warn you against that. I, therefore, wish to associate myself with this motion. I support it wholly and I thank you very much.

4.15
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, Sir. As far as Government is concerned, we welcome political and financial accountability - any form of accountability. We have nothing to hide. (Applause) Therefore, let the motion be supported. (Applause) But I would strongly advise hon. Banyenzaki to follow the rules of the game in our party. (Laughter)

4.16
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this moment first of all, to thank the government and congratulate Government for hosting CHOGM successfully. I think you made us proud and I believe credit should go to where it belongs. Where there is success we should be able to recognise it. Mr Prime minister, Mr Vice President, Mr Speaker, you hosted the Queen here. We were very proud as Ugandans. You made us proud! Thank you very much.

I want to begin by putting the record right. I understand The New Vision of today reported that my vehicle was hired and I was never paid. That is wrong. That is a falsehood. It is really wrong. Let me make it clear in the hearts of everybody on the Floor of Parliament that CHOGM does not owe me anything. My vehicle was never hired by CHOGM. Probably I should thank God because I am not in the category of having to account.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support the position of the Prime Minister. Having read his statement, I think that as Ugandans, not just parliamentarians, we are all concerned about accountability. We are also concerned about sustainability as a matter of fact. So much money has gone into doing so much infrastructure, beautification of Kampala and so on, and we are wondering whether this is going to be sustained. Are we going to continue to have lights on the streets of Kampala or after some time we will go back into the darkness? So, accountability indeed for money, value for money, we all want to know that. 

But what the Prime Minister has said is very important. I think it is satisfactory. We should give him and his Government time since he is only saying that within a month, the Auditor-General should have given a report. I think the main concern is to know the value for our money and since the Prime Minister is not opposing what we want, we should give them time. Basing on what the Auditor-General says, then we can take further action. Otherwise, we seem to be wanting to take up responsibilities of the Auditor-General before he does his work.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker, that we support the Prime Minister’s position.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, this accountability which you want to be given, should it be a verified accountability or somebody should just sit in his office and say, “Yes, you gave me money for roads. I made 10 kms, I did this and this and the other.” I think let us be clear in our minds. When you are asking for accountability, do you just want a list of activities carried out by the permanent secretaries to be submitted to you or you want the same to be verified? Because if they are not verified lies will be told to you. Supposing somebody says I made 10 kms when he was supposed to make tarmac and the 10 kms are murram, shouldn’t you have somebody to verify? Supposing the money was used without proper authorization and he says, “Well I used it.” These are some of the questions which must be clear in our minds when we are dealing with this motion.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In dealing with a situation where there are possibilities of people taking advantage of their offices and responsibilities - and I believe that you as lawyers know better. When they grill you in courts, they will ask you many questions which you think are even irrelevant and out of those questions, they begin to define what you are doing, where your mind is and at the end of the day they pin you down. So, even this Parliament asking for this, some where something will not add up, and when it does not add up then I think we have got what we want. I think that is the purpose of what the motion is about.

4.22
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, I really support this motion, but I wanted to also have a clear mind of what we are asking for. Accountabilities of public funds are vested in various organs of Government and in many of these cases we have accounting officers. Now, Parliament is asking for accountability. These also involve accountability documents. How are we, as Members of Parliament, going to receive this accountability? Are we asking individual ministers to come here and explain how they spent the money or we are asking accounting officers to look at verified documents? How do we separate the role of the Auditor-General from the accountability process? As Parliament, we account to the people and that is why we have the Committee Public on Accounts. We as Members as Parliament, are we competent to look through raw data and come out and say this is the position?

In addition, we have put in place a select committee on CHOGM. How are we separating the select committee of CHOGM and the accountability we are demanding for?

Mr Speaker, we have been talking about ongoing works and then hon. Ssekikubo was talking about the status report. How do we relate the status report and the accountability and the verification by the Auditor-General? These are few things that I would like to be explained so that when I vote, I know that I will be able to get results instead of taking a position where it is difficult to implement. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for giving way. Honourable, what you are asking is legitimate but when you look at the Constitution, it is very clear. When you are talking about matters of auditing under Article 163, there it talks about the Auditor-General or the auditing function. But under Article 64, there is a clear separation of auditing and accountability and Article 164(3) is very clear, it says: “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” So we are monitoring; we want to monitor in case there is some work that is ongoing. It is like we are doing stock taking. Auditing and accountability are two separate issues and the motion is also clear, and I thank the Prime Minister for supporting my motion. The two: auditing and accountability functions are what we have always been doing as Parliament while we are playing our oversight role.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the motion moved by hon. Banyenzaki, which requires Parliament - just to be more specific his resolution says: “Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: That the relevant ministries that were charged with the preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) provide the required accountability and table it before this Parliament within one month from today.”

And when you read the Prime Minister’s statement on the financial and value-for-money audit for funds used to host CHOGM, the Prime Minister informs this House that the request by Cabinet to the Auditor-General is for the Auditor-General to conduct a financial and value-for-money audit for the funds, which were used to host CHOGM, and submit his report to Parliament within 30 days from today. The most important point is that the Prime Minister’s statement provides a technical and viable method that would provide this House a more accurate and more focused manner of accounting for the money that was spent -(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, we have many items on Parliament’s Order Paper. Members expressed themselves on the motion; then the Leader of Government Business, who represents all the ministers in this House, stood up and said that government has no objection. Is it procedurally right for a minister of state –(Laughter)- to stand up after the Prime Minister has already made pronouncement on behalf of government, to suggest that he has a better idea than what the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am not in position to rule on that because he has not pronounced his position; he was developing an argument and, therefore, you had to leave him to conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition was too anxious and tried to predict what my conclusions were going to be. You know sometimes to be a leader in the Opposition; you may be tempted to think that what I am going to say is going to be opposed to yours, but not really. What I am going to say to you, is to be factual; is to be objective; is to be analytical and to help the country as well as this House to deal with facts. If this House wants accountability based on facts, the position of the Prime Minister is superior because if you ask a ministry to come here and give what was provided, the validity of that statement is not authenticated as it would have been if you took the Prime Minister’s position. That is really the point I want to make. It is in your interest.  

I also appreciate the Prime Minister’s position that in a multi-party political system, I think you will need to guide the House. In a multi-party political system where you have the Government side and the Opposition side, procedurally a motion that requires an Executive to account should come from the Opposition -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Prof. Kamuntu, a former Member of UPC that lost power because of mismanagement of this country -(Laughter) is he in order to say that when I am moving a motion as a Member of Parliament, when I am doing my job as a Member of Parliament as prescribed by the oath I took under the Constitution that my mind should be subjected to any person or authority?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are entitled to move your motion and the motion is being received. You are entitled to move a motion. (Applause) 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I am mentioning something because I know it is very fundamental and I am really not playing polemics because I would not ask hon. Banyenzaki what political party he belonged to before NRM -[Hon. Member: “He was not born yet.”] If he was not born yet that is a different story, but I would not ask because by definition the Movement is all embracing and that is the uniqueness of the party; and I can challenge that anybody who participated in the 1980 general elections must not have belonged to the NRM. So, wherever he belonged would not disqualify him from participating in these matters. But the point I want to put across is a matter that makes systems work. If you are going to move from a Movement system of governance, where individual merit is the criteria for leadership and debate, and you move into a multi-party system where government is for a party -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as far as I am concerned, any Member of Parliament here is free to move his motion. (Applause) You debate it, you support it or you reject it. And a motion was competently moved by a Member. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. I accept your advice, Mr Speaker. 

In conclusion, I want to submit to the House that in a way, the ministerial statement on financial and value-for-money audit of funds used to host CHOGM, if it had been the focus of the debate in the House, it would achieve the same objective as the objective tabled by the honourable member. Thank you very much.

4.35
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sometimes get disturbed when things, which are straight forward are brought to the Floor of Parliament then you see a section of people trying to oppose or even trying to pull faces. We all vowed to fight corruption and we are all accountable to our acts. I am here to support the motion. It is only a section of people who could have indulged themselves into the implementation of some activities in CHOGM that seem to be very unhappy with this motion. 

Like it or not, we cannot entirely rely on the Auditor-General’s report. We are accountable and we make our accountability here. We said transparency and accountability. Why do we run away from it? We must all be happy as we go for Christmas, when we have properly cleared the air. Otherwise, a section of Ugandans will look at us as not doing enough about certain things that are not right especially on CHOGM. This accountability is not going to the nitty-gritty of the figures; and the fact that this was brought by somebody on the Government side does not mean that people from the Government side should be unhappy that he brought it up. There are certain things, which are brought in this House which all of us can support wholesale because we want to help our people, we want good governance, we want accountability and transparency. Why do we fear being transparent and accountable if we are doing the right thing?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Amuge for giving way. Very serious nationalism has been demonstrated here by the Rt hon. Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business. He stood on the Floor of the House and said that after all accountability and seeking accountability is the responsibility of this House. It is by the Constitution. And because of that he said nobody, not even the NRM Government, is against seeking accountability. So he stood up and supported the motion by hon. Banyenzaki.

The honourable member from the Opposition is saying the government side Members are feeling jittery when our commander actually the Leader of Government Business has supported the motion. (Applause) Who exactly does she think is jittery about the motion when the Prime Minister has supported it?

HON. MEMBERS: Motion

MS AMUGE: Then motion - otherwise, hon. Kamuntu was not happy with the mover of the motion. We must all be happy with the mover of the motion. Like it or not, there are people who are not happy with this motion. Let us go to vote. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I should put the question [Hon. Members: “Yes”] The gist of this motion is that the relevant ministries that were charged with preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting provide the required accountability and table it before this Parliament within one month from this date. So what we need is that they bring their accountability here within one month. That is the motion. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

UPDATING PARLIAMENT ON THE STATUS OF EPIDEMIC MANAGEMENT IN THE COUNTRY

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this second opportunity. I have provided enough copies for the honourable members of this august House and they are being circulated.

This statement is moved under rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure and I would like honourable colleagues to be informed that the Ministry of Health together with the development partners and indeed government as a whole has continued to relentlessly battle the Ebola epidemic in Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole districts and Cholera in Buliisa and Nebbi districts. Investigations and surveillance have also continued for suspected Meningitis in Arua and suspected Hepatitis in Kitgum districts.

I would like to give the status of the epidemics as of today.
a) Ebola: the cumulative cases in Bundibugyo district so far stands at 115. Cumulative deaths in Bundibugyo stand at 29. Cumulative cases countrywide stand at 116. Cumulative deaths countrywide stand at 30.

THE SPEAKER: I would not like to interrupt you but when you say 116, the other one 115, therefore, the other parts of the country have got one case?

DR OTAALA: That is what I mean, Mr Speaker. That one case is the case of the doctor who died here at Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: But he was brought here.

MR OTAALA: Yes, but we record where the death occurred. The current admissions stand at 29. Death yesterday was one case. Discharges yesterday were five; contacts - these are various people who have got in contact with the suspected cases or with the victims - so far 368 and we have managed to trace these contacts. We have traced 187 of these contacts.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to point out that it is important to note that one of the recent deaths was that of another health worker, an ophthalmic clinical officer, and this now brings the total number of health workers who have died to five. 

On the issue of cholera in Buliisa, the district health team has already put in place treatment camps that are running well. The ministry is reinforcing the efforts of the district health team by providing Water-Guard tablets for each and every household in the affected areas. 

As a long-term measure, my ministry is working hand in hand with the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that the communities at the landing sites are provided with clean drinking water and have pit latrines at every household. The district has asked us for Shs.20 million, which is being processed right now. This is part of the Shs.6 billion that government approved recently. So far, 162 cases have been seen and treated and six deaths registered in Buliisa. 

Plague in Nebbi: Mr Speaker and honourable members, 39 cases with five deaths have so far been registered. We are focusing on hygiene in homes to eliminate fleas, but also on campaigns against cultures that subject women to sleeping on the floor. 

On the issue of Cholera in Nebbi, we are following similar actions as in Buliisa. So far, 306 cases have been registered with four deaths. 

Suspected meningitis in Arua District: Mr Speaker, surveillance has continued. Of the 225 suspected cases, with 25 deaths, none was confirmed to be meningitis. All suspected cases who will be reporting to the health facilities will be investigated by laboratory methods at the public health laboratory in Arua.

Mr Speaker, on suspected hepatitis in Madi-Opei Sub-county in Kitgum District, four new cases have been registered in addition to the 32 earlier on reported. Two cases have so far died and investigations are continuing to confirm the specific type of Hepatitis - A, B or C.

I would like to report that my ministry and government at large have taken a number of actions since these epidemics broke out. The Ministry of Health reactivated the national taskforces for all the above diseases, and they meet daily to coordinate activities at national level. Similar structures with similar functions have been formed at the district levels and indeed the district epidemic preparedness taskforces have been reactivated in all districts in the country. The various sub-committees of surveillance, logistics, communication, case management and coordination are all on the ground and fully functional. 

Secondly, the ministry made an appeal to government for Shs.6 billion to go towards fighting these epidemics. Honourable colleagues, I must most heartily thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who chaired the Cabinet on 7 December this year, and indeed the entire Cabinet for approving this emergency fund to fight the epidemics. 

In the same breath, I thank the honourable Members of Parliament from the affected areas for the spirit of collaboration they have exhibited in fighting these common problems. Indeed when I went to tour some of these areas, I moved with some of them. 

I want to point out that the Shs.6 billion which Cabinet approved will be used for the following major activities, in addition to the others elaborated in the work plan by my ministry: 

•	This money will be used for procurement of personal protective equipment so that the health workers are well protected and they are confident to handle the patients.

•	We shall be paying allowances to health workers handling the Ebola patients, according to their cadreship. 

•	We shall be passing out radio messages and have community sensitisation. Social mobilisation, public information and public relations will be done with this money.

•	Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, active surveillance and case search within the communities will also be carried out with this money. 

•	Contacts tracing and confinement of the various contacts at their homes is a very important aspect of breaking the transmission chain, and part of the money will go towards this. 

•	Procurement of other health supplies and drugs; sensitisation of local leaders on Ebola management, precaution and symptoms; investigations; collecting and transportation of specimens to the newly established laboratory at the Uganda Virus Research Institute, Entebbe; field visits by staff from the Ministry Of Health; development, printing and distribution of information, education and communication materials, treatment and case management guidelines and infection control will be done. 

•	Establishment of isolation units will be done. Management, monitoring and coordination of activities; international coordination; burial expenses and interim support to the affected families; surveillance; investigation; community mobilisation; case management; drug procurement; sanitation promotion for cholera, plague, hepatitis and meningitis among other activities will be done. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the ministry is further implementing the various directives by Cabinet namely, minimising or discouraging public gatherings in the affected districts of Bundibugyo, Kasese, Kabarole, Kyenjonjo, Kibaale and Hoima, but also avoiding gatherings that bring people from all over the country. In Kampala here, for example, some people have asked us to host major conferences that are meant to bring people from across the country and we have disallowed them for those obvious reasons. 

We are also working hand in hand with the Ministry Of Public Service and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to start the process of immediate compensation of the members from families of the deceased health workers and those who were affected by the epidemics in accordance with the law, that is, the Workman’s Compensation Act of 2000.

We are also giving official briefing to the media on a daily basis. We shall be briefing Parliament and Cabinet on a weekly basis in order to avoid misinformation that may alarm the public due to an information gap. We are further working hand in hand with the Ministry of Local Government to establish pit latrines at the landing sites and indeed all households across the country in accordance with the Kampala Declaration on Sanitation of 1997. 

We are working hand in hand with the Ministry of Water and Environment to provide clean drinking water for the people at the landing sites. We are discouraging negative cultures that cause women to sleep on the floor thereby predisposing them to plague.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have so far made some major achievements, which include the following: 
We have provided adequate personal protective equipment to the districts of Bundibugyo and her neighbours. So far, we are scaling up investigative kits - these are also personal protective equipment - to all regional referral hospitals and districts where alert cases have been reported. 

A laboratory has been established at the Uganda Virus Research Institute, Entebbe, to provide accurate diagnosis of cases within 24 hours. It has so far analysed 50 samples and it will be commissioned on Thursday 13 December at 2.00 p.m. 

We have established hotlines in the Ministry of Health to facilitate information flow and response. These numbers are as indicated: 0772587565, 0414-345108. We are also working hand in hand with the police, and the police numbers are 111 or 999. If you ring the police control room, you will definitely get someone who can urgently respond to you. 

We have established a central alert response team to respond to cases of Ebola nationwide. A helicopter from the UPDF is in place for this task, Mr Speaker and honourable members. 

The isolation unit in Mulago has been set aside to handle cases from Kampala and the neighbouring districts. The isolation units in Bundibugyo Hospital and Kikyo Health Centre are fully functional.

Additional logistics have been procured and are being supplied to the districts. Social mobilisation has been strengthened through radio, television, ICT materials, film vans and meetings.

In conclusion, I would like to allay the fears of honourable members and the public; soon the epidemic will be brought to control, since we have now established a system to break the transmission chain. Contact tracing and confinement of all contacts is very important in this regard. Barrier nursing will further go a long way in protecting the health workers and break the transmission chains. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. 

4.55
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank government for the quick response they gave to my district, especially after knowing that there was an Ebola outbreak - (Interjection) - Yes, I know that they knew about Ebola on the 27th, and that was the response I got and I started looking for help immediately after the 27th. Prime Minister and hon. Otaala, I want to thank you on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo for the work so far done. 

However, I have this to say; we have received all the assistance but we have a problem of the health workers who are managing other ailments in the other wards; they feel that they are not protected. Also, the patients feel that if they are attended to by people who are not protecting themselves, then they are not protected. So, you will find that there is fear among the general public of health workers and fear from the health workers of the patients. As we speak, most of the hospitals have no patients. They have taken off because the nurses and other health workers have also taken off; they do not want to risk their lives. In any case, the workers have not been given risk allowance as is done for the workers in the isolation units. So, they fear for their dear lives. 

I thank you for saying that you will compensate these people immediately. In fact, one of the fears they have is that you have never finished the compensation of the Ebola victims in the north. So, they think that if they put their lives in danger, or if they die, they may never be compensated. However, if you say that you are going to compensate the ones who died, we need this money before the opening of the schools. The children of these women and men have been in very good schools ranging from university to private secondary schools. I would not want to see a child of Dr Yona going to a third-world school when he has been struggling to take his child to a first-world school. So, I would like to see this money immediately, by February next year when the schools are opening. It will be painful to see these children moving up and down looking for school fees, including from us the Members of Parliament. 

I also want to request the ministry to provide disinfectants to taxis and buses that are travelling to these areas. If somebody is a businessman, he may not care whether the driver is guarded or not, but let us be mindful of the lives of the people of this country. If you could also provide protective gear and disinfectants to the public, especially the drivers and the conductors, and also disinfect the buses and taxis before they settle in, that would be very good. 

We also have a problem of food in the district. I know that the World Food Programme has gone down there, but they are attending to only those families that have lost their dear ones and are confined. They are going to provide food only to those people. I would like to call upon the minister to draw up a programme through the Prime Minister’s office because most of the people are now confined. Bundibugyo District has been depending on food from Congo and Fort Portal because we are now growing cash crops. A lot of the land is covered by cocoa and they sell the cocoa to buy food. So, if the people are over confined, we shall find our people malnourished and sick.

The other problem is that Stanbic Bank has closed. Now, if Stanbic closes yet somebody has got their money in there, what do you expect that person to do? That person is going to travel to Fort Portal or to Kampala to look for his money. So, I would like to request the Ministry of Finance to talk to Stanbic Bank. At least they should find a way of making sure that these people are served because it is going to turn into a big crisis. People are saying that those from Bundibugyo should not move anyhow, but they will move because their money is held somewhere. 

Lastly, I would like to call upon the ministry to equip all health centres and units - health centre IVs, the district hospitals, health centre IIIs - in all affected areas with protective gear. If we continue giving only Kikyo and Bundibugyo Hospital, we will not have done much and everybody will abandon the hospitals. In fact, most of the health workers have abandoned the hospitals. I recall that at the beginning of the epidemic, a woman died in Bundibugyo Hospital as she was trying to deliver and there was nobody to help her. She delivered the first twin and it died and there was still nobody to help her with the next twin. She died with her baby in the uterus. So, you can imagine that pain because of the fear of the health workers. Can we please help these health workers to serve the people? I would like to again thank the ministry for the work they have done. Thank you. 

5.03
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for this ministerial statement, but I have my reservations on this issue of Ebola. It is true money has been allocated to fight Ebola, to the tune of Shs.6 billion, but with our culture of financial management in this country, if we are not serious with this money it is likely to be an Ebola bonanza. I pray that the area Members of Parliament from Bundibugyo be part and parcel of the committee that will handle this money and see how it is being disbursed.  

Today a team from World Health Organisation and some doctors like Dr Okware, plus senior reporters of the leading newspapers in this country left for Bundibugyo to give health technical advice to the support staff on the ground. I am reliably informed they touched down at around midday.  

Mr Speaker, Ebola broke out in this country before CHOGM. I am very disappointed that government failed to alert Ugandans on this issue simply because they feared the visitors would be scared and CHOGM would be shifted. If Ebola tests were taken to Atlanta and the results came on 27th, that means the specimen were flown before 27th of November. This means the Ebola outbreak was here before CHOGM, and that is why the Queen’s trip to Kasese was cancelled. It would have been very disastrous if the Queen had contracted Ebola in Kasese; the government was going to blame Kibanzanga because – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, Dr Baryomunsi explained the complication of the Kasese issue. Maybe you were not present, but he did.  

MR GODI: Mr Speaker, you know that sometimes what comes from some of these ministers is not the utmost truth. I want to challenge the authenticity of this document.  (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I always restrain myself to move points of order, but you have told the honourable member that I gave an explanation as a professional doctor, and he is insisting that explanations coming from this side are always false. That is the impression he is creating in the House. Is he in order to discredit the information, which was provided to this House and was accepted when he was not around? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No. I think his problem was that he was not present when you gave the explanation, but I have told him that you did.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That day when Dr Chris was giving his explanation, I restrained myself from responding and today I intend actually to respond to what he said. If some of the things that he said are true, we should see greater action on Ebola, but what I saw was quarter a page from the Minister.  

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, this is the third time you are debating this matter. I think we should have only supplementary questions. We are not going to have a full debate. This is the same subject we have been dealing with.  

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I want to bring up this matter so that the rest of the debate can go on. There are two elements that Dr Baryomunsi brought out: One was that this disease is not very virulent and second is the fact that infection started sometime in August. 

Contrary to what he said, a disease that behaves like that and which is not very virulent is one that will creep on you because of its lack of visibility. Therefore, in the case of Ebola, if between August and the time that we started taking precautions we had not known that it was Ebola, it means that this disease has moved beyond the 200 and above people that have been followed up. Because it is not virulent, it is not going to show its head in such a way as to cause you to panic, and sure enough you now see even in the Minister’s statement that there is no sign of panic. 

I am just saying this professionally. Bringing diseases that are not very virulent under control is very difficult. Anybody who has done epidemiology will know that, and therefore this is important. The Minister talked about the 300 people who have been traced; where did they go? In mentioning that, you are actually alerting people to the fact that potentially, the disease could have been carried to those places. Therefore, there is need to build caution to ensure that you contain it. The statement, however, does not even mention which districts these people went to and you are just sitting and relaxing. I can assure you that Ebola can be with us for a very long time if we handle it this way. 

That time I was not sure which date it was identified and what measures were being taken to trace those who may have the infection. It is on that principle that Dr Baryomunsi, in his article yesterday, made the country feel that we are safe. I am just saying that we should be more alert to the reality of that disease by virtue of its characteristics in terms of epidemiology. That is what I wanted to say. Thank you.

MR GODI: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I respect the views of Dr Chris Baryomunsi, whom I hold in high esteem. As one of the panellists in Daily Monitor and part of the panel of experts, he knows that when the samples were taken to Atlanta and they came back on 27th, even the experts who carried the samples from the Centre for Disease Control said they worked on those things in only 48 hours and they were able to come up with results. But what was your explanation on KFM last week, if you are to say that I am disputing what you said?  Thank you.

5.11
MR WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement he has made. Mine will be very short; I would like to make some observations. 

The Minister has said that money has been approved but he has not told us whether that money has been released. 

The second observation that I would like to make is that Ebola is not a new epidemic in Uganda; we had an outbreak in 2000/2001. If we wanted to learn, we would have learnt. Therefore, I am happy to note that the government has established a laboratory at Uganda Virus Research Institute, which can make a diagnosis within 24 hours. Honourable minister, this should have been done in 2001 and these facilities should have been there.

The other observation I would like to make is that we were told that some of these patients had fever of unknown origin. In medical training, fevers of unknown origin are a very serious issue if they continue for days. That should have caused alarm to the medical personnel. Unfortunately, those medical personnel are no longer here so we are not going to get the facts. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that if government is really serious about the health of the people of Uganda, appropriate facilities should be put in place whenever we learn from something. The question of August to November would not have arisen if there was a laboratory put in place in 2000/2001. It would have been an issue of 24 hours, but because of laxity this did not happen. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.14
MR DAVID RINGE CHAN (UPC, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for bringing this report. However, there was a point which I could not swallow. I am an honourable member in this House, I am an Alur by tribe, I enjoy the comfort of my bed with my dear wife, and I feel that to say that my culture prohibits ladies from enjoying the comfort of beds was not based on research. 

I want this record to be set very clear; the honourable minister did not state that the people who are being affected by plague are women. He did not say that. It is assumed that the population comprises of both males and females. In that case, to zero it down and say that it is because of sleeping on the ground and that this is the culture of the Alur - I think I have a kingdom in my tribe and that is an insult to my kingdom. I do not want an honourable minister to say such a thing. If he does, maybe that is the policy of the government but we are not supposed to do that. 

My people are honourable people who should be respected. It is only poverty that is leading my people to sleep on the ground. I think the government must go further to uplift the standard of living in Nebbi so that the people of Nebbi begin sleeping on beds. I know that a good number of families are sleeping on the ground, but it is not necessarily women who do that as a result of culture. I could not stomach this and I felt I should really come up and speak out. 

Poverty is still striking us hard. I know some families are sleeping on the ground but it is males, females and children as well. They are all sleeping in grass-thatched houses. In last year’s speech, his Excellency the President said that he was going to provide iron sheets for some of these people down there, but I did not see the iron sheets and I am still hoping that one day the iron sheets will be provided and the grass business will be eradicated. 

I think that the issue of plague is not a matter of tradition. The Ministry of Health must do something and must do it fast. Plague has been affecting my people, and it is true that a good number of good citizens who would have become presidents in future have died as a result of plague. My dear minister should not just play around with this sickness. Also, he should withdraw that statement that we are suffering because of our bad culture. This is wrong and I want the record to be set right. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are we really going to take all this time? Let us now go to Kitgum; let us distribute. What I can say about this poverty issue concerning beds, if it is not culture, is that there were some people many years ago who used to sleep on beds called komerera. Komerera had nothing to do with money; you just go and get two stumps of wood, put them together and you make a bed. It does not cost you any money.

MR RINGE CHAN: In the past people used to make those beds with poles, but they were made in such a way that they were very narrow because they did not have the skill of making them wide; there were no mazongotos in that place. In that case, you could not share it with somebody as it would break and people feared this. It was not a culture. Thank you very much.

5.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to talk about this subject. I would like to thank the honourable minister for bringing the report to the House. I would like also to say that we stand and share the pain of our brothers and sisters in Bundibugyo and elsewhere who are suffering as a result of the outbreak of the epidemic in the country. 

Mr Speaker, last Tuesday I drew the attention of this House to a strange epidemic in the district of Kitgum, in the sub-county of Madi-Opei. I was happy that immediately I made my statement here, the honourable minister of state approached me that evening and invited me to go for on-spot assessment of the situation the next day. When we reached Kitgum District, after visiting other areas like Buliisa, Panyimur, Arua, the report that we got from the technical team about the epidemic was that there is nothing serious on the ground and things are under control. 

However, honourable colleagues, I had to go back to the district on Saturday and I went back to Madi-Opei to follow up on the problem. The Minister has given his data of what is on the ground as far as the epidemic outbreak in Madi-Opei is concerned. However, when I reached there, I made sure that the clinical officer in charge, who gave me the data contradicting our earlier report which was given to the Minister, talked to the Minister directly. As I talk, 53 cases are reported. 

Early in the morning as I was driving back to Kampala, I got a report that late last evening they were three cases admitted. A few minutes ago, I got another report from the clinical officer that three more people have been admitted and we have a total of 53 cases reported. Three are dead. While I was in Madi-Opei, I happened to go and console the family of one of the victims called Winnie Adong. She was an expectant mother and she died with her child. As I talked to the mourners, I could identify two of them. The epidemic in Madi-Opei has symptoms that include yellow eyes, yellow urine, severe headache, nose bleeding, lack of appetite, heartburn and general weakness. These- (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, after listening to this testimony from my honourable colleague and also learning from the ministry and government that those who have been in contact with suspicious cases should be put in confinement, we have a Member of Parliament coming straight from her constituency, after identifying those symptoms, right into the House; are we really safe, Mr Speaker? I would really want an explanation from the Minister as to whether it was right to allow our honourable colleague to jet straight into the House.

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for your concern. I think that you have just pre-empted my conclusion. Allow me to make my submission and conclude with what my honourable colleague is saying. 

Mr Speaker, when we looked at the confined cases in Madi-Opei, we were given information that two of the cases came from Southern Sudan from an area called Teretenya and that there was also one case with chicken-pox in isolation. When I asked the clinical officer what they were treating, because earlier we had read in the papers that there was yellow fever in Kitgum District, according to her the tests which were carried out did not prove this. Also, Hepatitis E, which was tested, proved negative. This made me fear because as I speak, we do not know exactly what is affecting the people of Madi-Opei; and if we do not know, then are we really tackling it or are we safe? 

Secondly, when I moved from Madi-Opei, I checked on the hospitals. We have two main hospitals in the district, the missionary hospital and the government hospital. I was also informed that as a district there is another problem of river blindness, which is in Akwang Sub-county and is affecting the children. As soon as they start eating, they all fall sleep. It is very severe among the population in Akwang and Mucwini and is spreading among the children. This is another epidemic, which is going on. 

When we looked around the Madi-Opei Health Centre IV, we were also told that the hospital is supposed to have a doctor and a house was provided for a doctor three years ago, but the House I saw was empty. The health centre has five staff running it and they are on alert for any other problems on top of what they are already handling. So, they also have a problem of staffing. I was also told that as a district there are no anti-TB combination drugs for children and on top of all this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are expanding this.

MS ANYWAR: I am winding up. I found that with what is happening across the country, people are at a high risk. Therefore, I would like government to quickly send a competent technical team to establish exactly what this epidemic in Madi-Opei is. The Minister reported that the suspected is not yet confirmed yet people are moving around. 

I also take this opportunity to commend Kampala City Council for the measures they have taken against Ebola. However, we are leaders, and my colleague has already alluded to this; how is Parliament responding to this especially when Members of Parliament move from here to their constituencies and back? Parliament should take immediate precautions, otherwise when we put the whole country on alert when we Members of Parliament are not taking serious measures, we will be shooting ourselves in the foot.

Lastly, I would like to ask the honourable Minister: “What are you doing about creating alertness in the schools where our children are studying, for instance Makerere University and Kyambogo?” As I talk, I drove the whole night and reached here in the morning because one of my family members, my son who is in Makerere, rang me and said he was feeling uncomfortable. I am still trying to find out what is happening. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will allow our area Member of Parliament to tell us the situation in Kampala. We cannot continue with this debate; this statement was brought to give us an update of the situation and this is going to continue on a daily basis. He has given us contact numbers, so we cannot really go on with this. Let us hear from the area Member of Parliament. 

5.30
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some brief comments on this. I also add my voice to those who have thanked the Minister for this statement, but I do find inaccuracies here. 

In the opening statement on Page 1, the Minister talks of the outbreak of Ebola in Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole districts. However, when you come to the figures given, we have all the 115 cases from one district, and that is Bundibugyo. So, how many cases do we have from these other affected areas that have been listed?

Secondly, the figures do not add up. When you see the cumulative deaths countrywide, they are 30 and the current admissions are 29; that adds up the cases to 59. I wish to know the position of the rest because if the cumulative deaths are 30 and the admissions are 29, and there are only five discharges, where are the others? What happened to them?

Mr Speaker, coming back to Kampala, on Page 3, the third last paragraph about the implementations of the directives of Cabinet, there is item 3 (a) which says: “One of the measures taken is to minimise and discourage public gatherings in the affected districts of Bundibugyo, Kasese, Kabarole, Kyenjojo, Kibaale and Hoima, but also to avoid any gatherings that bring people from all over the country.” I do not see Kampala listed and I am wondering why. Kampala is cosmopolitan and people from all walks of life converge here in Kampala. 

I am worried; if you look at all these cases of epidemics that we are talking about in those districts, such as Ebola, meningitis, cholera, hepatitis and all these others affecting a number of districts, no mention is made of action being taken in Kampala, yet I see buses ferrying people from all over these districts to Kampala. When they reach Kampala, many of them dash to slums like Kisenyi and Katanga and they take ajon and malwa in big groups, and you will find many of them sharing a pot. So, what action is being taken about such things because these are highly contagious diseases, especially Ebola and cholera? 

Probably, we could take action like stopping the practice of movement of people from these affected areas. I am sorry to say so, but ferrying people en masse in buses to come here to Kampala and they spread all over –(Interjections)- Serious action should be taken otherwise, we shall find ourselves getting affected by these epidemics. 

Finally, about this ministerial statement, no explanation at all has been given as to the source of this epidemic. Where did it come from?

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is not the first statement on the subject; this is the third statement. It is a situational report. 

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the member from Buliisa can say something; otherwise, I am closing this debate. 

5.35
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): This does not seem to be my height; the new technology is not fit for tall people like me. Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. Honourable colleagues, I would like first of all, to thank the Minister for the response to this epidemic, which has befallen the country, and our sympathies to the families who have lost their dear ones. 

The believers also say that on top of the medical attention, we get epidemics after we have sinned, and I am happy that the Anglican Archbishop is conducting a prayer which I will be joining shortly. I hope we also use that angle of Devine intervention to that problem.

I would like to specifically talk about the cholera incidence in the Lake Albert areas in general and Buliisa in particular. We are sharing a natural resource called Lake Albert where there are a lot of migrant communities from Bundibugyo, Kibaale, Hoima, Buliisa up to Nebbi. We all share this resource. 

Fishing is also slightly a nomadic activity and because these people are migrants, it is very difficult to control their hygiene. That is why the other day when I heard the Minister of Local Government threatening our chairpersons and the CAOs for action, I thought he was not well informed. I have since shared information with him that these are not native communities; these are migrant communities who do not even pay taxes to the local government. It was therefore important for the centre to find some money and build public health facilities in these areas, which can be used by these transitory communities, and I am happy it has been put as recommendation 3(d). If we can get these facilities, that would help us. 

The other issue is that our neighbours in Congo have had conflicts for over eight years and they have since found it easier to stay on the peaceful Uganda side. Again, those are communities that cannot abide by our laws completely. The local governments also do not have enough facilities. We have both internal and external movements of communities but we also lack immigration points to regulate the movements. So, there are a lot of movements that are not regulated and it therefore becomes difficult for a local government to handle the problem.

It is also true that the water system collapsed both in Butyaba and Wanseko where this incidence has occurred. The safe water supply for Wanseko collapsed four years ago. There is another gravity flow scheme which was being put in place in Butyaba, but which is also incomplete. So, there is also need for water in these areas if we are to solve this problem. 

We have a very big market with our neighbours in Panyimur, which brings people from Congo and Ntoroko; you may have even heard of an accident in which people died when they were going to Panyimur. You will find that there are thousands of people converging in a place for about three days, from Sunday up to Tuesday; we really need interventions in all these areas. It is my prayer that we do not end up with quarantines in these areas and restrict ourselves from moving, because at one time it might get bad.  

You have mentioned that Shs 20 million has been sought by our district. This money is only for supplies; it does not include funds for constructing a single public toilet and water supply.  I would like to request, if resources allow, that some money be set aside for these public toilets. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week I informed you that there would be Holy Communion for the Anglican community. The Archbishop of the Church of Uganda is already at the venue so I suggest that we really end here. This is not the last time we will be considering these reports. The Minister is advised to make such statements periodically, maybe every week, so that we are informed of what is going on or the achievements so far scored in arresting the situation. Please, use the emergency telephone lines given to us to send information to the Minister so that action is taken.  

With that, we come to the end of today’s business to allow people go for Holy Communion; it is important to have Holy Communion. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 December 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


