Wednesday, 17 December 2008

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon we have Members of Parliament from Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly, hon. Fondi Ndima and hon. John Olomo. You are welcome. They came to share their experience with us. 

As I told you, this is the last week this year for us to sit here before we go for the Christmas recess, but we have a lot of work that is pending. I do not know how we shall clear it. The Christmas recess normally extends up to the end of January. I need your advice if you think we should cut it or maintain it. I think this is something that all of you need to advise me about. 

Today we are supposed to handle this pending work on the Northern Uganda programme but I have been informed that Cabinet is sitting and they have a serious programme. Many of the ministers would have loved to be here to answer some of the queries but they cannot. I thought that we should defer it to tomorrow. Hon. Wakikona, what do you say about that? Should we defer it to tomorrow so that all ministers who are involved can participate? Some are here; I can see the Minister of Education and others. 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We heard that all queries concerning PRDP will be handled ministry by ministry; even the Minister of Finance should give a view as seen by Ministry of Finance. However, there was a problem in Cabinet and many of them are held there. We have a few here who can start answering and as Cabinet –(Interruption)- I am putting this forward so that we do not lose the opportunity to handle this. We have Ministry of Education, Ministry of Water and Ministry of Health here. That is my proposal. If nobody objects, we go ahead like that, Sir. Thank you.

3.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the Minister of State making a passionate appeal that we continue with his programme because there are ministers here. I am very aware of the manner in which government operates in terms of responsibilities. In front of me here I only have one senior minister. If only we can be convinced and assured that they have come here with full authority of their senior ministers who will not dispute whatever commitment they enter into, we will have no problem. 

Let them assure us that they are here with full authority of their ministers and whatever they commit themselves to will be taken. If that is the stand then we can proceed. Before we get that assurance, we would not like a situation where we ask questions and the junior ministers give responses and commitments and they are overturned by their seniors when they come. Can we get that assurance from the minister here present, the one who is representing the Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business? We want to hear from that person.

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I have been told to represent the Prime Minister. I am now here as the Prime Minister. (Applause)  I will eventually sit in that position but you can see that I look like him. (Laughter) What we are saying is: let us start with the senior minister that you have recognised but all other ministers of state have been given that authority to talk.

THE SPEAKER: Which means you want two days to deal with this subject when you wanted to deal with it in one day?

MR WAKIKONA: Well, it could take more than a day, I do not know, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: But is it fair for other business? 

MR WAKIKONA: No, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you sure that they will be here tomorrow so that we concentrate on this business tomorrow? 

MR WAKIKONA: Sir, the person who has told them to stay and listen to what he is passing on might take long. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then if it is going to take long, why don’t we wait for tomorrow?

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yes, he is the Leader of Government Business this afternoon but I am here as acting Minister of Health because my senior colleague is on leave. 

Secondly, hon. Wakikona was not in Cabinet this morning and therefore I do not want to disagree with him, but he is not correct to say that there was a problem in Cabinet. There is no problem in Cabinet. I was in Cabinet this morning – (Interjection)– my colleague the senior Minister of Education was in Cabinet and we were requested -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The problem I have is that we have a lot of business to handle. If you are going to spend today and tomorrow, I think it is not fair to the other pending business. We rather deal with some other business today and then tomorrow we handle your business.

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, sometimes things are understood differently. If you do not keep time, still we were talking about time keeping and not particularly problems that may come up. That is what was intended but not particularly discussing anything in Cabinet. That is what I wanted to make clear.  

If it is possible, if we allow say one senior minister to begin -(Interruption)– ok, since you have ruled, we are much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sorry I overlooked this. In the gallery this afternoon, we have the student’s guild of Kyambogo University led by their speaker, Asaba Ronald, and Guild President, Ojobira Sam. They have come to observe how business is conducted. You are welcome.

3.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. Since you deferred the response to the PRDP queries to tomorrow, there is a matter that is very urgent that I thought we should pass to Government so that tomorrow when they come they have a response. This is in respect to what was published in the editorial of today’s Monitor newspaper. The title of the editorial is, “Government should save the cotton farmers”. The opening statement says: “Angry cotton farmers in Pader District in the war-torn northern Uganda have threatened to burn all their cotton farms if the Cotton Development Authority (CDA) does not declare a competitive price for their crop.”  

I delayed because yesterday there was a district council meeting in Pader District and they resolved to send a delegation on this matter. The cotton that was being grown in that district was organic cotton, which is grown without using pesticides. The problem that has arisen is that while Dunavant went and worked with the farmers in Pader, there was a directive that this organic business was out and yet Dunavant had promised farmers a minimum price of Shs 800 per kilogramme. 

According to the interview which was run in today’s paper, a gentleman from Dunavant expressed their willingness to pay the farmers - “Organic cotton goes up to Shs 800 a kilogramme”. This gentleman is Mr Vishnu Vardhan Giri, the manager in charge of the organic project at Dunavant (U) Ltd. They are saying that they are willing to pay the farmers that much money. Cotton Development Authority however is resisting Dunavant paying the farmers the price that they promised. This is causing a real crisis. 

Christmas is coming and people have grown this cotton so that they have something to use to buy clothing for their families and to buy the things that normally go with Christmas and New Year celebrations. So, it is such an urgent matter that we would wish and want Government to respond to. I have told the leaders of Pader to hold on instead of bringing a delegation that will not help things. I told them that I would inquire from Government and that is why I thought I should bring this matter up.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some information. You will recall that this afternoon I had an opportunity to consult you in your office as to whether it was appropriate to raise the issue of cotton and the concern of cotton farmers in Uganda.

The information I want to give is that there is not only a problem for the cotton farmers in northern Uganda but there is a general problem with the cotton industry in the whole country. If the PRDP question tomorrow is deferred, we would not wish that the issue of cotton also be deferred as if it only concerns the PRDP. We would like a substantive answer from the relevant sector about what is happening with the indicative cotton prices. It seems as if the Cotton Development Authority at one time did indicate that the price would be Shs 800 but right now there are people who want to buy cotton at about Shs 200 in the villages. This has created a lot of paralysis because there is no guidance.  

Other than merging these things with PRDP, could the substantive sector of agriculture and Ministry of Trade come up and guide our farmers on what exactly is happening with the cotton industry so that we can streamline activities? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is an issue, which has been coming up a lot. As I told you yesterday, two hon. Members saw me to discuss this and decide on how to handle it. I do not know whether this was done. I had two members who were going to handle this. 

3.18
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following your advice on this matter, we tried frantically to meet with the ministers in charge. Unfortunately, as you know, today is Cabinet day and so it was not possible for us to meet with him.  

Just to reinforce what my colleagues have submitted on the Floor of the House today, there is a crisis in especially the cotton growing areas, not only of the northern part of the country but the cotton growers in Kasese are equally affected; the cotton growers of eastern Uganda are equally affected. This is a situation that has been created by government. 

Beginning April, government assured cotton growers that there would be market for their cotton and market at the cost of Shs 800 per kilogramme. Today as I stand here in this House, ginners are not even ready to buy cotton at Shs 400 and yet the input in producing a kilogramme of cotton could be in the range of about Shs 300 to Shs 400 per kilogramme. Where does this put the farmer? I think government is indirectly sabotaging its efforts to fight -(Interruption)- I will take it.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the law governing cotton is quite clear. Before CDA announces the indicative price, the Minister of Trade and the Minister of Agriculture must be consulted. In the past they used to inform us well in advance. 

I imagine that after learning that an issue on cotton was coming up, hon. Gagawala, the minister responsible for trade, fled the House. (Laughter) He was here. He is one of those key stakeholders who should be an authority in handling the cotton pricing here. We therefore would demand that if the appropriate minister is here now, he should be able to respond. This is because CDO in an attempt to fight the investors out there announced Shs 800 and the international market fell to Shs 400. They now have to look for the difference. That is the dilemma in which they find themselves.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for your information, my honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I think something needs to be done and it needs to be done now. There is no time to wait for anything. It is the Government of Uganda that gave these assurances; it should then be the Government of Uganda to fulfill its obligations to the cotton farmers. 

I am very worried that there is a crisis in the country and economic sabotage caused by the government itself, a government which should be supporting farmers to grow and to get richer. How will the policy of Prosperity for All be fulfilled yet the government that propagates this Prosperity for All Programme is sending conflicting messages?

Secondly, I remember very well during the Seventh Parliament, we passed a resolution here for the Cotton Development Organisation to be restructured. We appreciated that it was disorganised and not playing its specific role. Government has not heeded to this advice. This really tells a lot about what Government considers the role of Parliament to be. I would like to hear from Government why they are not listening to Parliament. Why is the Cotton Development Organisation still the same as it used to be despite advice from this House? We need answers. 

As we speak, there is a lot of pressure from behind. The Leader of the Opposition has just informed the House that cotton growers are threatening to burn cotton fields. I think this will be the worst curse that will be meted onto this government if this happens. We never burn crops in the north and north eastern part of the country for any reason. For a farmer who has invested a lot of money to threaten that he or she will burn their cotton I think should be taken seriously and answers advanced to us. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, acting Prime Minister. (Laughter)

3.23 
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Mr David Wakikona): Are you happy? Mr Speaker, thank you. This matter being discussed is the same matter that Cabinet is discussing now. I suggest that we wait for the outcome and the Minister of Agriculture will come here with a statement. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: So, it will be the first item tomorrow. The reason I had discussed it with hon. Amuriat was because sometimes when you ask such a question, you do not get a complete answer. So, I wanted them to inform the minister concerned that this matter is coming up tomorrow so that he can prepare himself and give us a complete answer. He is not here but the acting Leader of Government Business -(Laughter)- has heard and he has told us that they are discussing the very subject that you have raised. Therefore, I hope when they come tomorrow, definitely without waiting they will give us an answer to this particular problem. 

3.25 
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Early last month the honourable Minister of State for Fisheries sent circulars to all districts within and bordering Lake Victoria. The intention of these circulars was to re-call the fisheries sector from the district to the centre. 

On 25th November, he also gave some Members of Parliament a copy of the final draft of the new fisheries regulations. These regulations are going to be effected in January. Fishermen are supposed to pay licence fees within the month of January only and these licence fees have been increased. The average fee per boat was between Shs 30,000 to Shs 50,000 but it has now been increased to Shs 150,000. 

Although I agree with him, because the intention of re-calling the fees was to make sure that we regulate the fisheries sector, the duration he has given the fishermen of one month is too little. This is because a majority of the fishermen do not fish during that December season and the fish catch is always very low in January. I just want the minister to extend the grace period to at least two months, including January and February. 

As MPs we were given a draft. I do not know whether he is working on the draft or if he has the approved regulations to be given to Members of Parliament, because at times when fishermen ask us questions we get disturbed. I just have a draft and the minister is implementing basing on the draft. Even the fisher permit, which allows a person to be on the water, has also been increased from Shs 10,000 to Shs 40,000 and he is telling them that they should pay within one month. 

Fishermen need to be sensitised. They need to be given ample time - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, in the first place, when you raised this matter I told you to inform the minister so that he comes with a ready answer. Did you do that?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I informed you yesterday but it is regrettable that when I called the minister, he was visiting my island in Buvuma without notifying me. So, the minister is aware and he told me that he would be in plenary today. 

THE SPEAKER: Now that the minister with whom you communicated is not here, what do we do? I think let this also be something that we shall listen to tomorrow when the minister is here. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PETITION BY MAKERERE UNIVERSITY CONCERNED STUDENTS ASSOCIATION ON FEES INCREMENT

3.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, on 10 September 2008, the Makerere University Concerned Students Association (MUCOSA) petitioned Parliament with the following prayers:

Since Makerere is a public university, it should be stopped from unnecessary hiking of fees in the name of functional fees such as library and technology fees. The petition was referred to the Committee on Social Services in accordance with rule 27(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Honourable colleagues, the committee decided to deal with the most urgent matter of functional fees and held discussions with the Minister of Education and Sports, Minister of State for Higher Education, the National Council for Higher Education, Makerere University Council, the Makerere University management, Makerere University Academic Staff Association, Makerere University none academic staff representatives, the students’ guild representatives and also the concerned students association.

The committee took trouble to visit the university for a guided tour of selected areas of the university. These areas included the library, the Faculty of Information and Communication Technology, the faculties of science, agriculture, technology and halls of residents like Mary Stuart and Lumumba.

The committee also decided to prepare two reports, honourable members. One focuses on the issue of fees and the other addresses the other underlying issues of finance and management challenges facing Makerere University. This report focuses on the function of fees that the petitioners are contesting. 

Honourable members, in our observations, we looked at the mandate to determine fees. Makerere University is a public university. The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act provides for public university organs in part 9. The Act, in Section 38, provides for the establishment of a university council as one of the organs in every public university. 

The council’s functions are clearly specified in section 40, which provides as follows in part 1: “The University Council shall be the supreme organ of the public university and as such shall be responsible for the overall administration of the university and for ensuring the due implementation of the objects and functions of the university.”

Secondly, the Act provides: “The Council shall be responsible for the direction of the administrative, financial and academic affairs of the university, formulate general policies, give guidelines relating to the operation of the university and do any other thing and take all necessary decisions conducive to the fulfillment of the objectives and functions of the university.” 

Thirdly, Section 41(c) provides thus: “The University Council shall, in relation to its functions, among others fix scales of fees and boarding charges.” 

Colleagues, the rationale for introducing the library and technology fees is that in August 2006, the Carnegie Corporation of New York announced a competitive grant of US$ 2.5 million to develop a model library in Sub-Saharan Africa. Makerere University Library participated in the competition and was successful in the first round. It therefore was invited to submit a full proposal to compete with other short listed university libraries. Makerere University Library emerged best amongst the various university library submissions. However, before the final award, there were issues to be addressed by Makerere as part of their contribution to the project. These issues included the following: 

1. 	To complete the second half of the library building extension to provide appropriate space for the model library, and that would cost Shs 3.4 billion;

2. 	It had to commit to sustain the model library at the end of the grant by replacing all the obsolete computers, paying all resources subscription and software licences. 

3. 	Also increase the bandwidth to be able to accommodate the increased ICT facilities.

Hon. Members, Annex 1 shows the agreement between Makerere University and the Carnegie Corporation of New York.

On 29 March 2007, Makerere University Council met and discussed issues raised by the Carnegie Corporation of New York regarding the grant of US$ 2.5 million for the establishment of the model library at that university. You will have to look at Annex 2 to confirm that the council made its resolutions.

The council agreed that the university would: 

•	Embark on the completion of the second half of the library. 
•	Budget for funds that would be required to sustain the model library at the end of the grant period. 
•	Continue with the general refurbishment of the old library building. 
•	Increase the bandwidth to be able to accommodate the increased facilities at the university; and 
•	Communicate council’s commitments on the resolutions made to the Carnegie Corporation of New York.

Honourable members, on the basis of Section 60(1) of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, which empowers the council to borrow funds required for meetings and carrying out its obligations, Makerere University Council decided to secure a government-granted loan. Colleagues, we have also endeavored to attach Annex 3. When you read through, you will see what I am talking about.

Section 60(3) further provides thus: “The minister responsible for finance, in consultation with the minister responsible for education, may from time to time prescribe the maximum sum that may be borrowed in respect of the different votes for expenditure of the public university.”

When the committee went through all that, we observed a number of emerging issues:

1. 	During our consideration of the petition, we established that the student community had been sensitised during the orientation.

2. 	We established that there is congestion in the library.

3. 	We realised that the reading space is very inadequate given the current student population.

4. 	It was established that there has been significant improvement in library management especially the cataloguing, but what about the rest?

5. 	The committee established that there are major financial and management challenges faced by the university. On these, I want to promise that they will be addressed in the bigger report to follow.

Honourable members, the Cabinet of course had a position on the issue of the library fees, and when you look at Annex 4 you will see this. The Minister of Education and Sports presented this document, which we call the Cabinet Memo, on how to raise funds to support the development of the state-of—the-art Makerere University Library. They decided as follows: 

1. 	That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development guarantees a loan of Shs3.4 billion to Makerere University to be paid within five years with a grace period of one year. 

2. 	The University Council decides on the students to be charged the library fees and quantum.

3. 	The university charges should start in academic year 2008/2009.

4. 	It was also decided that the university administration should sensitise the stakeholders in preparation for the policy of charging students library and technology fees.

5. 	It was decided that the university establishes a fund onto which the library fees will be deposited and from which money will be drawn to pay the loan.

6. 	It was decided that the university authorities should contact the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a briefing about the process of the ministry’s assistance in the negotiations for the loan and the identification of the bank to provide that loan.

Colleagues, allow me inform you that all first year students’ admission letters contained these functional fees and the students agreed to pay by consenting to the terms and conditions of admission. Indeed, 62 percent of the students supposed to pay the fees had already done so by the time we were trying to wind this up. 

Hon. Members, we have also endeavored to attach a copy of admission letters and the fees structure.

To be able to raise the money to repay the loan, it was agreed that all first year students, both undergraduate and postgraduate, pay the library and the technology fees. The university observed that charging this new fee to continuing students could have negative implications as their fees structure had already been implemented.

It was further observed that there are no first year students among the petitioners. 

The committee therefore recommends that the payment of library and development fees is justified. 

Secondly, the committee also recommends that the university should continue sensitising stakeholders on the importance of the fees.

I would like to conclude by informing you that the university was justified to introduce the fees, given the need to finance the library project and the maintenance of the ICT facilities. The committee however feels that there is need to study and consider the other issue of financing of public universities in order to find lasting solutions.

I beg to submit.

3.40
MS ABIA BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Seninde for the report. Less than an hour ago, I was at the university and in fact to be specific, in the library. The current issue facing this institution is that despite the extension in the library, there is still a challenge of accessing journals. This means for a postgraduate student to access a journal of agricultural economics for example, you need to pay not less than US$ 40 per journal. This implies that for the universities to run effectively, as one of their mandates is research, these kinds of fees actually need to be charged. Students must also appreciate that for you to be a good student you need access to library facilities.

The state-of-the-art library that we are considering will have an e-library and therefore actually the fees that are being charged by Makerere University, if you compare them across the region, are extremely minimal. It is pertinent that our parents appreciate the role of university libraries in enabling their children to acquire the kind of knowledge that they want.

Makerere University has very fundamental challenges. I just want to give you one example of how failure to pay this would tantamount to inefficiency in research. The Department of Agricultural Economics and Agribusiness Management for the last two semesters has never received remittances from the central pool. That tells you that the postgraduate students and undergraduate students have a challenge in accessing e-journals and yet you cannot have a well researched paper as an academic when you do not have access to the library. Therefore, I indeed welcome the idea that these library fees are totally justified and sensitisation of parents and all stakeholders, needs to be done. 

By the fact that students accept the terms and conditions in their admission letters, they have committed themselves to payments. When you accept an admission into a higher institution of learning, the first thing you know, particularly for the postgraduate students, is that you are the first teacher to yourself, implying you need access to a modern-day library for your research to be update with realities. The justification for these fees and the sensitisation is automatic by the fact that you accept to take an admission letter.

I implore the Ministry of Education to look fundamentally into the issues that are affecting Makerere University. As I talk now, over five people with PhDs in less than two years have left the Faculty of Economics and Management because they find it very difficult to perform to their best because of lack of access to modern-day library facilities. Many have gone into the UN system and some have recently gone to the Bank of Uganda. At the rate at which we are losing academia to other fronts, we are not likely to recollect the glory that we once had for this university. The idea that the university students pay these library fees is therefore not only justified, it is also fundamental. I thank you.

3.44
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to support the committee’s recommendations and the report. I want to thank the chairperson for a brief but very assertive presentation. 

I want to urge the government and especially the Ministry of Education to move away from its interference in Makerere University. It is this interference which provokes people to present these kinds of petitions and strikes. What the Minister of Education and the government need to do is to have an eyes on and hands off policy. Unless the ministers of education - hon. Opio and hon. Bitamazire - change the policy, the quality of Makerere University products will continue to decline. This will affect our comparative advantage in East Africa and Africa in terms of attracting foreign exchange.

Makerere has greatly declined in the world university rankings. Ten years ago, it used to be ranked close to great universities like Oxford, Harvard, Stanford where I have been recently, and others. Now if you look at the global rankings, we are going down. This is because the government despite enacting the legislation continues to interfere.

You find one class in Makerere University full of 600 students and some are attending lectures through the window. Some attend through the phones - when you get a seat, you put your phone on and then others will listen from outside. This is unacceptable. That also affects the kind of product and quality of the labour force of this country. This matter is very serious. It goes beyond the issue of fees. That is why I wholeheartedly support this report. 

In order to maintain a high quality of education in this country, I want to urge the university and the committee to really ensure that government comes up with a loan scheme so that students who cannot meet high fees can access loans and then pay once they get gainful employment. This is the only way we are going to manage this country. If you wish to continue interfering in issues of Makerere University, we are going to affect the quality of education like primary education, which has declined. 

Mr Speaker, this matter is very serious. Most of the Members here do not even have their children in Makerere University; they take them abroad. Just like most of the MPs do not have their children in Universal Primary Education (UPE) schools. So, really how can we cook food and then we do not eat it ourselves? How if we really love our voters and love this country? I want to end here, and thank the chairperson.

3.47
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS, HOUSING AND TRANSPORT (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute in this important debate and to observe from the onset that I am going to speak from the point of view of a rural university student; somebody who comes from a setting that survives on less than a dollar per day. These people are found in Northern Uganda, Eastern Uganda, some parts of Central Uganda and some parts of Western Uganda. 

My arguments today are premised on the recognition of the fact that yes Makerere University like any other university requires a good library facility. 

I am privileged to have gone through Makerere University during the old good days where the library was buoyant and provided good facilities. How I sympathise with students who are going through Makerere today. 

In their report, the Committee on Social Services talks about the good things that disgruntlement will bring in encouraging E-Learning and therefore buttressing the efforts of the university to improve on research activities. 

But I am saddened by the fact that the report suggested that the university student just joining the university as a first year student could have the capacity to stand for their rights with all the bravery that it required.

On page 4 of their report, hon. Seninde and her friends, our honourable colleagues state categorically that “In their letters of admission, there was an indication that there would be an increment,” indeed the increment suggested was to the tune of 188,500 when you look at one of the annexure, the admission letter.   

She said they signed and said well we accept to these conditions. But what would you have expected from a First Year student who was so much yearning for university education to do? They would accept to put a rope a round their necks so long as they were admitted into the university. So this was expecting too much of the university. 

I would like to say and to submit that much as we require this improved university facilities in Makerere University and other universities, putting the burden on the student is being unfair to the rural poor who also desire university education. 

I am sure all of you seated in this House in this air conditioned room and dressed in state of the art suits, designer suits, can afford this increment. 

But I am also sure that you cannot afford the pressure that you come under from people who come every time to your house when you are at home asking for you to supplement university education fees for their children. So this should be an awakening to all of us.

I would like to propose that Makerere University being a public university and being partly the responsibility of the Government of Uganda that it offers a grant to Makerere University. That whereas university research and library is critical for university development and especially in the academia, government should fund this project and then see how to recover this money over a long period of time; that is my No.1 proposal.

The second proposal is for this funding to be recovered through fees. But fees spread over a long period of time; and also consider that the other students other than the first year students are actually going to benefit from the services of that the library. It will not only affect first year students but also the rest of the university students. This way from simple arithmetic, you will realize that it is possible to have every student probably paying an extra Shs 10,000 and to me I think this is affordable. 

Let us not demonise university education, my dear friend. If we did this, we would be excluding a majority of the people of this country. Remember that 82 percent of the nation is rural poor and engage in peasantry. They are not bourgeoisie; the few bourgeoisies like some of you seated in this House actually take their children to America, to Britain and to other advanced countries. 

So while we legislate here, while we debate here, we need to know that we are debating for people who live in abject poverty. I do not full support this report. Therefore, I would like to seek indulgence of this House and of the committee in particular to take note of my submission and be flexible when you come to respond to our concerns. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.54
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened attentively to the trend of this debate. First of all, from the debate I perceive two issues. There is the issue of the petition by the petitioners and it appears according to the committee which was effectively represented even by the side of the Opposition; they have effectively dismissed the petition that it lacks the merit and the proposals as made by the university should continue.

As a Parliament we must guide our people because if we do not do that, people are going to abuse this Parliament so that whoever wants to come up with any issue, irrespective of whether it concerns him or her, will just come to Parliament and consume our valuable time that we must utilise.

According to the petition, the people who petitioned are not concerned about the issues that were raised. The beneficiaries and the people who are going to get concerned with the petition accepted and they were going ahead to implement it. So, the issue of raising the fees does not arise and according to the committee and the Members of the House, let us dismiss this petition.

But there is a second issue which is emerging and which is being raised by hon. Amuriat. I am surprised because this would have been the leeway for the opposition. I would have expected the opposition in this country, if us on the Government side are coming up with policies that are not coherent and are not helpful to our people, and you feel you have alternative positions, to get up and do a specific research paper on a department or on a Government issue and come up with alternative policy proposals. This is the way Government runs. But even when Members of the opposition have signed this report, a member from the opposition side is coming to disown what his colleagues have actually -(Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for raising that matter. One thing I know is that even our friends from the Government side, the backbenchers especially, do not take what comes from the frontbench for gospel truth. This has been illustrated by the very beautiful submissions that you have made that may not be consistent with what the frontbench advances. So for you to push this to the opposition alone, I think is defeatist in nature. 

Secondly, I would like to advise hon. Dombo to read our alternative policy statements. In those policy statements, and I would like, before probably our Minister of Education contributes, to say that we have time and again, urged the government to look for rural poor education policies, an all-inclusive policy that does not exclude anybody including the poor people. 

Hon. Dombo, the clarification I would like from you is whether you actually take trouble to read our alternative policy statements and also whether, as a backbencher, you think your responsibility is to agree with the Executive just because you belong to the NRM.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the report we are debating is not a report of the NRM. It is the report of the social services committee of Parliament. I want us to follow issues as they emerge. 

This report is a consequence of a petition and it appears, according to the submission, although the chairperson did not specifically say so, that the petitioners even lacked the locus standi to present this petition in the first instance. This is because it did not affect them although they are a concerned association. 

Secondly, none of the people for whom they were pleading was complaining. Those are basics which I read in the committee report. I did not attend the proceedings but, what is more important, and I wish to agree with hon. Amuriat, is the education sector. 

There have been issues of recent that have emerged that could easily be construed as interference in the proper management of the university, especially when it came to the foreign students making a demonstration and subsequent correspondences coming up in not so much an organised manner. I would have expected that a public university like Makerere University should be having cost centres and by the time they fix the fees they have the cost centres which have been costed and which can even be made public for anybody to consume. That one - (Interruptions)- let me conclude on this issue first.

If that were the issue, it would be understandable. But if we follow the report as it is, I think it would be easier to put a question on this report so that we adopt the report as –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You see, it cannot be a point of order because if it was a point of order, you should have started with it. (Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your wise counsel and guidance to this House. To conclude, I was saying that I want to agree with hon. Amuriat and the members on -(Interjection)- I will take the information.

MS BAKO: Thank you hon. Dombo for giving way. Hon. Dombo, I am one of the most faithful educationists in this country -(Laughter)- and I am one person who has been so passionate. If you have been seeing the Shadow Cabinet, I am one of those you would never have, in one way or the other, underestimated in handling these issues.

All the issues that you are talking about like cost centres, if you visited the office of the University Bursar today and scrutinised what is going on in the university right now, you would be amazed at how much resource power in terms of humans and finances is available to do all the costing in terms of whatever fees structure the university can set.

I am, even right now, eager to suspend any business here and go with you right now to the university and you see what is going on. (Laughter) I am on record -(Interjections)- I seek for your protection, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

MS BAKO: I am on record in this Parliament for annually presenting alternative policy statements from the Opposition but I am not sure hon. Dombo has had access to any of those policy statements possibly because he is preoccupied with other issues that are not pertaining to education. 

He is not deliberately informed about what the opposition has profiled as to what should be university financing, how university education should run, how universities should be managed and ultimately how private sector and public sector relations in terms of higher education should be running.

The information I want to give you is that as far as cost centres are concerned, if you went to Makerere University right now, there is no shortage of that kind of thing.

And secondly, that in my capacity as the shadow minister, the opposition has excelled very well in terms of strategising and putting forward alternative policy issues in terms of how education should be financed, managed, and therefore directed.  Therefore, I am imploring you, as a hon. Member of Parliament, to get access to all the policy statements and have yourself informed. 

MR DOMBO: I want to thank the honourable members. I want to thank the shadow minister and I want to tell her that if I ever had the opportunity to be in her shoes, I would have come with those issues during a debate like this one so that they become physical information as we debate. I am surprised that she is not prepared even as we debate these issues.  

Finally, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I think anyway let us not exchange – 

MR DOMBO: Finally, I want to assure this House - (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Point of order, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Madam, hon. Member -

MS BAKO: Is the hon. Member in order to suggest that I am not even prepared when I was the first person to respond to issues that my committee raised, and yet pertinently I have raised issues concerning university education on the Floor and it is on record that I have even all the details that I provide to my colleague ministers in our private meetings? Is he in order?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I do not want us to divert this debate to an issue of the ruling party versus the opposition. This is not the intention of this debate. The intention of this debate is to look at the merits of the petition as was presented and also the recommendations as made by the committee.  

I want to support the committee and also ask Members that in our debate we must encourage our people to participate in issues that merit in order to consume our time when they do merit.  

I also want to thank the honourable shadow minister that even when she is aware and she talks for the people, she has supported this report and she has signed it as No. 7. It is very good for you to appreciate really that the petition did not deserve merit and it should be dismissed with the contempt it deserves and that in future, if a worthwhile petition comes, this House will give it the attention it deserves.  

But also I want to call on Members of this House that we should find time to explore and see how the public universities are funded, whether the funding is adequate and whether there can be alternative sources. I thought this could have been best done if the opposition took up the challenge. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the report of the Social Services Committee.  

First of all, I would like to thank the shadow minister for supporting such a report for the first time. I thank you very much. I think the other Members of the opposition should follow their shadow minister otherwise you cannot contradict each other on the Floor; it is very shameful.  

I support the report for three to four reasons. One is that the fund, which has been sourced from the students used the right procedure, that is, the National Council for Higher Education debated it and approved it. Then, the students were informed that they would be paying this money and they were aware. Indeed they signed and 65 percent paid up. That means it is a good cause.  

The library is one of the most important sections in any university because you must do research for your papers. And you have seen the pathetic situation before where students were reading under trees because the capacity was too small. 

Here is a donor who has supported us and we need to contribute a supplement budget. It is important that really students and the parents contribute. Government has taken over 4,000 students to be paid for and these students are enjoying these facilities. So it is important that the parents also contribute.  

I am aware that some parents are very poor, they come from the rural areas and they have little income. But if a parent can manage to educate a child from primary one up to senior six where they have paid a lot of money, what is the problem of paying this little contribution to improve the quality of education in Uganda?  

I urge all the Members to dismiss this petition and we continue to contribute. I am even looking forward to cost sharing so that other citizens can benefit. It is only 4,000 who are benefiting, what about the rest of the Ugandans? If we have cost sharing, the others will also benefit. Please, let us contribute so that we improve the quality of our education. Thank you very much.

4.11
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just have three brief responses. 

One, I think Parliament should be extremely very careful not to behave like courts. If we start behaving like courts then we are not going to serve the interests of our people. We should look at every petition with the merit it brings and not technicalities.  Otherwise, if we start dwelling on technicalities, the majority of the people who voted for us here are peasants and they will recall you after five years because you will have turned against them. So, let us continue to look at the merit of petitions other than dismissing petitions on technicalities.  

Secondly, I also think that as Members of Parliament we should be concerned about the cost of education especially to the majority peasants in this country. Public university should be funded and fully funded. The cost of public university should not be too much for our local people to afford. Even as we speak, I think just narrowing this thing to Makerere is of course another issue. 

My colleague, hon. Ekanya, was bringing the argument of standards and quality. What will this improve if everything remains constant? What will this increase in fees for the library improve in Makerere if the library will not have enough space for the students? 

So, government needs to look critically at public universities entirely but also with the consideration that it is not only the upper class or the elites who should afford to send their children to university. Otherwise, we are going to enter into a class struggle in this country. There will be a revolution from the peasants and they will throw all of us out because time will come when the peasants will not accept to be treated the way we are trying to treat them. 

The current cost of education is extremely too high for our peasants to afford. If you go to the universities, you will see that majority of the people paying university fees for students are either their uncles or relatives who are well placed somewhere. The common people who are cutting bananas and selling cassava in the villages are unable to bring their children to university and this is very unfair for a country like Uganda where the majority of our people are peasants. 

Lastly, I want to ask the Minister for Higher Education to clarify. What plans do you have for public universities to improve the libraries, the laboratories and the equipments? 

We also hear rumours in the corridors – you can confirm or deny them - that government is paying salaries to some lecturers in private universities. If that is true, don’t you think that money would help us improve public universities to reduce the cost of our peasants so that they can also afford universities?

For that matter, therefore, anything that associates with additional costs for our people, I disassociate myself from it. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

4.16 
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this report of the committee and agree that the petition must be put aside. However, several of my colleagues have raised fundamental issues. This is a petition that was presented to us and the committee handled it. 

I do not want to shy away from the fact that there are several issues. For example, the one my honourable colleagues have just raised regarding Makerere University and other public universities. The issues are there but are they supposed to be raised because of this petition? 

In my opinion, I would like to suggest that on page 4 under the conclusion, there is a sentence that says, “The committee, however, feels that there is need to study and consider the other issue of financing of public universities in order to find lasting solutions.”

I would like to suggest that this particular phrase be moved from conclusions to recommendations and the committee in here be tasked to do exactly that and come up with a comprehensive solution rather than raising these issues at this time. 

At the moment, the issue is about whether we need the library and whether we need the facilities and the university has given a commitment to the Carnegie Foundation in the US. 

I would like to suggest that we go ahead with the charging but the committee should be tasked to take this up as a whole issue and look at it holistically. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.18 
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the recommendations of this report. The main mandate of any public university or any university lies in three fields: research, lectures and publications. 

Considering these three mandates of any university, there is nothing that can be done for this university unless it has a well-equipped library. And for a university to have a well-equipped library, it needs the cooperation of the stakeholders. 

And considering that the fees proposed are not exorbitant, and considering that the targeted students have signed and agreed, and 62 percent of those students have actually paid these school fees, I believe that it is in good faith that the university needs this modern library, considering that they have already secured a loan and they have already got the support of the Carnegie institution.

Members are concerned about the state of the poor students. I rise to say that any parent who can support his son or daughter up to senior six in any school in Uganda can actually pay these minimum additional fees -(Interjection)- many of these secondary schools pay much more fees than the fees paid at these public universities and many of the parents pay these fees. There is no reason why they cannot pay an extra fee for the library and for technology. 

I submit that this is an era of E-learning. For those who cannot fit in this small fees structure, we can always search and learn on the Internet, and go for the courses that can develop them elsewhere where they can fit and where they will definitely become responsible and contributing citizens in their own right. But this is a cause that needs to be supported and I support the recommendations of this committee. Thank you. 

4.21 
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

But I must say I am very concerned that as we dispose of or set aside this petition, we need to be mindful that the petition and the charges for the library are not the cause of the problem; they are just a symptom. Makerere University has got a much bigger problem than that of charging library fees. These problems can actually be classified as administrative and policy problems. 

I, therefore, would like to request that even as we set aside – and I entirely agree with hon. Sanjay on the fact that the question of the ministry and the university telling us how they intend to solve the other problems must be brought to this Parliament. Short of that, we shall really not have done justice. 

Are you aware that the UPE graduates are now going to senior three and that we are soon having a revolution in tertiary institutions? If we do not plan, we will get into problems. 

After this petition had been presented, I happened to listen to a debate in which the vice chancellor and his team participated – you may want to know for example, that the current funding of the government on sponsorships at that university is below the unit cost; the running cost of the university is higher than what we are funding yet it is Parliament that appropriates that money. 

You may also want to know, for example, that Kenya has done the same project, but their money was raised through the social security fund. The same has been done in Tanzania. 

My opinion is that we need to study the ways other countries, our neighbours, are financing university education. We may also need to look at the situation relating to whether the university should not specialise in core functions that include training, research and publication. Should that university, in this millennium, still be providing accommodation and feeding to students? Isn’t it time for that university to get into public-private partnership? Mr Speaker, I am raising these issues visa-avis affordability. If we really intend to make our university –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are here to debate a specific petition that was concerned with the library. What you are talking about relates more to the general policy of funding the university. 

We are only dealing with the issue of library though I think there are merits in what you are saying as far the need to discuss the general policy and whether we should still have students on Government sponsorship or not; whether we should be having Government funding the other infrastructure and so forth, is concerned. 

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me give you this information. Like honourable members have pointed out, it is true that the petition was a mere symptom. When the committee tried to analyse the various problems at Makerere University, we discovered that the problem was not only the fees. There are so many other problems that need to be addressed for a lasting solution. 

Let me also inform this House that our committee is doing that. Our strategy was for us to first dispose of the issue of fees because it was urgent. Otherwise, having discovered a lot of problems, we have chosen to carry out a serious study on how we can solve all these problems. We will soon come up with a bigger report to address all these issues; don’t worry about that.

MR BIRAHWA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Let me also thank the chairperson of the committee for that information. I was saying that because if we do not handle it, we shall be just postponing problems; more petitions will come in. 

As I wind up, I would like to say that public university ownership does not mean that Government must manage that university. A university can be owned by Government, but with out-sourced management that is given permissiveness and leverage to innovate and make that university perfect. What is happening at Makerere is that we own the university, but at the same time want to control how it is managed. I think that is a very big problem.

Let me also say that I would like to agree with the honourable member who raised some issue here yet we seem not to be ready to debate it. That is the issue concerning the fact that the current government sponsorship apart from the quotas system is largely benefiting children of the well to do who will have managed to take them to good secondary schools. If we do not discuss this issue, we will be doing a disservice to the rural children, who go to rural schools; and who cannot do well in sciences. 

Those who are being admitted on government sponsorship have got automated machines in their rooms because they are the children of people of our class. We need to look into that. How I wish we one day we get funding across the board or reduce the charges to enable everybody to benefit. Otherwise, what we are doing currently only helps the children of the well-to-do people to enjoy the services of that university. I thank you so much.

4.28
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Chairperson of the social services Committee for presenting this report. I will be very brief. 

I want to start by urging my colleagues to open their minds about public universities vis-à-vis private universities. The students that go to public universities are our children, but the other ones who go to private universities are also our children -(Mr Odit rose_)- why?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, this is a very senior member of this committee, and a professor. My opinion is that all he can do is to provide information, but not to contribute. How come he is making a very substantive contribution? I do not know whether that is procedurally right.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see if you are a member of the committee, then this is your report. You should only listen to the contributions.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Mr Speaker, I respect your ruling but my submission was a way of giving information to the honourable members of this august House. I am doing this because it seems as though they are actually closing their minds to the fact that the students in public universities are our children, and the children in private universities are also our children. Tuition in these universities must be paid and I do not know whether it will be right, Mr Speaker, to use public universities as a bait to the poor rural peasants because of restricting the fees in public universities and leaving the private universities charging what is commensurate of education in this country. We are closing our minds to that.

That is the information I would like to give and I think we have to be really very careful when we talk of public universities and private universities because what we need are standards in both public and private universities. I thank you.

4.35
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for producing this report but I am very disappointed with the general conclusion which was derived at the end of the report. When you look at Makerere University, it is a public university, it enjoys funding from government, it enjoys funding from the donor communities and it is also enjoying the overwhelming population in the university whereby the money derived from the institution is just sufficient to make Makerere University a model university in Africa and in the world.

When you look at the audited accounts of Makerere you find that there are surpluses of profits which are always there at the end of the financial year. This is where the committee should have really looked at and found that Makerere University had funds sufficient enough to make all the new developments in the university. When you look at the development fund in the Ministry of Finance that goes to Makerere University, whether little or what, it could push Makerere University to a certain limit.

I am also disappointed with the committee because in such investigations, to rule out the merit of the petition, Members of Parliament should have given a copy of the petition because we should have read the content of that petition and possibly other things which are in the petition which the committee did not get time to address. That is why we would have actually been comfortable to see whether the petition was actually having merit or not. 

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, according to our rules, the issue as to whether a petition is properly worded should have been handled at a time when the petition was being presented. You cannot now make a ground for rejecting a petition at this particular moment. If the committee thought that the petition was not properly worded, it should have brought back the petition and pointed it to the House; a motion would have been moved and then the petition would have been rejected at that particular moment.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much for that information. When we look at Makerere University, the issue of financial management, the issue of fees structure is a big problem. What is killing Makerere University is nothing else but greed. We are aware that Makerere University is a public university; it is not for profit making. They are supposed to provide affordable education for all Ugandans, but this is now prohibitive to the rural setting.

I can see all the sides happy because the Opposition signed this document. I can assure you if you read Animal Farm, Animal Farm can make you do things without you knowing that you are being pushed into a deep hole -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are saying a public university is not for profit making, but don’t you think that public university has to raise funds to run? I went to the university myself. I never paid fees because it was affordable for the country. I was being given air tickets to go to my university; I was being given “boom”. When I was in high school, I did not pay; they were instead paying me money to sustain me.

But because now it is not possible I think here you have to consider the situation. Is the government able to fund everything in the university with the numbers we have? The answer is no. that is why some charges are being levied from the students. Asking students to contribute some money does not mean that the university ceases to be a public university or that it is working for profit.

MR OPANGE: Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, what I was driving at is that I register a privilege of the governments that were managing Makerere by then. Even during my time, I was getting marriage allowance, I got “boom”, and I got transport allowance. But the question now is, despite the fact that the university wants to operate, there should be a minimum figure which is set to cater for the poor in the rural setting.

For example, BCOM external by then, even after last year was paying Shs 500,000 per annum per student. But as of now, in the new structures including development fees, library fees and all that, BCOM external is now paying Shs 1,500,000 per annum. Can a student from a rural setting in Pallisa, in Teso afford this? This is very restrictive! This committee which addressed this should have really considered this.

I pray that let this august House defer this and we task the government to institute a comprehensive audit for Makerere’s managerial aspect. Thank you very much.

4.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. But I would like to start from a number of issues that arose from the Floor. First, I would like to thank hon. Ben Wacha for pointing out the fact that I intended to point out to the committee particularly when hon. Dombo virtually labelled criticism against the petitioners. It is through the burden of us leading the country back to those who sought assistance from us. But as the rule has been shown to all of us, it was incumbent upon the committee to guide Parliament if they thought that the petition did not meet the technical requirements for petitioning Parliament.  

Secondly, sometimes we get amazed, the committee quotes provisions of the law to tell us that the petitioners cannot direct or demand that the university sets fees. At the same time the committee then folds its hands because the law can also not allow you to direct the university to set fees. The only option you had as a committee would have then been to pronounce yourself on the merits of the appeal, which unfortunately you did not do. 

Thirdly, before I come to the substance my sister, hon. Margaret Kiboijana, was saying that if these people cannot meet the fees let them go through distance education. Looking at her and she is a very beautiful lady, I was reminded of the history of the French Revolution. When Maria Antoinette completely oblivious -(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member when he stands here when I contributed as an hon. Member of Parliament in my own right to insinuate that I may be a beautiful woman implying that maybe somebody came in and pitched in for me for my school fees.  Whereas my old man who is very poor is actually the one who met my school fees. And I want to inform the honourable member that whereas the government sponsored students at Makerere pay around 6.6 million, the private sponsored students pay around 2.0 million the rest is being subsidized by government. What I meant is, when government subsidizes that and they cannot afford, they can fit anywhere and they can become successful.  We have seen so many of us who are the equivalent but who are here and are Members of Parliament. The fact that you do not get say a degree of Makerere University does not make you any less of any capable member of society. Is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: No, my impression was that the honourable member was appreciating you and -(Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Beyond wanting just to state a fact I know other issues with her. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Keep it as your secret. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: No, the point I was making, and is a serious point by the way I know you did not mean that but it still brings out the point and I am just trying to caution us Members of Parliament that when we discuss some of these sometimes we forget to put ourselves in the shoes of those who petition us and we completely miss the spirit behind the petition. And I wanted to say, in giving that example which is quoted very often, that just when the ordinary Frenchmen and women were starving in the palace people were celebrating. And when they were breaking the palace, Maria Antoinette was asking, “What is the problem?”  They said there is no bread and she said, “Why don’t you give them cakes.”  We run the danger –(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the honourable member having quoted the quotation in the French Revolution; I am not the type who will see people who are starved and I say that they can partake some cake when I know what is happening. That is why I came out and said we have those who have the equivalent in this House and they are actually as qualified as any of those who have got university degrees.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Actually my sister, if you wanted to inform me I would have allowed you to do so and I would accept it as information. But just going back if we were critical, unless what is in this report is not the exact reference from the petition, sentence No.2 on the first paragraph says that those guys, the petitioners have the following prayers:  “Since Makerere is a public university, it should be stopped from unnecessarily hiking of fees in the name of functional fees such as library and technology fees….” and the key word is “unnecessarily.” Unless that is an introduction of the committee I still find that the prayers of the petitioners remain valid and the petition cannot be rejected because that request for unnecessary hiking of fees cannot be something that we can reject honestly and the job of the committee was to go and find out whether this increment was unnecessary or not. That is the starting point of the petitioners’ appeal. In the first place -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Member for giving way. I just want to provide information as a member of the committee that we did not throw out the petition on grounds of technicality as some of the members have argued. We entertained the petition and actually processed it comprehensively and that is why in the methodology we see that we met various stakeholders, visited Makerere and we formed an opinion on the issue of introducing the new fees. We thought the university was justified to introduce the fees.

So the argument that we used a technicality does not arise. We did a very good job to study this issue and like the chairperson said, we are bringing another report to look at comprehensive issues of financing the university. So, I do not know why you seem to be very anxious on issues which are very clear as we process them in the report.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I am only anxious because if you were the committee doing your work, and I was a Member of the committee, if this was your report, I would probably have a minority report. That is why I am anxious. If you followed the law, then you can do nothing. 

The reason why somebody petitions is that it is how that person feels. And all you hon. Members did was to just stick by the law. The letter has been written; they have signed and therefore it is justified. The fundamental question is, should we build our libraries using the hiking of additional fees? Where does the responsibility for building the libraries stand?

If you had used the petition, the issues that my honourable colleague and other Members began to point out could have emerged as part of the imperative of your recommendation. Let us just go to the merit of the case. You have now hiked these library fees but is it only first years that are going to pay? Do you know that it will not only be first years using that library?

THE SPEAKER: No, the Leader of the Opposition, I think in concluding the way they concluded, they must have considered that, “Okay the students had grievances but taking into account all the circumstances of the case, the demand for paying those particular fees is justified.” Definitely they will be inconvenienced because they do not have the money and the parents do not have the money. But then to solve the problem, I think the charging of the fees is justified. I think that is what they are saying.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yes. I got it from their report but I want to just -(Interruption)

MS MUNYIRA: Yes, I thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not find it in order and I would like to find out from you whether it is in order. The Opposition Members of this House signed this report and he is the Leader of the Opposition. Now, he has come and is debating as if we are still under individual merit. Is he really in order? What are we doing? I would like to understand.

THE SPEAKER: You mean he is a Member of the committee? 

MS MUNYIRA: But I understand Parliament as running on a multiparty basis. So, if all the Members of the Opposition have signed and then the Leader of the Opposition comes and takes us back, I do not understand.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is not saying that we are opposed because others have said this and the other but as a Member representing a constituency, he is putting his case forward. But hon. Member, I think you need to conclude because we have got another item.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I am not taking more information. I can only remind hon. Rose Munyira that I came to Parliament from Makerere and I still hold responsibility for the well being of that university. 

Makerere gets an award for a project, it needs money, it appeals to the country and the solution the country gives is, “Raise fees.” We cannot run a country like this, honestly! Shs 3.4 billion, can anybody tell me that the Government of Uganda cannot pick that money as its contribution to building that library when they have given individuals Shs 20 billion to build hotels and their institutions? (Applause) When they have thrown money in Kashwada? 

This is the point we are making; that we have a country for which we are responsible. Educating people in the university is the same thing you are doing. As much as we educate our own children, the country must educate its people. That is the principle we are preaching here. And therefore this petition is a wakeup call to those who are in power to please do the right thing for this country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you will be the last because we have item No. 5 and we should dispose of it today.

4.54
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo for raising part of what I wanted to say. In fact, we should now be able to know that we are dealing with the petition. We are not talking about Makerere University as such but the petition which has been forwarded to this Parliament. A very important phrase in the prayers of the Makerere University Concerned Students Association petition is that since Makerere is a public university, it should be stopped from unnecessary hiking of fees in the name of functional fees such as library and technology fees. 

When you study the report, you will find that the committee has dealt with only the library. There is nothing about the technology and when you study the report I thought they were going to inform us how long this loan is going to be paid and how much this fees, which has been hiked by the Makerere University in charge of this loan? Then another thing that they have not told us is how they arrived at this fee. How many first year students –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you comrade for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, the committee not only dealt with one thing and left out the area of technology, but they also failed to tell us the areas where it is necessary to hike fees because here, the petitioners do not talk about low standards or not hiking fees but they are talking about unnecessary hiking of fees. If there is an “unnecessary”, it means there is a “necessary”. So, you would have told us where it is unnecessary where it is necessary and then the balancing would have come. 

THE SPEAKER: But do you really except a committee of Parliament to go into those details? (Laughter)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you for the information. In fact, before this becomes unnecessary hiking of fees in the names of functional fees, we expected to know how many types of functional fees you discovered when you went to Makerere, when this hiking of fees started. They have petitioned us about the library fee and the technology fee. Were there others? When you look at the magnitude of this loan as I said, in what period of time is the loan supposed to be paid and will these students manage it? And in any case, what is the government doing about building or giving Makerere University or public universities some grants to build these universities?

Another thing that I am concerned about is whether we are going to charge these students some fees for using the library and whether that will involve all the students in Makerere University, if we have to recover either the loan in question or if we are to develop the library. What have you discovered about this? Then when you stated that none of these first year students who petitioned signed this petition, that is where we really wanted to know; where are the prayers of these concerned students and if you probably met them, what was their report that should have been tabled to analyse before we think of throwing away this petition? 

My observation is that this petition is very important. You cannot throw it away. Instead, we should have been able to use it as a step to find more information, for example, about why fees are being hiked in Makerere or other public universities year in year out. Perhaps we should also have known what the budget which has been put to run this library is because if these students are complaining about increasing fees every financial year in the name of something, is the management of that money proper? If you take the past analysis of the other functional fees that were increased, what were the results? You should have come out with all these details so that we can see that there is no substance in this petition but I think this petition has substance. It is to inform us of the problems down there. 

Above all, in the rural communities, there are very bright students down there who cannot come to Makerere University or to other public universities or even to private universities. Therefore, when this continues, it renders Makerere University which is a public university, a private university because even when you go to higher schools like Buddo, you are asked to pay for beddings every year and this has been on yet when you go there, you do not see new beds and no one knows how the amount of money used there is spent. That is more less what we can suspect at some of these public universities. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion was that we consider the report and adopt it. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR WACHA: About the “ayes” having it, we did not hear the “ayes” at all. 

THE SPEAKER: There was just one voice of the “Nays” -(Laughter)– I think let us go to another item. I, however, advise the Committee on Social Services to discuss this problem of funding university education in public universities, and actually there are many petitions that have come from Makerere University over this issue. But I think the main issue is how we raise the funds. Actually, there is a complaint that private students are the ones funding the university and this is going to cause a strain between the citizens of Uganda because some are funding their colleagues. These are the issues that you need to consider and sit with the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders and find solutions. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tomorrow, I will be laying on the Table of Parliament the White Paper on Higher Education. This is as a result of the McGregor report, the discussion by the government and the discussion by Cabinet. It has been gazetted and I will lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Then that will be the basis of the debate –

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I have just witnessed a scenario I have never witnessed in this House. I just want to find out whether it is in order for two people to assume and insist that they are chair of a committee when the Speaker has guided and ruled on a matter? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think this is a convenient time for us - would you like to enjoy this kind of situation? Don’t you think you need to go and sort this out instead of going on record this way? 

5.05
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned and as a person with the legitimate duty to assign responsibilities in the Opposition, we have a chairman of this committee in the name of hon. Johnson Malinga.

If there is any decision that is to undo a decision that was taken by the Speaker in the Chair, rule 73 is very clear. That ruling can only be undone by a substantive motion on notice. That is what our rule 73 says. So until that is done, the decision that was taken after thorough consultations that hon. Johnson Malinga becomes the chair of that committee, as far I am concerned, still stands. Thank you.

5.06
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought this matter had been resolved. The law that created the Opposition in this House is very clear on the responsibilities given to the Chief Opposition Whip. The Act does not talk about Opposition Chief Whip; it talks about Chief Opposition Whip. It is not the same with what is provided for in our rules. I think the two should be harmonised. The Rules of Procedure talk of Opposition Chief Whip while the Act talks of Chief Opposition Whip; the two are not the same and I had wanted to write to you on that.

The law recognises party whips and the duties of the party whip are the same as those of the Chief Opposition Whip. According to our rules, the chairmanship of accountability committees is decided on by the party with the greatest numerical number in Parliament. We do not dispute that, but having put the chairperson in place, there are rules on how that chairperson should be removed from office. 

Mr Speaker, the President appoints judges in this country, but he does not have the powers to remove them from office. What we are saying is that if there is need to remove hon. Odit from that chair, let us follow the rules that are very clear. We are law makers, but we cannot make the laws and break them ourselves. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable members, I have got the duty to protect the integrity of this House. Because of that I am going to adjourn but I ask to meet the leadership of the Opposition. I am also concerned with your position on this matter. I will make arrangements to meet the Members to sort out this matter. The House is adjourned to tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.09 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 December 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)
