Tuesday, 15 December 2009

Parliament met at 02.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting but on a sad note I regret to announce the death of one of our members of staff, Ms Mary Asio Wafula, a stenographer secretary in the office of the Director of Finance and Administration. She died this morning at 2.00 a.m. at Nsambya Hospital. Unfortunately she died while giving birth, which is a matter that we have been talking about in this House and asking for help about. 

There will be a requiem mass tomorrow at Christ Sanctuary International, Kireka at 10 O’clock in the morning. She will be buried on Thursday, 17 December 2009 in Kakoru sub-county, Pallisa District at 2.00 p.m. May her soul rest in peace. May I request that we stand up for a moment of silence?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The second announcement relates to our late colleague, hon. Balikowa. There will be a memorial football game to be played on 20th December in Kamuli between the Parliamentary Football Club and the Kamuli District’s first 11. All members of the Parliamentary Football Club are informed that training is ongoing starting tomorrow at Kampala Rugby Grounds from 6.30 a.m. So you go there early in the morning and train. 

The third announcement is an invitation from the Electoral Commission; they had invited us for the stakeholders’ workshop on Thursday to discuss re-organisation of polling stations and I think that is a matter which all Members of this House are interested in. However, it was coinciding with another issue we had arranged for that day and that is the discussion of the National Land Policy which will take place in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. So we have agreed with the Electoral Commission that we hold that stakeholders’ meeting on Monday at Imperial Royale Hotel at 8 O’clock in the morning.

Let us not forget the land issue on Thursday and then on Monday we go for the Electoral Commission meeting.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): I also requested for a slot for a brief ministerial statement on the land policy.

2.25
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): I rise on a matter of national importance. I have received information from my constituency which is Terego and Arua District in general that local council officials, especially LC I chairpersons under the directives of GISOs and DISOs are moving from house to house writing names of household occupants who are aged above 18 years. They are not only writing names but also their political party affiliations and yet we know for a fact that is not in any way their responsibility. That responsibility squarely lies in the hands of the district registrars of Electoral Commission. We also know it that LC 1s and LC IIs do not exist in this country as of now.

I would like to ask the line minister in charge of the electioneering process in this country as to whether he is aware of such underhand methods going on in the countryside and as to whether this is a directive from the Electoral Commission? 

When I contacted the Chairman of Electoral Commission, he distanced his office from that operation. Let us know whether Government is in the know of this underhand method going on, why these names are being written and what the importance of knowing their political affiliations is.

MR EKANYA: This activity has been going on in Tororo and I took it up with the office of the DPC. He told me that he was not aware of it. But using informal methods, I established that the directive was from the NRM secretariat. They wanted to asses the strength of the Movement party in my constituency and also the strength of other parties. We realised that they were using the wrong people because LCs are not officers of the NRM political party. Some people feel threatened so what happened is that some them had to lie that they belong to a certain party in order for them to be safe.

This practice is even affecting people in terms of getting tenders and also the civil servant I met yesterday told me that they have been given a directive that all of them, if they do not vote NRM, will be dismissed. 

Yesterday I was in a church with the auxiliary Bishop of Tororo Archdiocese -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will the minister responsible say something?

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, these are very grave allegations being made by honourable members. I would prefer that they put these in writing and we shall look into them very quickly.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister that when this matter was brought to my attention, and by the time I got to know about it, LC V counsellors had already formally written to the District Registrar drawing his attention to this malpractice. I promised the Chairman of the Electoral Commission this morning when I contacted him on the phone that since I was given a copy of the letter, I would share it with him because this is a serious matter on the ground right now. 

I thought it was only in Terego but later when the whole thing was run over on one of the local FM stations, it was discovered to be in the entire district.  So something wrong is happening somewhere.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The problem is that once we married the office of the Minister of Security with the office of the Secretary-General of a party, we were bound to have this problem. It was happening in my constituency and I even wrote to the Director General of Internal Security complaining about the District Internal Security Officer and the Gombolola Internal Security Officer (GISO) going around doing partisan work. It has been happening. 

In fact I am even surprised that the Minister for Ethics is saying that we need to put it in writing. Under what rule in our Rules of Procedure are we required to raise issues in writing to him? Instead of him taking up the matter - I do not know whether he is the correct minister to do this. 

We wanted the Leader of Government Business to come up with a statement on this particular matter and not hon. Nsaba Buturo as this has nothing to do with ethics. There is some illegality going on; somebody is misusing government offices or state structures to do partisan work.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been directed by the Leader of Government Business to take up this matter and I am going to do so. I will be in a position to apprise the House on what exactly is happening at the earliest possible opportunity that is on Thursday. I had opted for this week but if you want me to provide the statement next week, I can also do so. Thank you. I will do it this week.

2.34
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue on the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. When the Bill was brought before this House last month, you committed it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We have discovered that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is very busy and yet there is the Committee on Presidential Affairs, which had handled this Bill from its infancy to the time hon. David Bahati tabled it here for the first time. 

Therefore, I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, and requesting that you re-assign the duty because the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has already said they do not have the time and Presidential Affairs had handled it for three weeks. They are ready to continue with the Bill and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have no time to continue with the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence to re-assign that issue to Presidential Affairs. First of all, it came from Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, which lies under the President’s Office. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think when I was committing it to the committee, I said that the lead committee was Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I did say that they could team up with other committees. Can we hear from Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? Do you have a problem?

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the Presidential Affairs Committee had handled this Bill for three weeks before it came to Parliament so I thought they could liaise with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs since it comes from Ethics and Integrity. It is an issue of moral conduct and we can handle it in the Presidential Affairs Committee other than Legal and Parliamentary Affairs who say they are crowded and do not have the time. 

Also, hon. David Bahati is on pressure from so many international organisations and we need to fast-track this Bill and pass it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the mover?

2.36
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think when you made the ruling that the Legal Committee should take a lead in this and then work with other committees, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, which is responsible for Ethics and Integrity, took it up and actually invited some stakeholders for a few meetings. 

In the middle of that, it came to the notice of the Legal Committee that they were supposed to be taking it up yet it appears that they have a number of issues, which are engaging the committee and as everybody knows, this is a matter that has engaged a lot of debate not only within the country but also outside it and Parliament should really work on it as fast as possible. 

I think that a decision to transfer it to the Presidential Affairs Committee, but with the position that it should continue to work together with the Legal Committee for legal guidance, would be appropriate for this matter. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I think when a Bill is before a committee, to retrieve it when the committee has already started to do business and assign it to another committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not retrieved it. What the Members are telling me is that the Presidential Affairs Committee took the lead and started handling the Bill. So they are seeking my endorsement to allow them to continue and also to incorporate other committees.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, if the way you have presented it is what the Member is requesting for, then it is okay. But to say that you assign a Bill, which is already being handled by a committee to another committee -

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this is about our Rules of Procedure. Once a Bill is read for the first time here, it is assigned to a committee and as far as the record shows, this Bill is now before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. In fact, we have even heard - because under our rules, this is very clear. If a Bill has been assigned, even if other committees were to be involved, they would join the major committee. It does not provide for re-allocation of Bills by retrieving them from this committee and assigning them to the other. We really have a procedural problem. 

I suggest that the only way forward is to request the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to treat the Bill as a priority. That is the only way but to have a committee considering a Bill and then another committee is also considering the same Bill is confusing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you telling me that both committees are considering the Bill separately?

MR KATUNTU: Yes. This Bill was assigned to our committee and it is part of our pending business but from what we are hearing, the Presidential Affairs Committee has also started calling - how do they come in? It is not about fighting for business, it is about our Rules of Procedure. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that the emerging interest in the Bill is not arising out of the love for the Bill, but due to other forces; money and donor funds. I suggest that you take a firm stand and choose a committee to do that work -(Interjections)- it was already decided but efforts to recall the Bill from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is not a parliamentary initiative. It is a donor initiative and we must face it head-on. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, if you notice where I sit; I sit behind hon. Bahati so that I use my size to protect him. This Bill has generated a lot of interest, especially in the international community. Everyday I receive more than two messages on my e-mail address from people outside the country trying to lobby; so there is need to expeditiously handle this matter. 

I do not want to disagree with hon. Otto that it is Government pushing – I think the concern is that even our rules say that if a Bill is committed to the committee, the committee should report within 45 days. Short of that, they should ask the Speaker to extend the period. The problem is the speed at which the Bill is being processed. I thought hon. Bahati had discussed it with hon. Tashobya, the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and the concern was that the committee was overloaded with a lot of business. It is in good faith if the procedures can allow – I think the Speaker should look for a way of expeditiously handling this Bill so that we dispose of it as soon as is practically possible. Otherwise, I do not think it is in bad faith that we expeditiously handle it.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am speaking as a senior member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and a member who attends committee meetings regularly. Our friends are saying the main reason for seeking re-assignment of the Bill to another committee is because the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is busy. Which committee is not busy? Which committee is redundant? I assure you that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has the capacity to handle this Bill. It is doing its best to prioritise it. Therefore, whatever decision you take, Madam Speaker, you should be aware that the legal committee is prepared to do its work in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. But if you deem it necessary to ask another committee to support us, there is no problem. The legal committee has the willingness and the determination to handle this Bill. Thank you so much.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, it is over a month since you assigned the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to spearhead further debate and discussions on this Bill. When I last talked to the committee’s chairperson, he said he had not been instructed to take up this matter. 

Let me remind hon. Members – unless some of you are not in contact with the outside world – there is incredible pressure on Members of Parliament. The country is crying hard for this Bill to be disposed of. Therefore, since the chairperson told me he had not been given the assignment, yet the records show that the assignment was given to him – in view of the fact that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs appears to have so much on its plate and also the fact that the Committee on Presidential Affairs had put in about four weeks of work, which -(Interjections)-  the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs has a lot of work, which they were able to do. This is because they immediately took over this task – I want to request, Madam Speaker, that given this huge pressure from outside and given that Ugandans are demanding that Parliament makes progress, it would be wise and appropriate to rule that the Committee on Presidential and Parliamentary Affairs takes up this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all the committees are important and they work on behalf of the plenary. I had reasons why I chose the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to act as the lead committee. In my remittance, I said they would team up with the others. 

We thank the Committee on Presidential Affairs for starting the work, but I want to ask them to team up with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They will sit together and take it from there so that the Committee on Legal Affairs can benefit from what they have done and vice-versa. So, please, team up and treat it as a priority. Time frame - can you finish it immediately after Christmas?

2.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Menhya): Madam Speaker, I thank you. All along, I knew that Bills emanating from the docket of the Ethics and Integrity Ministry go to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for handling. Unfortunately, I was not around on the day when you pronounced who should handle this Bill. When I came back, I was informed that you had instructed my committee to handle this Bill. Immediately, I embarked on the process of inviting different stakeholders for public hearings and review of the Bill. That is how I was involved in that Bill until I was told to stop all public hearings and handling the Bill because you had assigned it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. That is where I stopped. 

I was further informed that the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs would continue from where I stopped. So, we had a discussion and agreed that he takes over from where I stopped. When you say that the two of us handle, Madam Speaker, I have a feeling that there should be a person to take the lead. And if you think that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee should take the lead, then for us we shall be invited like probably any other stakeholders to review this Bill. So, I am requesting that the chairperson will take it over and then we shall join him and his committee when he invites us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think you are not taking it in good spirit. There are many times when we have asked two committees to handle a matter. This is what I am saying that Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Presidential Affairs jointly handle this matter but the lead team is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee. You do not come in as the public; you come in as a partner to the Legal and Parliamentary committee. So, let us handle it that way. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.50
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the first time. Section 10 of the Budget Act requires me to accompany this Bill with a Certificate of Financial Implications; I also beg to lay on Table this Certificate of Financial Implications dated 10 December 2009 and duly signed by the Minister of Finance. I beg to move.

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.52
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, hon. Members I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the first time. 

Once again, Section 10 of the Budget Act directs that a Bill must be accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications. I am glad to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications dated 10 December 2009 and duly signed by the Minister of Finance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice for reading these two Bills but the Budget Act is very clear. When we made the Budget Act and required that Bills must be accompanied by certificates of financial implications it was very clear. And the philosophy behind that provision was that the Certificate of Financial Implications would indicate how much money Government would require or spend for three years after Parliament enacting that Bill.  

I am surprised – I have just picked one copy and the second one is there - what the Attorney-General called the “certificate of financial implications” is not. The statement, which does not indicate any amount that is projected to be spent, it does not give details and that is why the Electoral Commission has been complaining - as we speak today, the Electoral Commission is stuck. 

We have passed here several laws; those laws cannot be implemented because the kind of certificates given to us cannot project the financial implications that they know that this House will cost. Madam Speaker, I would like you to look at this and base on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, so far the Bills which have been presented are amendments of existing laws. So, there must be an existing financial framework under which they operate under the existing budget - these are mere amendments. 

MR EKANYA: But, Madam Speaker, it should indicate what the cost the amendment is likely to lead to. Otherwise, this is not a Certificate of Financial Implications. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for hon. Ekanya whom I respect very much –(Laughter)-  to grab papers from the Table after the Minister has presented the Bill and laid on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications and use the documents, which we are not privileged to look at, to rubbish the minister’s presentation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I think you should allow the Minister to present his Bills, and after he has moved all of them, I will commit them to a particular committee, which I will name and then you will be free to be there and contest what is presented. 

2.57
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the first time. 

This Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which I beg to lay on the Table. I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, hon. Members I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for the first time. Pursuant to Section 10 of the Budget Act, the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications duly issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which I lay on the Table. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Taking into account events that were eminent, we want to ask them to deal with it expeditiously so that they do not affect the elections timetable. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. I thank the minister for the Bills he has tabled. However, you are aware that we have pending motions to introduce Private Members’ Bills to amend the electoral laws, and these are some of the Bills we intended to amend. I have had an opportunity to look at these Bills and they are not broad; there are just a few scanty provisions, which are being amended. Ours were comprehensive.

Secondly, we also intended to amend the Constitution in line with the aspect of electoral laws and the Local Government (Amendment) Act, which is not one of the Acts to be amended here. We are first and foremost seeking guidance from you about the fate of our motions that you directed be split into five. We complied with the directive and then we resubmitted those motions that are pending here. We are now seeking guidance on what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are you not members of the same committee? I know you are the Shadow Attorney-General and a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Can’t you use that opportunity to enrich what has been submitted?  

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): I thank you very much. As my Shadow Attorney-General has said, we had proposed and shared with your office the comprehensive areas of amendment that we would have wished to table to the House. Last Thursday, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the evening hours passed on to me two of these Bills that have been laid today on the Table. When we looked at them, they did not really touch the nerve centres of electoral malpractices that we wanted to touch and make amendment to. 

The problem we are going to run into is the fact that even when we are expected to go and appear before this committee and propose amendments, the amendments will only relate to the scanty areas that have been identified by Government. We will not have an opportunity to bring all those other areas we felt were necessary but not covered in these proposed amendments brought in by Government.

Secondly, there are issues, like the Shadow Attorney-General has said, which are not reflected here. There are the issues of the Constitution amendment, which are not among these other Bills, which are being tabled. So, what do we do? In the Local Government Act in which you also propose areas of amendment, can we still go ahead and bring those two which are not touched at all by these four Bills which have been tabled? How else can we bring those other areas which are not touched by these four Bills that have now been committed to the relevant Parliamentary committee? We really wanted some guidance on that area so that we can see how we work. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not studied what the Attorney-General has brought and also what you have brought because I was waiting for the separated motions and the attached Bills. However, since you have already started the process, you can bring them at a later stage and we consider them because you will still have to get the permission of this House to allow you to move them. So, the House will take a decision. Did the Minister of Local Government want to say something?

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Arising from the statement made by the Opposition Chief Whip, I wanted to inform this House that my ministry will be tabling the Local Government (Amendment) Bill next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you will bring your motions and we shall debate them here, one by one as we had agreed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.04
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Madam Speaker, this House and the country at large have been demanding that the government should come out with a national land policy. I am glad that we are in the process of completing this exercise, and I wish to inform members that on Thursday we would like to meet Members of Parliament in a half-day workshop. Furthermore, I also would like to inform members that in all your pigeonholes, you have the fourth working draft of the National Land Policy. It is being given to you in advance so that you may be able to go through it and when you meet the consultants on Thursday, you will be able to interface with them much more intelligibly. 

I have also managed to give out a rather long ministerial statement, which I will not fully read. The ministerial statement simplifies what is in this thick book here. I do hope that when you go through this ministerial statement and also scheme through the draft policy, you will be able to interface with the consultants on Thursday. I do really urge you.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as you are aware Uganda does not have a comprehensive national land policy. However, the process initiated in 1983 in the Bank of Uganda was taken over in 2001 by my ministry. This process of developing a national land policy is now near completion. The purpose of this statement is to inform you of the process regarding the formulation of a national land policy, the progress made so far and what remains to be done. Copies of the fourth draft of the National Land Policy have been availed to you, members, in your pigeonholes for ease of reference and to enable members to consult their constituents and to contribute effectively at the workshop scheduled for Thursday, December 17.

The statement deals with the background on page 1 and includes what was in the Odoki Constitutional Review Commission. As a result of the 1995 Constitution, the Land Act 1998 was made. In 2001, a national land policy working group was constituted and this committee has been working very hard producing the first, second and third drafts and now the fourth draft. We also had input from the Ssempebwa Constitutional Review Commission and now we are ready with the fourth draft. The statement deals with policy goals and objectives on page 4 and also the key policy issues. On page 5 you have the guiding principles, that is, what constitutes a good national land policy. 

Madam Speaker, what now remains to be done is that the consultants, together with the national land policy working group, produce the National Land Policy which was published as a public document and consultations were carried out at all possible levels. The consultations also included the general public and interest groups. There were criteria which were used and out of all those documents, it has now come to what we have.

Hon. Members, after completing the above consultation process, the following remains to be done: 
•	Consultation of other key stakeholders including Cabinet and Members of Parliament, which we have undertaken. The members of Cabinet are already being consulted. They have got their copies and on Thursday we shall be introducing you to the process of this consultation. 

•	Displaying the fourth draft of the National Land Policy for further public input and feedback from all stakeholders that were consulted. We must be able to compare what is here with what they gave so that they know that their views are really reflected here. 

This will be done in the newspapers, at all districts and sub-county headquarters, on my ministry’s notice boards and websites. Copies of Draft 4 of the policy will also be sent to ministries, permanent secretaries, departments, agencies, relevant civil society organisations, professional bodies, the academia, political parties, religious and cultural institutions for final input and consensus building. There will also be the holding of a national land conference. 

After conducting the key stakeholders’ consultations and displaying Draft 4 of the National Land Policy, my ministry will hold a national land conference where delegates will include Members of Parliament, district representatives, special interest group representatives, national political party leaders; land experts and opinion leaders among others.

The purpose of the national land conference is for Ugandans to pronounce themselves on the proposed policy options so that the proposed policy options are agreed upon by the majority and preferably by all Ugandans. This will ensure that the National Land Policy is acceptable to all Ugandans and does not find resistance during implementation.

After holding the national land conference, the consultants, together with the national land policy working group, will consolidate all the views and recommendations from the conference and produce a final draft of the National Land Policy which will be submitted to Cabinet for consideration and approval as the Uganda National Land Policy by April 2010. After Cabinet approval, the National Land Policy will be laid before Parliament and released to the public. 

Conclusion

Hon. Members and Madam Speaker, I urge you to obtain a copy of Draft 4 of the National Land Policy, which has been given to you, and you internalise it. 

You are also invited to attend a very important half-day workshop this coming Thursday, December 17 2009, in the conference hall here in Parliament to enable you interface with the consultants.

Finally, I urge you to consult your constituents and submit written views to the ministry not later than end of January 2010. Please, do participate in the process so as to have a nationally acceptable National Land Policy. I thank you all for listening to me. For God and my country!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is just information to prepare you for Thursday. Since you have been anxious to talk about the land policy, please ensure that you attend the meeting.

MR NYEKO: Madam Speaker, I first of all thank the Minister of Lands for finally coming up with the draft of the land policy. However, if the workshop is to be on Thursday, it may clash with another workshop by the Electoral Commission.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have already rearranged with the Electoral Commission and theirs will be on Monday. The Electoral Commission workshop will be on Monday. We have already discussed and agreed with the chairman of the commission.

MS BEATRICE LAGADA: Madam Speaker, on Thursday UWOPA has a meeting, which is going to engage all the female MPs; does it mean that we shall not be part of this consultation? –(Interjections)- All the women Members of Parliament are members of UWOPA and I think they have a right to also engage. This was something arranged for long time ago and now the honourable Minister of Lands is just informing us of a meeting on Thursday morning. What do we do?

MR OMARA ATUBO: With due respect to my colleague, you have been demanding for this national land policy and we have been ready as far as September this year to hold this seminar. We are really trying to catch you before you go for the recess so that you can consult your constituencies during the recess. The National Land Policy has a given timeframe, and we do not have a permanent organisation like UWOPA, which we can consult any time. 

Since the National Land Policy actually touches UWOPA as women in a very special way, I would urge them to join us on Thursday because the women need to be fully incorporated in the land policy. Thank you.

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I must say I am disappointed with the minister. Are you inferring that because UWOPA is an association of the Uganda women parliamentarians it is not important and whatever they have arranged to do on Thursday is not important and therefore they should put it aside? 

My argument and our argument is that as parliamentarians we have many schedules and surely the women parliamentarians have a very important meeting which affects the women representatives and the people they represent. The honourable minister has just informed us this afternoon that there is consultation; at least we did not get prior information on Thursday. Is he proposing that our contributions to his consultation on Thursday are so unimportant that he can afford to do without the women parliamentarians?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members! Last week I announced two meetings. One of them was on the National Development Plan, which aborted, and the second one was this one on the land policy. I announced last week that it would take place this week. Please, rationalise. Maybe divide; some go there and some go for this one. Both are important. I have done my work, I have communicated; you take your decision.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

3.18
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By the time we adjourned this motion last week, we had not started voting and since then a lot of consultations have been made. Arising out of the consultations, I wish to move two amendments to my motion, which is being distributed, for the resolution of this Parliament for the creation of new districts as follows:

I propose to delete item No.8 in the original motion which sought to introduce the creation of Kalungu District and also to delete item No. 10 in the original motion, which sought to introduce Butambala District from the list of the districts to be created by this Parliament.

The reasons for my amendment are as follows:

Since I moved this motion to create the districts, some disagreements from the leaders of the mother districts have emerged. It is my observation that these disagreements need some time to resolve. Government has started the process of consulting the parties involved and we expect that the consultations will be complete by February 2010 after which I undertake to report to this House on the outcome of those consultations.

On page 27 of the report, the committee had recommended that the districts of Buhweju, Sheema, Ngora, Kween, Kole, Matheniko, Kapelebyong and Kibuku should be cleared by Parliament by the end of December 2009. The government position on this proposal is that consultations on these districts are continuing and we shall be able to report to this House on the status of these districts also in February 2010.

I beg to move.

3.21
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do agree with the motion that has been moved by the honourable minister. The only problem is that there is an omission of the issue that I had raised. There are submissions that had been made to the ministry, duly processed from the district. This is in the case of Namisindwa District. There is nothing mentioned in the report yet the submission is there in the ministry.

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the amendment he has made. I am seeking clarification from him whether, when consultations are duly completed and are positive, Government undertakes to put in place these districts during the forthcoming financial year. I just want to know whether this is possible and also whether it will be possible for the Electoral Commission to consider these new districts in its process of the forthcoming elections. Thank you

3.23
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the amendments from the honourable minister, I really expected him to mention something about Pader District. I have always spoken on this Floor of Parliament that there was a proposal from the council of Pader to sub-divide Pader into two, having Agago as another district. When the report was being presented on the Floor of Parliament, I did not see this proposal among the list of districts that are still undergoing consultations. Immediately after we adjourned the House, I walked out and spoke with the honourable minister about this and he admitted receipt of such a request and he said he would work on it. So I expected that when he would come with an amendment of this kind, we would see it.

Pader District is really very big. We have 27 sub-counties. In comparison, we are creating districts of seven sub-counties, eight sub-counties but Pader district has 27 sub-counties. By the fact that council had already written a letter, the resolutions are there, everything is there before the minister, I wonder why it is not appearing here. Thank you

3.25
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the minister’s statement amending the earlier motion, he did say that since we adjourned last time a lot of consultations have been ongoing. Perhaps the minister fell short of explaining to all the members where, when and who the stakeholders to be consulted that time were. 

For the case of Ngora District to be, since 2008 we have actually submitted literally everything that is required for purposes of justifying the creation of a district. I have also followed it up with other letters which I am sure the Minister of Local Government received. I am just wondering whether there is any other gap that could be along the path for Ngora District to be created. To me the February deadline will keep people again under a lot of tension and anxiety. Hon. Minister, I wish you could help us out and state what the missing gap is because as far as we are concerned, we do not see any missing gap for justification of the creation of Ngora. I really see February as a very long period. I thank you.

3.27
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Exactly one week back on Tuesday, we were here and the entire Parliament talked in unison other than the Minister for Local Government and the Minister for Security. I am heartedly surprised to note from the honourable minister that ever since Tuesday, he has held and carried out wide consultations. I am the Member of Parliament for Terego who talks on behalf of Terego in this House; I am a stakeholder. Referring to part of his submission in his motion, I have never been consulted. I do not know whom he consulted on behalf of the people of Terego. 

One thing which I have noticed is that the Executive seems to be hiding under state power. I wish individuals in executive positions could be held accountable for their actions. They are hiding under state power because when matters go to litigation, it is the taxpayers of Uganda that suffer the brunt of paying the court fees. I only wish individuals could take responsibility for their actions.

Having said that, in as far as I am concerned and in as far as, Madam Speaker, your ruling is concerned, the issue of Maracha-Terego is [Mr Awori: “Dead.”] a very contentious issue. Former UPC, do not disrupt me -(Laughter)- do not disrupt me, please. I need protection from the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR WADRI: I am being intimidated by hon. Aggrey Awori, a former UPC member. (Laughter) As I was saying, it is subjudice for us to debate the issue of Maracha-Terego here in this House as of now. The honourable minister knows very well that it was within his constitutional right to make an appeal against the High Court judgement, which right he enjoyed and made his intention to appeal on the 14th of April this year. Since then, he is here, he is a lawyer and he has not even submitted a memorandum of appeal. Why should a person, learned as my brother is – for whom I have high regard and keep referring to honourably as my senior grandson, a lawyer who knows all these legal implications - not even submit a memorandum of appeal and he has refused to appear in court? That is why I am saying people are just only hiding under state power. It is no longer a matter of law. The way I look at it, it is now a matter of “mobocracy”. You have the majority numbers and you want to force things, but the law will not be bent.

When I came to this House and I took oath, I swore by the Constitution to uphold and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I cannot allow, I repeat, I cannot allow the Constitution to be defiled by the Executive and I sit, watch and clap hands. I will not do that and I will not be part of it. I will have fallen short in my responsibility and in my duties as a Member of Parliament. For you the majority who believe in wrongdoing, you have the numbers, do it and thereafter I think we shall know where to go for redress because it now all looks a predetermined thing. The consultations which were carried out intensively I am meant to understand were in State House yesterday and therefore you are at liberty to enjoy your majority numbers.

As I said, I swore in this House to uphold and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Where it is being abrogated, the way I see it about to happen, I will have no reservation but seek protection of the Constitutional Court as to why we should continue to run this country as if it is a sole proprietorship. If you are running a sole proprietorship, when you are not around you lock up your shop and go home. When you want to take holidays, you lock it up and go home until you come back. However, if it is a company, you must consult and go by a memorandum of understanding. In this case, the memorandum of understanding that we as a country cherish is the Constitution and the laws that have been written - the Local Government Act and other subordinate laws. 

Here is a situation where we are being taken for a ride. We are being trampled upon as if we have no rights, as if we cannot enjoy protection from courts of law. I want to rest my case here. I will watch whatever happens and at an appropriate time I will obtain records of Parliament and go to court. I thank you.

3.33
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a document, the amended motion for the resolution by the minister. When the minister was talking about pending districts and indicating the timeframe and requesting for us to accept to move the timeframe from December, as the committee indicated in the report, to February, I kept reading and I failed to get where he was reading from. This will make it very difficult for assurance to be recorded. I want to know whether it would be possible for the minister to put it in writing because what is amended here does not contain that particular part of the pending districts, which he had indicated. Thank you.

3.34
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about two clarifications that I am seeking from the minister. I see item No.3 under the resolution talking about Otuke District currently part of Lira consisting of Otuke County with its headquarters at Alangi (Orum Trading Centre). I want to know from the minister whether Alangi is actually Orum trading centre or Alangi is going to be renamed Orum trading centre as the district headquarters of Otuke. It is a bit contradicting and it will also confuse the rest of the people in Otuke. What do they actually mean by having it in Alangi and also in brackets in Orum trading centre? These are two different things. 

Secondly, I also want to know whether the fourth item on Lamwo District, which is currently part of Kitgum District consisting of Lamwo County, is having its headquarters in Lamwo township because I have never know any place in Lamwo called “Lawmo Township”  (Laughter). So, I wonder whether it has been created of recent. Indeed, there is no township in Lawmo County. So, which location are we talking about?

Lastly, I want this to go on record - indeed, I am always and will always be very sick of debating the creation of new districts. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ishaa, you benefited from the creation of a new district. (Laughter)

3.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make my small request on the districts, I want to set the record straight. When there was debate about the last Bill that we passed on FGM, my sister, hon. Margaret Muhanga, said that I had circumcised my kids. I have two sons and they are not yet circumcised. They have to grow up and I will cut them following the cultural procedure. All the MPs from Bugisu know that I am the cultural leader, so I cannot commit this crime of cutting my kids –(Interjection)- and I am the chairman. For your information, I think I will circumcise the first one next year –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I have listened to hon. Nandala-Mafabi and he makes it clear that he is a cultural leader. I wonder what he is doing in this Parliament if he is a cultural leader. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. We have a culture called circumcision and I am the one who heads it. So, it is not really that I am the king; I am only in charge of the culture. There is a difference between being in charge of a culture and being a cultural leader. I wanted to put the record clear because I will circumcise my son next year. 

Having said that, I think it is high time that Government came to its senses. First and foremost, you have destroyed all counties. Counties were part of the administrative units in every district and since you have destroyed them, it means that people want districts to replace counties. I think it is just logical. You can see that the reason why hon. Omara Atubo had to cross was because of a district –(Laughter)- in order to avoid problems –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is the leader of circumcision –(Laughter)- and definitely the way he walks indicates that it was a circumcision gone wrong somewhere - I know enjoys a lot of humour with me. However, for him to imply that I have crossed because of a district is rather hitting me too much. First of all, on the day I was sworn in here, I was no longer on the other side, so the issue of crossing does not arise. Two, I think the district came much later, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. So, there are more fundamental issues why I am on this side rather than on that side and we are also waiting for you to come to this side. Thank you very much. Is he in order to impute that I am on this side just to obtain Otuke District?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me amend the statement - the district found you there. 

As we speak, if we have to create equity, there should be a policy that every county becomes a district and the reason is clear. I will give an example; if a district is in place, it will have a local council which has LC V downwards, it will have a district service commission which will have the CAOs and others, it will have an RDC and four assistant RDCs who do nothing and it will have one MP for the constituency and one MP for the women. If your district has more than one county, that means that you will have only one civil service, one local council, the RDCs will be fewer and there will be only one woman MP. So, who loses? The one with more counties loses more than the one with only one county. 

I agree with my brother, Bukeni, on why he is clamouring for one; he wants his district, which is a one-county district, to become a two-county district so that he has two districts. He knows the reasons. However, in order to avoid problems, we either bring back the administrative units at counties or since we have killed them, we make our counties districts. 

Madam Speaker, I have two lists and there is district No. 3 and No. 4. You recall that we agreed that where a district is created, the district will take the name of either the town council or one of the big trading centres. However, if you look at district No. 3, which is Otuke County, they are even confused; they do not know the name of the place where the district headquarters will be. That shows that we were not organised in creating districts and these are now personal properties. When hon. Omara Atubo was there, he said, “Now I am a minister but I should also go with a district”. I know he is now proposing maybe to the LC IV chairman of the area. Lamwo district is just Lamwo County, the township is Lamwo Township. If you ask anybody from Acholi here, he will tell you that that there is no Lamwo. This means that this Minister of Energy, Hon. Onek is trying to create a district from his trading centre and maybe use his own house. So, you can imagine the districts we are creating!

There is a district headquarters called Kibuuku. Kibuuku is in Bugwere, I do not know when Kibuuku became part of Ntoroko.

Having said, I think we need something realistic to be done; we should not create districts for the sake of creating them and because people are ministers. We should have a policy which is clear on districts. Let all counties become districts, let us decide today. Since we have said that we can handle these administrative costs, let us handle it. Since we have divided districts into small units, it is now time we divided Uganda into small countries so that we also have enough presidents in Uganda. We should have presidents for the East, North, West and Central. That is the best way to govern this country, short of that there will be heading to genocide and no one region should be in power forever.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I wish you could really focus on the motion.

3.36
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Last week when we were concluding the debate, I had some issues for clarification. I am going to seek clarification from you, Madam Speaker, and also from the Leader of Government Business.

As you may be aware, from 2004 the matter of dividing Tororo into three districts was discussed at Rwakitura in a meeting chaired by the President. In that meeting, we agreed that that Tororo, which included Butaleja, be divided into 3.

In 2005, Government created Butaleja district and the Minister of Local Government, then Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, said that the President and Government were still consulting on Tororo. This year, hon. Adolf Mwesige brought a motion here creating Mukuju and Kisoko districts to conclude the division of the then Tororo district. The minister withdrew Kisoko and Mukuju on the ground that there were still consultations going on. The clarification I am seeking is: how long will the consultation on the division of Tororo take? From 2004 up to 2009! Can we have a timeframe from the President and the government as to when this consultation will be concluded?

Hon. Amama Mbabazi stood up here and said that the Ministry of Local Government had erred technically and legally by dividing Tororo district and creating Mukuju and Kisoko. However, I remember that when the Minister of Local Government appeared before the Committee on Local Government, he said that he had done legal consultations and proposed to the committee that either Kisoko or Mukuju will retain the name Tororo. This means that the name Tororo remains in the schedule.

I went down to convince the people of Tororo County and for them they said that a rose by whatever name still smells like a rose. The people moved ahead and named Mukuju sub-county Tororo so that the name Tororo is retained instead of Mukuju. We have Tororo retained and this conforms to the Constitution. I want to find out from the Ministry of Local Government what legal problem there is. When the minister appeared here, he said that the location of Tororo town was still a matter of consultation but, Madam Speaker you know very well that in this Parliament, we have MPs who speak for their area and also MPs who speak for their district.

The MP for Tororo Municipality, hon. Sanjay Tana, has appeared in this House and before the committee stating that his people are part of Tororo County and they would wish to form one district. So, who else speaks for Tororo Municipality who can say that Government will have to decide where Tororo Municipality falls?

Recently, somebody called me and said that the way forward for the people of Tororo County who are marginalised is for them or me to cross to NRM. I said, “No problem, I am ready”, and today I wanted to ask whether I can cross to the other side but then when I looked at the Constitution I discovered a problem yet I swore to defend it.

I wanted to cross such that we have this district. When FRONASA first started in 1980, the President was hosted in Koitanyilo hills. The founder of FRONASA, Omongin, is an Itesot. He was the first chairman and it is in “The Mustard Seed”. That man hosted the President in Tororo County. For all these years the people of Tororo County have been voting NRM, 80-90 percent. 

In the last elections, NRM did not perform well because the promises for the district were not fulfilled. Last week I sent a message to the President telling him that he should come to Tororo County and I parade all the FDC people. For me, I cannot do it here because it is unconstitutional. I want to find out from Government if districts - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have very painfully risen on a matter of order against my brother and shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. Hon. Ekanya has been in this House and this is his third term. He knows very well the rules of multi-party dispensation. I have, for quite some time now, blocked my ears to hearing whatever he was trying to say but still even after having closed my ears, the sound waves kept on entering into my ear drums. (Laughter) 

The honourable member has repeatedly appealed for the need to cross in order to get a district for his county. The point of order that I would like to raise against my shadow minister is as to whether he is in order to suggest that districts are therefore being given on FDC/NRM basis and that in order to get a district, he has to cross to NRM? Is he in order to impute that that should be the way and that everybody who wants to get a district must cross to the NRM? 

Is he in order and yet for me who knows the rules of the game, I am not about to and I will not cross in order to get district status? Is hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, my shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appreciate the stress and tension that hon. Ekanya is going through but I think the issues of crossing are not for this House. Looking at this motion, there are districts and I do not want to embarrass Members, who are not part of the NRM but are on this list. So, there is no need to emphasise the issue of crossing. You have made your point and asked the minister to explain who he is consulting and what else he has to do. The issue of crossing should be handled from somewhere else. Please, conclude.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With your guidance that districts are not given based on that criterion, I want to find out from the Secretary-General of the NRM and the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi, what locus standi he derived to state in this House that it was illegal for the hon. Minister of Local Government to create Kisoko and Mukuju. This is because when the minister appeared before the committee, he told us that instead of the name Mukuju, we should call Mukuju Tororo and it was agreed upon in the committee. It is on record that Tororo Municipality is part of Tororo County. So, on what grounds did you say that the motion by the minister was wrong so that Government had to withdraw it for further consultation? Thank you.

3.57
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to deviate a little from discussing the specifics and try to bring back the principle of creation of these districts. I appreciate that the minister’s preamble is taken from the constitutional provision, Article 179(4). However, a wider reading of this provision, I think, is a recipe for the multiplicity of districts without end. 

I would like to know from the minister, is there going to be, at one point, a ceiling above which we are not going to create any more districts? This is because while we talk about effective administration, taking into account means of communication, geographical features and economic viability, we do not seem to emphasise the administrative costs of running these districts. I think it is important that we as leaders start looking around and seeing that may be there will come a point where we cannot run these districts even if we created them. That is point No. 1.

Point No. 2, which to me is more important, is: are we re-thinking our administrative units? This is because while Government is bringing up these district divisions and laws about local government tiers, we are not talking about revising our thinking about administrative units. Could Government please come out clearly and state to us what administrative units we are going to adopt? This is because as matters are, we are going to reach a dead end. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.00
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few points to raise. I oppose the creation of any district as a matter of principle. I do not agree that this small country, which you can drive across in five hours, should be cut into small pieces and my views are also being carried by hon. Okupa who is opposing the creation of Serere District. I am sorry that I honestly disagree with my woman MP that even in Pader, Prof. Latigo and myself are opposing the creation of any new district.

I think the problem we have is that people are targeting 2011. They think that if they get a new district and go and tell people that they have brought it, they may be voted back. That is my personal observation. Let me assure you that even if we create 333 districts, at least 150 MPs will have to lose their seats in 2011. Look at the records of the past Parliaments; there is a trend, which determines who comes back and who does not. Even if you make your home a district, it is not a safety net that you are going to come back.

I would personally, on a slightly ambitious basis, even appeal to Members to start thinking of contesting in constituencies outside their areas. I have talked with hon. Ruhindi several times and told him that one of these days I may go and contest in Nakawa -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, can you focus on the motion, please?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you for that guidance. Having raised that preamble, I have two substantial issues on the motion. One is the constitutionality of the motion. Article 94 of the Constitution allows Parliament to make Rules of Procedure for its operations. 

Article 128(2) of the Constitution says, “No person or authority shall interfere with the courts or judicial officers in the exercise of their judicial function.” 

Basing on Article 94, we made the Rules of Procedure. Rule 60 reads, “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” 

Madam Speaker, hon. Wadri has raised such serious constitutional issues that I do not want him to walk into court next time and lower the repute of this House. There is a pending case of the Attorney-General v Kassiano Wadri. It has not yet been disposed of and today, Parliament is seemingly in contravention of Article 128 and rule 60, the subjudice rule, by considering the issues of Maracha District, which are before court. I am seeking guidance on this matter. I hold it strongly.

I was wondering as hon. Wacha – I was in Kaberamaido two years ago at the district headquarters and the grass in the main football ground was enough for Kony to launch a one-week operation. The district had failed to cut the grass. We are creating more districts, but how economically viable are they going to be for this country? I want to ask the minister; can we create all these districts today and then tomorrow, we balkanise them under the Regional Tier Bill so that we have things like road works regionalised; Gulu-Kitgum-Pader-Amor-Lamwo with one road maintenance unit and one water unit so that we do not take all these unnecessary units to these small villages and sub-counties? Can the minister tell us concretely if he can undo what we are doing today in the Regional Tier Bill so that today we can all win and say we have brought it; then tomorrow, we take most of the local government support to the regional level as opposed to the district levels to make these smaller units viable? 

For example, I have been in Otuke several times. Acholi and Lango Parliamentary Group met the President in Otuke recently. That place has seen the bulk of the LRA rebellion. I even wonder whether they will keep the first office furniture now that we are operationalising this district. 

Is it possible hon. Minister under the Regional Tier Bill to balkanise the whole of the Central region so that UPE funds, health funds and road maintenance funds are sent to the regional government, then these small districts, which have now become sub-counties, send their representatives? Shall we have one councillor per district to the regional government where they will allocate resources from to avoid having over 5,000 elected leaders in this country? 

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Otto for giving way. Hon. Otto has raised a pertinent issue of the constitutionality of this motion. I felt obliged to raise a point of information on this issue.

When you look at the heading of this motion, the amendment is of Article 179, clause (1) paragraph (b) for creation of districts. But when you look at Article 179, clause (1)(a) is about altering boundaries of districts and (b) is about creation of new districts. There are two aspects, altering boundaries and creating new ones. This motion is specifically about 1(b), creation of new districts. But page 2; paragraph 9 talks about altering the boundary of Arua District to incorporate Terego County. That is Article 179 (a) of the Constitution, yet the motion is brought under 179(1)(b), which is a violation of the Constitution by including the aspect of altering the boundary.

In the schedule to this Constitution, Terego is already part of Maracha. Now we are going to phase out a district from the Constitution; that is a district comprising Maracha and Terego. Where is it going to remain? The moment you create Maracha and then re-design the boundaries and take back Terego to Arua, what is going to happen to that district comprising Maracha and Terego? Wouldn’t it be phased out completely from the Constitution without amending the Constitution? Wouldn’t that amount to abrogation of the Constitution, which is treason under Article (2) of the Constitution? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OTTO: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, the creation of the new districts is not for the good of Ugandans. I have been calculating the number of districts they are creating in each region and found out that in the North, there are four districts in the Central, four in the West, three in the East, five in the North. These are the districts, which are being split.

A heavily populated area like Western Uganda, according to the population figures, is requesting for the least number of new districts. Even Bushenyi that we all know urgently needs a new district has declined the new district. What is happening?

MR BANYENZAKI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give you is that it is not true that Western Uganda is not requesting for new districts. Kabale District has already passed a resolution to create two more districts from Kabale; that is Rubanda and Rukiga districts. This resolution was made on 20 November 2009 and is signed by 31 members of the council. I beg to lay this resolution and the minutes of the council on the Table. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, what I am laying on the Table is the resolution from Kabale District Council to create two more districts - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Banyenzaki, do you just bring resolutions from Kabale and lay them here and create a district? (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am laying this document on the Table as evidence that Kabale District has already taken a decision to create Rubanda and Rukiga districts. It is up to the minister to take appropriate action. I lay it on the Table. (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: As I wind up, I want to thank hon. Banyenzaki for that information. Madam Speaker, rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure specifically states that the Speaker’s ruling shall be final. I want to draw the attention of this House to the ruling of the Speaker on Tuesday the 8th of December 2009 if I may read from the Hansard, and I am very privileged it was the Speaker in the chair who was chairing then:  “THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, the matter which went to court was the two counties of Terego and Maracha. By seeking to remove one, you are altering the subject matter of the suit. Those two were taken to court and if you remove one, you will actually be interfering with the suit.” That was the Speaker’s ruling. 

So, hon. Minister, considering rule 73 of the House, in spite of the Speaker’s ruling, you have still brought back the issue of Terego-Maracha in this motion. You are a lawyer and the Speaker is a lawyer, why are you trying to make the legal profession go to disrepute? So, I will really draw your attention to this Hansard and I may hand over the copy to you as you come to respond. 

Lastly, tell us how many districts Uganda will have when all is said and done. During our school days, there were 16 but these days I even do not know. My daughter asked me and I remembered that they were 88. So, when all is said and done, how many districts will this country four times the size of Belgium have? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will be responding to the matter a little later but let us ask the minister to make a response and then I will speak on the position of the House on the issue.

4.12
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions. On the question of the districts of Kalungu, Ngora and Kole and others which were deferred, I had already said that Government will come with a position to this House in February next year. My statement is captured on the Hansard; my view is that the Hansard is more authentic for purposes of parliamentary procedure than just my letter. But if hon. Betty Amongi wants a letter, I will be glad to write it. 

So, the commitment from Government is that we shall have a definite position on the way forward for these districts by February without fail and we will come here and report to you.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Hon. Minister, you have mentioned Kalungu; do I take it that that also includes Rubanda and Rukiga -(Laughter)- is their fate also to be decided in February? Should I take that information back to my people hon. Minister? 

MR MWESIGE: I will also come with an answer on Rubanda in February next year. I will definitely have an answer. But I would advise that the hon. Member for Rubanda submits the documents through the right procedures, namely that you submit your request to the Ministry of Local Government who will take it to Cabinet and if Cabinet approves it, it will come to this House. That is the procedure and I would advise that you take it. 

The request for Agago has been received in our ministry but I can see that some colleagues from Pader itself are not comfortable with the proposal. This is the more reason why Agago should also be deferred until consultations are made with the leaders of Pader. 

The ministry has received the Namasindwa request, it will be studied because the ministry will have to send a technical team to that area to study whether the request is proper and as soon as those studies are finished, Government will have a position. 

Districts must follow the names of their headquarters. I know of no law which says that a district once created, must be named after its headquarters. But it has been the practice of this House to name districts after their headquarters.  For those districts that appear in the motion, which have not been named after their district headquarters, that has been done in consultation with the people who requested for those districts and, therefore, I would request this House to respect the request of the people who requested for these districts to name in accordance with the proposals we have made. 

As for Kibuku being in Mbale, well, there is a place called Mbale in Kyenjojo District and it has not ceased to exist. So, I do not see anything wrong with having a Kibuuku in Ntoroko and having a Kibuku in Bugisu because Ugandans are interrelated - people have been migrating with their clans, values and cultures. 

Hon. Ekanya talked about the consultation on Tororo. I think the Secretary-General of the NRM made the position very clear that Government respects the request of the people of Tororo County to be granted a district status and that commitment is firm. But we recognise that there is a dispute over the location of Tororo Municipality on which we must consult. The President has personally taken up this consultation. I would not want to haphazardly set up a time frame for the head of state but what I know is that he is committed to the consultation process and as soon as he has completed that process, this House will be informed by Government. 

About Lamwo, yes we chose Lamwo because there is Government land available there, which will help us build district headquarters. You do not have to have many houses - you do not have to have three, four, ten houses in order for you to start a headquarters. But the advantage with Lamwo is that there is Government land available. We need not buy more land to build the headquarters for the district and that is why we chose and proposed that the headquarters of Lamwo District be located at Lamwo. I have resolutions from the people of Lamwo County proposing that the headquarters of their district be located at Lamwo.

MS AKELLO: I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The reason this question was put across was because there is no township called Lamwo. I remember asking this when the Bill was first read. So, we are not proposing – can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS AKELLO: We are not proposing that there be no district headquarters in Lamwo but saying, “Where is the township?” because some of us come from the area and we know.

Secondly, hon. Minister, allow me -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members is there an objection to Lamwo District? Please –

MS AKELLO: Can you please hold on hon. minister Kabwegyere? This is a very -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the committee?
 
MS AKELLO: No, let me finish up before you can inform me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the committee?

MS AKELLO: No, please – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the committee?

MS AKELLO: From the committee? Okay.

MS BAKEINE: I want to inform this House that I am on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government and we visited Lamwo County. We were taken around and we even saw that Government land. It has no buildings and what the minister is submitting is true. We thought that an opportunity for this country to have a model district set up and well planned could set a precedent for this country to see how districts or rural areas can be planned especially when we are looking at the urbanisation that we have been desiring to have for our rural set up. I thank you. 

MS AKELLO: I do not want to be misquoted but want to be very clear and say, “We are not opposing Lamwo being with its headquarters in Lamwo,” but we are saying, “Where is the township? The documents that come and pass through Parliament must be authentic!” 

Secondly, I am a politician and I have got reports that one and a half weeks ago, the RDC of Kitgum was on radio making a very serious statement and I believe that could have come because I had asked this same question before. He said that I and hon. Okello-Okello are seriously opposing the creation of Lamwo District, which is really very wrong. I do not want the Minister of Energy to misquote me tomorrow when he goes to Kitgum because he wants some other things –(Laughter)- to go and misquote me that I am opposing – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, please do not bring your – order! We are really wasting time and I do not know why anybody should object to creation of more and more towns for our people. Please, conclude minister.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much. The issue of townships is a typing error which we shall cure by amendment and, therefore, should not trouble us so much because this motion is before the House and it can be amended. So if the township is a problem, we can cure it by amendment. But we agreed that the headquarters of Lamwo will be at Lamwo –(Interruptions)-  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I very well know that for a township to exist, it must be approved by the Ministry of Local Government. I want to know procedurally whether it is right for the Minister of Local Government, who is the one who approves town councils – the custodians, to come and tell us we can change. Is it procedurally right to tell us that Lamwo Town Council has been approved and it is with him with buildings and not land? (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister. 

MR MWESIGE: If hon. Mafabi had bothered to study the Local Government Act, he would know that when Parliament creates a new district, the location of its headquarters automatically becomes a town council. So once this Parliament adopts Lamwo, it will automatically become a town council. In my opinion, hon. Ben Wacha -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order. I am an Acholi politician and I know every area of Acholi like my fingers. There is no area in Acholi called Lamwo. There is a county with many other smaller units and by you making a statement that the headquarters will be in Lamwo, which is a county, people will kill themselves at the grassroots -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us hear from the Member for Lamwo County, the Minister of Energy. 

MR ONEK: Thank you. Lamwo County is named after a mountain, which is at the heart of Lamwo. The mountain is called Lamwo hill. The location of the new district we are debating today has been discussed at the parish, sub-county and county level. At the county level, a county conference was called and all the leaders of Lamwo chose an open land – an area between Lokung and Padibe to create new district headquarters because the land is available and it is at the foot of one of Lamwo Mountain ranges called Lalak. So that is the location and that is why they decided to name it Lamwo headquarters. I have here with me in Parliament – so everything is in order. Thank you. 

MR MWESIGE: An issue on whether this matter is subjudice was raised and I would not want preempt the exercise of your discretion but I had made a submission the last time this motion was discussed that this matter, in my opinion, is not subjudice. The subjudice rule is rule 60(1) which says, “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure?

MR WACHA: Thank you hon. Mwesige. This matter was settled the other day and procedurally we are doing ourselves a disservice if the Chair rules and then we go back and try to start arguing about it. However wrong or right the decision was on that day, we should stick by it.   

MR MWESIGE: Well my understanding is that the matter on whether this motion is subjudice or not was not ruled on. The Speaker will definitely guide us although I was saying that the rule emphasises debating the motion in a way that will not prejudice the interests of the parties to the case. I would like to refer to the ruling of the High Court in the case between hon. Kassiano Wadri and the Minister of Local Government, which was delivered by Justice Kibuuka Musoke in the High Court on 27 March 2009 and in this case, hon. Kassiano Wadri had applied for a prerogative order of certiorari, removing the decision of the Minister of Local Government declaring the trading centre of Nyadri as the district headquarters of the new district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties to the High Court for quashing and remitting the matter to the councillors of Terego and Maracha counties for a decision.

The background to the presentation of the application was that during the month of July 2005, this Parliament approved the creation of a new district comprised of the counties of Maracha and Terego from Arua District. Parliament, in its wisdom, neither named the new district nor chose any place to constitute the headquarters of the new district. 

It appears that a lot of concerted efforts were made by Arua District Council and other stakeholders to identify and agree upon the name and location of the new district but without success. Two trading centres were identified in the process. They stood out for choice of one of them. They were Nyadri Trading Centre in Maracha and Kubala Trading Centre in Terego. 

The application went on to observe that since Arua District Council did not determine the location of the new district and since Parliament also did not do it, the only logical and legal way to proceed would be to remit the matter to the people concerned or their representatives, the councillors at LC V level.

That course of action, in view of the judge, agrees squarely within the spirit of Article 1 of the Constitution. Court also agreed that the choice of the headquarters and the name of the new district should be the responsibility of the people concerned who should not only determine how they should be governed but also from where they should be governed. Since there is already an interim council for the new district, which came into being by operation of the law, the matter should be referred to it for decision.

Court agrees that the Chief Magistrate would not be appropriate to preside over this matter as it is purely political and there is no provision in the Local Government Act that can back that position.

The court made the following orders:
a)	An order of certiorari quashing the decision of the hon. Minister of Local Government which declared Nyadri the name and headquarters of the new district comprising of Terego and Maracha counties. 

b)	An order of prohibition restraining the Ministry of Local Government from implementing the -(Interjections)- of the minister.
 
c)	An order remitting the matter of choosing the headquarters and naming the new district to the councillors at LC V level from Terego and Maracha who now constitute the interim council and requiring them to resolve it within 21 days from that date as the interim council for the new district.

d)	An order requiring the Electoral Commission to conduct, not later than 21 days from today, elections for the interim chairperson under section 187 (1) of the Local Governments Act.
e)	An order requiring the interim council for the purpose of effecting the order set out in (c) to meet at any place within the new district as they may agree to other than Nyadri or Kubala.

f)	An order requiring the Electoral Commission, immediately before the interim council elects the interim chairperson of the new district,  to conduct a vote for the members of the interim council to choose the headquarters of the district and therefore its name.

g)	An order awarding costs for this application to the applicant.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Local Government did not agree with this ruling so he instructed the Attorney-General to appeal and the grounds of appeal which the minister communicated are two:

a)	That the learned trial Judge erred in law and in fact in holding that there is an interim council for Maracha-Terego whereas there is none.

b)	That the learned trial judge erred in law and in fact in making an order remitting the matter of choosing the headquarters and naming the new district to the councillors at LC V level yet the power to create and  name new districts lies with Parliament.

Now the facts are that there is no district council in Maracha-Terego; the district has no name; the district as of now has no headquarters, no council and it has no chairperson. At the moment the people of Terego and Maracha are getting services through the district of Arua [Mr Wadri: “Clarification.”] This motion, which seeks to alter the boundaries of Arua, will not prejudice the people of Maracha and Terego or even the parties before court because in any case, even before this motion was tabled, the services to the people of that area were going through Arua. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the honourable minister would not accept to be sought clarification from. Maracha-Terego as a district has been in existence for the last three years. As a district, the council has to sit for budget conference. They are not an appendage of Arua District.

In my hands are two letters from the Ministry of Finance, signed by the Secretary to the Treasury, appointing officers as accounting officers for the district of Maracha and Terego. With your permission, Madam Speaker, allow me to read and lay on the Table, the letter that I have here:

“Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
Plot 2-12 Apollo Kaggwa Road
P O Box 8147 Kampala, Uganda

Reference: BPD/77/222/02 dated, 23 June 2009, addressed to Mr Samuel Okot, acting Chief Administrative Officer Maracha/Terego District. Maracha/Terego

RE: Appointment of Accounting Officer for vote 577 Maracha/Terego District, Financial Year 2009/2010

In accordance with section 8, paragraph one of the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003, you are hereby appointed as accounting officer for vote 577 – Maracha-Terego District with effect from 1 July 2009 for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

As an accounting officer for a district vote, you must comply, and ensure compliance by your district, with financial provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003, circulars and instructions issued from time to time by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Local Government, in as far as they relate to your vote.”

The letter goes on and it is signed by Keith Muhakanizi for Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury. It is copied to the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the head of Public Service and Cabinet Affairs; Deputy Head of Public Service/Secretary to Administration Reform; the Auditor-General; the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President; the  Inspector-General of Government; the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Local Government; the Secretary-General, Uganda Local Government Association; the Secretary-General of Urban Authorities Association of Uganda;  Chairman, District Public Accounts Committee and lastly, Director, Banking, Bank of Uganda. I wish to lay this on the Table.

I am saying this to water down the stand of the minister that this district is being administered by Arua. It is not! It has its own vote. The councillors of Terego and Maracha are the ones who sit in budget conference to approve the budget for that district, and not Arua District Local Government. 

Currently they have an interim arrangement known as Chairman of Co-ordination Committee and you know the person who deals with you. He is called Mr Viga Canon. You have all the correspondences. So I would not like you to mislead this august House. The facts are laid there in black and white and please own up to the mess. You appealed in the court but up to now you have not given a memorandum of appeal. You are a lawyer and you should know it better than anyone of us –(Applause)- please, own up!

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, as far as the Ministry of Local Government is concerned -(Interjections)- can I make my submission? The interim coordination committee is not council -(Interjections)- the interim coordination committee is not council. We do not recognise it as an interim council. 

The Electoral Commission has never conducted elections of the interim council; there is no chairperson for the district called Maracha-Terego; there is no executive committee in Maracha-Terego to manage what he is talking about. As far as I am concerned, we do not have an interim council. We do not have a chairperson; we do not have an executive committee and that is why I said that -(Interruption) 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to concur with the Minister of Local Government -(Applause)- not of course -(Interjections)- you first listen to what I have to say. What is happening, that man called Okot that the hon. Kassiano Wadri has mentioned was posted to Arua as a Deputy CAO for that district and since then - because I met him and he was sitting in the office of the -(Interjections)- Mr Okot was sitting in the office of the former Chief Administrative Officer of Arua. And since then, Okot, I think has been transferred to Amuru District or somewhere; he is no longer in Arua. So, if there were a chief administrative officer for a district which has no name, why didn’t that officer go to sit in a place either in Terego County or in Maracha County? 

What is actually transpiring in that notorious district is that the councillors, since they are not an interim district local council, four of them came, I do not know where they met in Arua or what - one claims he is actually the ad hoc chairman of that district. I do not know where that position of ad hoc chairman is actually mentioned in the Local Governments Act or in the Constitution. Actually these people have been operating illegally and not under the law.  

So, there is no reason why hon. Kassiano Wadri should come and mislead this House that there is a district council or interim council with a chairperson. Who is that chairperson? You can only elect an interim chairperson -(Mr Johnson Malinga rose_)- I am giving information. If you are biased, wait for your turn. You will catch the Speaker’s eye. 

The information I am continuing to give is that the procedure for establishing an interim LC V Chairman or council is clear. Either you have the interim council or you have the substantive district local council, which does not exist. So, the likes of the hon. Kassiano Wadri are dwelling on the ad hoc, which is not provided for anywhere in the Constitution.

Madam Speaker that is the information I wanted to pass on. I would like to appeal to the Minister of Local Government to take up this matter that we have some people calling themselves an ad hoc committee who are operating there and who should actually be prosecuted. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, hon. Members, I want to seek the opinion of the Attorney-General on this matter but before that, I want us to put this issue into context. And I will start by taking us back to 20 July 2005 when the Minister of Local Government moved a motion for the creation of new districts. 

The motion was in two parts: for the districts taking effect 1 July 2005 and those taking effect 1 July 2006. 

The bulk of those districts have taken off, save two, namely, that of Tororo and that of Maracha-Terego. Those are still in limbo and this is exemplified by the fact that in all those other districts there have been elections of the District Women Representatives and I will give you the chronology. 

This information, hon. Members, is contained in the Hansard of our first meeting of the Fifth Session from pages 14,974 to 14,976. Part one of that motion - that time it was hon. Kabwegyere - because I went back to check really what it was that we did with the resolution. The first part of the resolution created the following districts: Ibanda, Kabingo (Isingiro and Bukanga), Kiruhura, Kaabong, Kaliro, Koboko, Butaleja, Nakaseke, Budaka, Amuria, Mityana, Manafwa, Amolatar and Bukwo. Those were the first set.

Then the second part of the resolution created eight new districts and I want you to listen carefully:
1.	Tororo District: headquarters yet to be agreed upon and then named.
2.	A new district consisting of Maracha and Terego counties to be created out of Arua District with its headquarters yet to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
3.	A new district consisting of Kilak and Nwoya counties to be created out of Gulu District with its headquarters yet to be agreed upon after which it will be named. I think that is now Amuru. 
4.	Oyam District consisting of Oyam County having its headquarters at Oyam.
5.	Abim District consisting of Labwor County in the present day Kotido District having its headquarters at Abim. 
6.	Busiki District consisting of Busiki in the present day Iganga District with its headquarters to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
7.	Buliisa District consisting of Buliisa County in the present day Masindi District with its headquarters to be agreed upon after which it will be named; and 
8.	The last part of the resolution was that the headquarters of each new district shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act.

The question I want the Attorney-General to answer; did we complete the process? That is what I want to know because we have been sending money. So I want to know and this was a resolution brought by the Executive. For us we did our part, we agreed with them, passed the resolutions, now give us the answers.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I have some difficulty appreciating the issue but this is not about the larger context, this is -(Interjections)- there should be a microphone.

This is not about the broader issue, the specific question posed by the Speaker is whether the process of setting up a district under No. 23 in the First Schedule to the Constitution - we need to begin with Article 5(2) of the Constitution which says that “Subject to article 178 of this constitution, Uganda shall consist of -
(a) Regions - not applicable
(b) Kampala - not applicable
(C) The districts of Uganda, as specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution, and such other districts as may be established in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.”

And when we go to the First Schedule, Kampala and districts of Uganda, and you go to No. 23, it says “District comprising of Maracha and Terego Counties”.

I would like to thank the honourable MPs from these two counties and hon. Kassiano Wadri for the information he has tabled. I think it is useful. This information is useful.

Similarly, the challenge to that information by hon. Alex Onzima, MP Maracha; the challenge is also very helpful indeed. (Laughter) To my understanding, the Constitution provided a framework, which had to be operationalised and actualised by the people responsible and it was not operationalised; it was not actualised.

To answer you, Madam Speaker directly, the process of establishing this district under NO.23 in the First Schedule remained incomplete, and remains incomplete up to today. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General answered your question by saying this district, Schedule 23, has not been operationalised/actualised. The clarification I want to know from him is that the Executive has been bringing before this Parliament a vote and we have been voting money to this district. They have posted RDCs, DPCs and other officials as district officers of this district 23. What does this mean? Does it mean it is partially actualised and operationalised and if it is partially, what will then be the effect of total non actualisation/operationalisation vis-à-vis partial actualisation/operationalisation?

What is the effect of this motion which will eventually expunge district 23 from the Constitution? Would it not mean that we have amended Article 5 of the Constitution, which you read earlier? What is the effect? Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two issues we should put into context: creation of the district and operationalisation of the same. Creation is a matter of a decision of Parliament. The moment you take a decision in accordance with Article 179, you have created a district and my understanding is that by the time the amendments are effected to the Constitution and inserted in the Schedule to the Constitution, the process of creation is complete. 

You have No. 23 in the First Schedule as “a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties” and the rest is operationalisation. So, if I am to look at all the districts in Uganda and if you are to talk of complete operationalisation even in Kampala here, you will find that some structures are missing. All the structures as provided for in the law under the Local Government Act and under the Constitution have not fully been put in place in all the districts in Uganda. So, the issue that we should look at, in my understanding, is –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has used the word “creation” and it brought in my mind something that I want him to clarify. What happens when a creation of a pregnancy –(Laughter)- takes place and then it is aborted before birth? Is that a complete birth or is it an abortion? Can’t we say that what has happened here is an abortion? 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I wish that question was directed to a medical doctor; unfortunately, I am a lawyer. The point I was making and which I want to sum up is that a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties was created and it is a district under the law. 

I now want to ask, even if the process were incomplete as suggested by my counterpart, would it mean that we are completing the process by saying that Terego should go back to Arua and that Maracha should go its own way? Are we in line with the earlier resolution of this very House? Are we in line with the constitutional provision, which commands us to complete the process or are we reversing the whole process? That is what I wanted to know.

5.03
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the intervention of the Attorney-General, I did not have very strong views on this matter but I think we risk running into a very serious problem if we try to bend the law in order to suit our circumstances. 

The Constitution talks about the establishment of districts; we all know that the genesis for establishing a district starts from the grassroots with people expressing their interests to their local district councils. The local district councils then pass resolutions which are sent to the Local Government Ministry. The ministry synthesises those resolutions and takes them to Cabinet and brings those resolutions here and then we discuss and pass those resolutions. After we have passed the resolution and established a district, then there is no other way. 

Can the Attorney-General now tell me of the other arm of the law that we did not carry out when we passed that resolution that you read out, Madam Speaker? We should never try to bend laws because in the end, we, ourselves, will look foolish and we will be challenged. I wish the Attorney-General had just kept quiet. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The other clarification that I want to obtain from the Attorney-General, subject to what he has told us is: how do we then get Terego deleted from the Schedule to the Constitution? How do we get that deletion effected? Is it just by passing this motion and by so doing, will we have amended the Schedule to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda? If our hands are bound that this motion is insufficient to alter the Schedule, I am inclined to think that what we are doing is technically incorrect. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that lawyers have spoken and I have discovered that there are some lawyers misleading our Government, and if these are the lawyers we have, then we are finished. 

We created a district and it is No. 23 in the Schedule. If we want to create another district, it should then be one of Terego and Maracha and that is what the Attorney-General should have understood. It is not necessary for us to try to go around things which we know are wrong. Which council submitted the resolution that Maracha wants to become a district of its own? It must have been Terego and Maracha and if there is no council, put a council in place. 

I come from Bugisu and we had an issue of Manafwa and Bududa and you remember it was a serious matter and we said, “Okay, Manafwa and Bududa stay together; Bududa, you will get your district”, and indeed they got their district and there was no noise. Likewise, if we want Maracha and Terego to keep quiet, we must create two districts; that is Terego and Maracha. 

“Altering boundaries”, that is what the minister is talking about. I do not know which boundaries he is altering. You are now altering the boundaries of Terego District. Anyway, we need to pay more school fees for you to study law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General?

5.09 
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I was asked a specific question; I was not asked to respond generally. There was a specific question on whether the process of establishing the district under No. 23 in the First Schedule was completed and I replied that it was not completed. 

I appreciate these other interests and these other concerns, but I cannot respond to them instantly as I responded to the question posed by the hon. Speaker. If you give me time, I can respond to those tomorrow. I cannot do it instantly. I am sorry.

5.10
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Just to add my voice to that of the Attorney-General, this is simply to supplement. Those districts you read in the resolutions of this Parliament which were similar to Maracha and Terego because Parliament did not name those districts are now named in compliance with the decision of Parliament.

That is why in the Constitution you find, for example, for Acholi you have No. 24 which is called Amuru although at the time Parliament took the resolution, it was not named. At No. 28 under Bunyoro, Buliisa had not been named but we all know that it has been named. Amuria is the same with these. Amuria is No. 35.

In the case of all these districts, we all know that the process was completed: they have a local government, they have chairpersons, they have district councils, and they have a Woman MP, which is evidence that the process of operationalising the decision of Parliament to create districts had been completed.

When you look at Article 257, which defines a district, it says district means a district referred to in Article 5(2), which the Attorney-General read.

When you go to Article 177, which is about districts of Uganda, it says subject to the Constitution for the purposes of local government, Uganda shall be divided into districts. Districts are created for purposes of local government. Article 176 talks about a local government system and tells you it’s ingredients. When you look at what we have in Terego and Maracha, these have not been fulfilled.

MR WADRI: In his submission, he has clearly indicated that the whole process, according to him, of ensuring that all government structures are not in place - and yet in March this year as per the judgment delivered by the High Court in Kampala which was read and presented by the Minister of Local Government, it was him that appealed to the Court of Appeal.

After appealing, he has never turned up in court therefore halting everything. Who has halted this process? Isn’t it him who has refused to come to court after he made an appeal? While we are talking all this, Maracha-Terego district has a DPC, it has an RDC and a DISO. Surely who has halted the process if it is not the Executive?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, all of us have been here since that district was declared. Hon. Wadri, the Speaker and I have been in this House. If all was well as hon. Wadri is saying, why did he go to court? He is now saying there is DPC and that everything is ok, why did he go to court?

The matter of Terego and Maracha is a case of two leaders failing to agree on where the district headquarters should be. I have been to Terego and Maracha and I have said that if I were a leader and I was representing the area, I would behave differently because some people have been killed. There have been deaths in that area over an issue of leaders failing to agree.

I even propose that the headquarters should be in the air so as to solve this problem. So now when the hon. Member says that everything is alright when he has gone to court, is he in order to deceive this House and misguide us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I am hearing some of this information for the first time about what is on the ground. I did not know that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My simple response to my dear friend and brother hon. Kassiano Wadri is that illegality cannot be cured by passage of time. The Attorney-General has challenged the ruling of court to give power to an interim council which is even non-existent to determine the headquarters of a district. All that the minister is saying is that the ruling is defective in law as it is based on the presumption of existence of a council, which is not correct and that is the issue. Whether takes a year or two, it does not in any way cure the problem, which is being addressed now. 

The simple point, which I was making, is that by reading this Constitution, the interpretation of districts, Article 177 and the elements of what local governments are supposed to do, a district is there for the purpose of local government. In Maracha-Terego, there is no local government at the district level because the ingredients necessary for a local government to be in place do not exist. That is why the Executive is coming back to Parliament and saying, in light of the difficulty of fulfilling the wish of Parliament to create the district of Maracha- Terego, we are proposing as he is doing in the motion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Local Government as well as hon. Amama Mbabazi, have told us that the judgement of court was made and because they were not comfortable with it, they have decided to appeal. The decision is about who should decide the location of the headquarters. If we go ahead and pass this motion in its current form and create a new district called Maracha with its headquarters at Maracha and we take Terego back to Arua, what would be the decision of the Court of Appeal in that matter? What would be the relevance of the decision now that Maracha-Terego would be phased out completely? Wouldn’t it bring the appeal to an end and would that be constitutional?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, I am glad that my learned brother corrected himself. The question is, was court correct? We are questioning the correctness of the decision of the High Court. I heard that you are a lawyer, maybe you haven’t sat your exams because –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker is hon. Amama Mbabazi, who was accused for embezzling Temangalo funds, in order to make wild allegations about my academic credentials? Is Mr Temangalo in order to make such allegations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have got a register of the Members of Parliament and I do not have that name among my Members. Please, conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am used to having exchanges with intelligent people and I have absolutely no problem in facing any challenge either by way of clarification or anything like that. It is just a question of the time of the House.

I was simply making a point that when you read this Constitution, read the definition of district; look at Article 177 as to why districts are created and Article 176, which has the elements of what a local government should have. It is obvious that Maracha-Terego has not become a local government as is anticipated in this Constitution. 

Therefore, the government is simply coming back to Parliament where the power to create or alter lies - it does not lie anywhere else but Parliament and it is this House that has to make that decision. There is no way anyone, especially one who is a lawyer and has sat exams and passed them, could make any other interpretation than what is being presented. 

The reality is that that is the case and after four years - mind you this was a decision taken by Parliament in 2005 so how could we, as Parliament that have this responsibility, hold back and do nothing about this situation? The Executive has come to Parliament to require it to exercise its power and take a decision on this matter so that the people of Terego and Maracha enjoy the services, which this Parliament intended them to have when we took that decision by that motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know we have a motion and Maracha is only one item of this motion but there are districts where there is no issue. I think we are punishing the other parts of the country by continuing to delay this process. I would like to propose that we take the vote one-by-one.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall go one-by-one? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall call district-by-district.

5.27
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are caught up in a fix. What will happen if we come to Terego-Maracha when we have not sorted out this impasse? 

Ordinarily, Madam Speaker, I appealed to you to get the opinion of the Attorney-General. I thought the Attorney-General’s opinion would have sorted out this problem. Unfortunately, it has caused more questions than answers. 

But I am seeking just a clarification on this; maybe I will be convinced by the Attorney-General’s explanation. Article 257(f) defines a district. It says, “District means a district referred to in Article 5 of this Constitution.” So, when you go to Article 5, the most relevant Article is (c), “The districts of Uganda, as specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution, and such other districts as may be established in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.” 

My interpretation, for which I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General - and I heard one other senior lawyer, whom I presume sat exams and passed as he has been saying, claiming that the process was not complete. It was complete because this is what the Constitution says. Any other issue is subsequent; like there would be a district with or without a Member of Parliament. And I heard hon. Amama Mbabazi talking about those other districts, which do not have Women MPs. A council is elected to manage a district; you must establish a district first, then you continue creating those structures because the Constitution –(Interruption) 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much my colleague. The clarification I wanted to seek is: when I look at the schedule you are talking about and I look at district No. 5, that is Pallisa District - you know, there is a district called Budaka. Budaka District is not on that schedule but came out of Pallisa District, which is No. 5. Are you saying that a district cannot come out of district No. 23 just like Budaka came out of Pallisa? (Laughter) That is the clarification I am seeking. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: That is the best contribution I have heard from hon. Lyomoki in a long time. (Laughter)

The Constitution is very clear. It says that those referred to under the schedule and any other established under the Constitution. So, Budaka, which does not appear in this schedule, is catered for and any other established under the Constitution. So, there is no contradiction. 

I implore the Attorney-General and colleagues on the other side who are lawyers, to protect this Constitution. We swore to defend it. We do not have to defile this Constitution because we must make some political gains. It is unfortunate and I implore the Attorney-General to think about this seriously. A district -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just to add on the spirit of respecting the Constitution, which hon. Katuntu is appealing to Parliament about, the Constitution, which created our rules - rule 73 if I may read it verbatim to give the information: “The Speaker or the Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except on a substantive motion made after notice.”

A decision was made by the Speaker that the issue of Maracha-Terego is subjudice. Are we respecting the Constitution and the offices we created like that of the Speaker by starting to review a substantive decision without considering the requirements of a motion that would want to review the decision made by the Speaker on the 8 December 2009? That precedence is worrying. If you have opened a Pandora’s Box, then some of us may be specialists in that area of reviewing decisions of speakers. That is the little information I wanted to add as far as constitutionalism is concerned. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is for the chairperson; I am more interested in respecting this Constitution. On issues where we should have a meeting of minds as lawyers, we should not go into legal engineering to achieve political gains. 

The Constitution is very clear. There is no contradiction and I am sure – you see, when honourable colleagues who are lawyers the other side are saying – I heard it from the Attorney-General that the process had not been completed. The responsibility under the Constitution to create a district is by Parliament and it does not add on any other authority except the other authority to put structures in place. As Parliament, we finished; there is nothing we can do about Terego-Maracha. There is nothing Parliament can do to complete that process. And under the Constitution –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Under Article 179, if you can turn to it - are you there? It talks about the power of this Parliament to create or alter, okay. And most of it is talking about altering and creating -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let hon. Katuntu conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Really, I agree with the hon. Mbabazi, Article 179 talks about altering or creating new districts. The question we are asking is: which district are we altering? Is it Arua as it was then or is it Maracha-Terego? And if you are altering the boundaries of Maracha-Terego and taking away Maracha, the residue district is Terego. You do not have to be a lawyer - even a law student would know this! If we are altering Terego-Maracha as a district, the residue district is Arua, the mother district.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, hon. Katuntu has just said - if my ears are right, that the remaining district will be called Terego. Is he in order to say that Terego would now be the residue and not Maracha? Let me be understood, if you have Maracha-Terego and you take away Maracha, and Terego is taken back to where it came from, the demand -(Interjections)– we have heard it before on the Floor of this House where Members, because they disagree on the district, end up with the district being divided.  

I remember, when I was Minister of Local Government -(Interjections)– are we looking for a solution? What I am saying here is that the agreement that seems to be on the side of hon. Kassiano Wadri is that because Maracha is going, therefore, Terego also becomes a district. We have had this before and sometimes we create districts which do not make sense.

The issues now as far as I see them are: one being technical, constitutional and the other is political. And the political one is the one which has created the confusion which we have had over the period. So the lawyers are talking about the technical but they are not helping hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Onzima to agree that the district can be together. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have been talking about respecting the Constitution but the Constitution also requires that you should be here to carry out the work for this country. I do not want to say the numbers which are here, if I put it on record you will get angry with me; but we are not sufficient to complete the business, which we started. So, I am appealing to you that tomorrow I want all the Members from both sides of the House here. 

And I have embargoed the travel of all the committees for this week; you must remain here to complete the business of this country. So, I do not want to see any empty benches tomorrow. I adjourn the House to 2.00 O’clock, tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 December 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

