Wednesday, 10 December 2003

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a PEAP review workshop has been organized by the Budget Committee together with Parliamentary Budget Office to take place between Friday and Sunday this weekend. It has been changed from the 11th to 13th December 2003; it will now run from 12th to 14th December 2003. 

The workshop will consider PEAP, PMA and NAADS. It is organized for the following committees and parliamentary staff: The Budget Committee, Committee on National Economy, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Parliamentary Budget Office and the clerk assistants

The venue of the workshop is Imperial Botanic Beach Hotel in Entebbe, and the reporting time is the evening of Thursday, 11 December 2003. Letters of invitation to the workshop and details of the programme are available in your pigeonholes. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker will officiate at parts of these functions. So, I am appealing to you endeavour to attend all the sessions as is our culture.

I am also delighted to announce the election of hon. Alisemera Babiha as Vice President of International Medical Parliamentary Organization for Africa.  She was elected this week between the 6th and 7th December at a meeting which took place in Bangkok. So, please join me in congratulating her and we wish her a very successful tenure. (Applause).

2.34
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kogoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I am getting frustrated. This is an important issue. The Prime Minister promised this House that on the 2nd of December, there would be a statement from the Minister of Lands, Water and Environment on the status of Karongo-Katoke Trading Centre in Kakira. 

The story is that Kakira Sugar Works is trying to turn a trading centre into a sugar plantation. I have the Prime Minister’s letter here, directing the Minister to come to Parliament and make a ministerial statement on that matter.

Madam Speaker, the people who have been living in that trading centre are being mistreated by Kakira Sugar Works. We do not know how much land Kakira Sugar Works wants to take from Busoga region. May I know from the Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs whether this matter will be answered in Parliament, or you advise that the people of Karongo-Katoke take action, which they think is feasible in the present circumstances?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was the letter written to you?

DR NABWISO: The letter was written on 18 November 2003.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that a directive was given. But it is also true that the amount of investigation involved was not overseen at that point when the letter was written. The Minister is handling the issue and very soon he will come to Parliament and make a statement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I hope you are aware that this House will go on recess on 18th December. We should have the statement before the 18th December.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  Government undertakes that this statement will be made before Parliament goes on recess. Thank you.

PETITION BY JINJA DISTRICT DRUG SELLERS ASSOCIATION

2.38
MR NASANI NABETA (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the opportunity to present this petition to the Parliament of Uganda. Under Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to present the following petition by Jinja District Drug Sellers Association:  

The humble petition of the undersigned in agreement and represented by hon. Nabeta Igeme, Member of Parliament Jinja Municipality East, showeth and states as follows:

That the subject matter of the petition is the continuing harassment of drug sellers in Jinja Municipality and the unlawful closure of their drug shops by the National Drug Authority;  

Your humble petitioners have suffered and continue to suffer the untold loss of business, financial hardships, just to mention a few, as a result of the unlawful acts of the National Drug Authority;  

That your petitioners were asked to vacate Jinja Municipality, and when they questioned the National Drug Authority on the legality of their decision and why it was being applied selectively to only Jinja Municipality, the National Drug Authority responded by refusing to renew their licenses for 2003 and thereafter proceeded to confiscate their drugs and to close their drug shops;

That the decision of the National Drug Authority to force them out of the Municipality and their subsequent eviction is unlawful and is driven by ulterior motives;  

Further, your humble petitioners are hereby resolved that the actions of the National Drug Authority are in disregard of the National Drug Authority Act and the National Drug Policy and Authority (Issue of Licenses) Regulations, 1995; 

Wherefore by this petition, the petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House and pray that Parliament resolves itself:
 
1. That a select committee of Parliament is constituted to look into the grievances raised by the petitioners in this petition and suggest recommendations; 

2. That the unlawful eviction of the drug sellers from Jinja Municipality be halted until investigations by the committee are complete; 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray.  

Petition presented by hon. Igeme Nabeta, MP, Jinja Municipality. 

And hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

Madam Speaker, I lay this on the Table. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The petition is committed to the Committee on Social Services to report back in the first week when we return from recess.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 38 OF 2003 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

2.40
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. “On the 4th of December 2003 the Army spokesperson was quoted in the Monitor newspaper to have warned me not to undermine and abuse the Army. Also on the 9th December 2003 the same person was quoted in the same newspaper under the heading ‘UPC peddling a coup-Army’ that Rwanyarare and I are bent on dividing the Army and that the Army is our target.

Could the Hon. Minister clarify on the reported utterances since it is causing fear to me and others to enable the Speaker give guidance on the immunity available to Members of Parliament?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Defence, you have arrived just in time. There is a question for you to answer.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I am trying to catch my breath. 

The Clerk brought this matter to my attention yesterday. I had actually indicated that considering what I was going to do and that I would be in Cabinet early this morning, I would not have adequate time to consult those who are involved in the facts of this question for me to be able to answer this afternoon.  

Therefore, I would like to request the indulgence of the Chair and the House that I be allowed to answer this tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It should be reflected again on the Order Paper tomorrow.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON ELECTION VIOLENCE.

(Debate continued.)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance on the procedure we should follow in standing here to ask you to speak. Yesterday you ruled that I should sit down because I was not following the report. 

Madam Speaker, I have internalised the report and I am ready to contribute – (Laughter)- on this Floor following the report. I am asking for your indulgence and guidance as to whether your ruling yesterday actually rules me out from speaking on the issues that affected Kamuli?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when I am satisfied that you have internalised it I will give you an opportunity.

2.43
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, yesterday I listened to the debate on the report and the real issue was how to deal with the Army when it comes to elections. 

However, Madam Speaker, while we are talking about the Army there was another issue on the domestic electoral violence, how husbands treat their wives. I am very happy that the report pointed out the violation of the rights of spouses as one of the causes of election violence. This is a very serious issue.  

I think that voting is a right of every citizen in this country. But there are areas where the husband and wife do not agree on whom to vote for and sometimes the wives are denied from making an independent decision, one different from their husband. I am sorry to say that in this area men commit violence.  

I think that civic education should be carried out to educate husbands that voting is a right of everybody. I have seen this in my own constituency, Madam Speaker, where husbands take it upon themselves to punish their wives, to lock up the voter’s cards as the report indeed points out. They even beat them, causing unnecessary divorce and separation in homes.  

I think this is an issue we need to address and find a solution to. The Police should be empowered because when these reports go to the Police they are summarily ruled out as domestic issues that the Police cannot handle.  

Madam Speaker, this is an issue that the Police should be empowered to – (Interruption)

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you very much my colleague for giving way. I would like to give some information to my colleague. 

I wonder whether he is aware that even some women do harass their husbands during elections. It is true that women also harass their husbands in case they are not in harmony with the candidate in question, and at times they go to an extent of denying them sex.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that electoral violence?

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to inform the House that in such circumstances, the only thing we may have to do is strengthen the civic education. 

However, to complement what my colleague has just said, during the presidential elections campaigns one senior government official, and minister for that matter, advised women to deny their husbands their conjugal rights. To me this was very terrible harassment, which could easily derail the man’s thinking and he fails to vote wisely, which is very unfortunate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo and hon. Sebaggala, would do you define that as electoral violence?

MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much honourable Reverend for accepting this information.  I think we should strengthen the family law very seriously and then also appeal to the candidates to have some level of discipline. Really, you cannot hold some people’s wives through the night for meetings! 

We have read some press reports that people’s wives are turned into girlfriends, sugar mummies for the candidates themselves. So, really, discipline on the part of the candidates should be emphasized.  Thank you.

MS JALIA BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I seek clarification from my dear colleague; what happens to people’s husbands?

MR MBALIBULHA: That is what I said, that discipline among the candidates should be really emphasized. When we are strengthening the family law we should have a very serious punishment for such behaviour.  Thank you very much.

REV. SSEMPANGI: Madam Speaker, I think you can get from this information and points of clarification that there is an issue, which may be covered by the Domestic Relations Bill, on how spouses should be handled during elections. 

Madam Speaker, I was a bit disturbed because the chairman of the committee in his first executive summary made very good recommendations, which he turned into questions in his second executive summary. However, I followed the recommendations, especially the one of creating election tribunals that are decentralized, to be established in districts. I think this is very important. 

However, time was not given to elaborate on this point. It could be a way forward to minimize on election violation. Who will compose these tribunals and for how long? How are they to be financed? What kinds of people are going to serve on these tribunals? 

I think these are necessary so that people who are aggrieved are handled easily. And if they are in place during elections, they could handle this domestic violation.

Madam Speaker, there are two other points mentioned on how to handle these grievances - the Electoral Commission and the magistrates. One would like to know which cases would be handled by the Electoral Commission, which cases would be handled by the magistrates courts and which ones would be handled by the tribunals. 

Election Tribunals are being elevated, according to this recommendation, to the level of High Courts. So, I would like to know from the chairman of the committee whether they have thought how this should be handled?

Madam Speaker, my last point is on having a separate organ to scrutinize the foreign qualifications. I think that this matter is handled with a bit of injustice. You find somebody who has served as a Member of Parliament, who has served as a minister and at the last minute he is disqualified because he does not have the qualifications to represent his people.  I think a separate and independent organ, as is being recommended by the committee, should handle this issue. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi I have looked at the rules. Under Rule 51(8), you have already contributed to the motion; no member can speak more than once on the same motion.

2.54
MS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the committee for their report. It is very important that as we consider this report, we should bear in mind that election malpractice has led to a turbulent history in this country. Therefore, as we debate I do hope that we are debating so that we can clean our act, so that history does not repeat itself.  

Madam Speaker, I have been around for some time. I have seen one election after another, but the elections of 2001 worried me because the extent of the violence was uncalled for. It was uncalled for because the Movement is strong –(Interjections)- Yes, at that time it was strong and I was wondering why –(Interjections)- yes, I have not had an opportunity now to weigh –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members do not heckle her.

MRS BIGIRWA:  Madam Speaker, can I be protected? I thought that we would have carried out an election without hooliganism, without thugs, without beatings and without killing people. But what I was able to see and read in the press worried me. I do hope that Government will look at all these issues and the recommendations of the committee critically, with a view of making sure that there will be no repeat of what has happened in the past.  

Madam Speaker, when this issue was brought on the Floor of this House, I think it was last year, the Executive actually did not want it to be debated and I remember they did not want a select committee. At that time they had promised that there would be a Judicial Commission of Inquiry and, therefore, there was no need of having a select committee.  

I do remember the Minister of Justice at that time assuring this House that even if the Select Committee was going to carry on its work, they were going to appoint a Judicial Commission of Inquiry, which up to now has never been appointed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with the Electoral Commission and what in the report they called institutional weaknesses. The Electoral Commission can either play a part in ensuring that there are free elections or it can also make sure that there are no free elections. 

The recommendation of the committee goes further to say that, arising out of the observations, some people within the Electoral Commission were recruited irregularly, some did not have proper papers, and others were just recruited without using the right procedures. 

I would like, therefore, to urge the line minister that as they are considering these recommendations, even as the report came out I would have thought that the Electoral Commission would have carried out investigations to ensure that the right staff are in the right places. But as of now, we still know that other than the Commissioners whom they changed, it is as usual, like in the past. 

Madam Speaker, the report also talked about ignorance, lack of democratic culture and abuse of office. I would like to talk about lack of a democratic culture. I think this is the biggest problem we have in this country. I do not know how we are going to get out of this. 

I thought we could start through our schools so that people would be able to understand and comprehend democracy. As they grow up, they would be able to know that in a democratic situation, there is tolerance, there is accepting defeat and accepting victory. This is part of our problem. 

Whenever there are elections people - maybe I could call them over-zealous supporters - want to do everything that is possible, whether it is criminal or thuggery, to make sure that their candidate wins. This has really created damage to democracy in this country. Therefore, we have got to find a way out together. 

Right from childhood, as we grow up we should be able to embrace democracy and know that democracy is about tolerance, about having winners and losers. But unless something is done about this, I can foresee violence after violence. Eventually history will repeat itself. 

Therefore, I would like also to recommend civic education. What do we mean by civic education? Normally this word becomes a catchphrase towards elections. They give money to some NGOs, to some functionaries to go and do civic education. As it turns out, civic education is then not about democracy or about how elections should be conducted in a free and fair manner. It is about whom you should vote for. 

Therefore, we must now see how we can do proper civic education and not wait for elections so that people go to campaign for their candidates.  

When you look at the issue of individual merit, it is a very good thing. Most of us would not be in this Parliament if it were not for individual merit. But we just misuse it because as we know in practice individual merit is not individual merit. People take sides, they campaign for other people right from whatever level, and eventually it becomes partisan. Well, now we may have wisdom and that is why we are abandoning it. But individual merit, as I know it, is just in name but not in practice. 

I would also like to thank the committee for having come up with a recommendation on having concurrent presidential and parliamentary elections. Madam Speaker, in the Sixth Parliament we tried to amend this in the Constitution and we were defeated because people did not want it to be brought up. 

However, from what I read in the papers, we have now changed our minds and there should be concurrent presidential and parliamentary elections. This will not only save people from going to vote several times, it will also save money. We are always crying for money, but this will save money. 

However, I would go further to recommend that it should not only be for presidential and parliamentary elections only, but it should include the councillors and maybe district chairpersons. This should be done on the same day so that we are able to save money.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those people who have condemned the use of the Army by some individuals during the elections. In particular I would like to talk about the Kalangala Action Plan. This is like a militia, I imagine, and Government is fully aware of their leader, what they did and how they beat up people. But the leader is at large, the people who were involved in these acts are at large and no action was taken. 

As a result of this, my fear is that in 2006 we may see a situation, which is even worse than it was before. People are going to have individual militias. This is an example. 

In my language we believe that if you steal when your child is on the back, you are showing that child what to do. Already I hear some people saying, “We are not going to bother, we are going to just create militias and we go and beat up people”. So, I do hope that Government can deter future hooliganism. 

They should be able to punish the people who used to beat up people. I do not know whether it is a registered thing or it is ad hoc, but people know that it is Kalangala Action Plan and they know who the leader is. We should ensure that these people are brought to book so that others who have got ideas in their minds that they are going to have personal militias in the next elections, see that they can be punished.  

Finally, I would like to talk about the role of public officers and their impartiality during elections. Madam Speaker, when public officers take sides, they do not only paralyse the districts, they also paralyse the whole country. 

I know in my district because public officers took sides in the LC V elections, it has taken a long time for the current chairman to stabilize and do his work. It was open; some public officers were for him and others were not. Therefore, it became difficult to start planning together to be able to continue with the development programmes. 

But of course, why should public officers who are at district level conform when right from the top people do not conform? This goes back to what I had said earlier, we must set examples as leaders so that other people can know that it is not “do as I say, but not as I do”. 

I would like to call upon Government to really clean up their act. They should make sure that we start now so that by 2006 we have already put mechanisms in place to ensure that there is going to be free and fair elections. If not, I am very afraid we are likely to see violence that has never been seen in the past. 

With those remarks, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity.    

3.08
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this wonderful work. 

Like it has been alluded to by the previous speaker who happens to be the senior Member of Parliament from my district, if you look closely you notice that the turbulent part of our history partly hinges on the manipulation of the election process. Right from 1961, you see marriages of convenience between UPC and KY to win elections, manipulation to win elections, culminating into the 1966 crisis. 

It is even believed that the 1971 coup is partly blamed on the manipulation of the election process because there were delays in organising elections. Amin took advantage of that and overthrew the Government, hence the turbulent history of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to 1980 - this is recent history - manipulation and rigging of elections and the country was again in a turbulent situation. 

You look at 2001, the situation is not improving because it seems we are not learning from the past. There was serious election violence and we are not at ease in parts of the country, as you know. When you follow that trend, the indication is that even 2006 may not be an exception - if I can follow the rule of the game. 

Madam Speaker, here I do not want to apportion blame. I was not part of the committee that worked on this report, but the committee has pointed out that almost each and everybody in this country who participated in the election process has a hand in election violence. 

It was indicated that some Presidential candidates, Parliamentary candidates, local council candidates, had a part in election violence. The report points that out; I did not write it. That means that as we debate this report, we respect each and everybody but do not apportion blame. We look for our roles. How can we improve this?

A lot of blame has been put on security agencies as being part and parcel of most of the violence. But take it from me, Madam Speaker, these security agents in most cases work on orders from people in charge, and sometimes from civilians. So, the blame should not be directly placed on most of these security agencies. The blame should also be put on the people who are in charge. (Interruption) 

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much hon. Bikwasizehi. As much as you realize that the officers get orders from above, there are some army and police officers who are ordered by candidates themselves. Really, for an army officer or police officer to be ordered by a civilian candidate, whom do you blame? I thank you very much.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you for that information. That enriches my debate in a sense that even a police officer can be manipulated by a mere candidate and he causes violence. So, that should be condemned and the people in charge too should be condemned. 

It is alluded to in the report that some of the candidates were using their relatives who are in some of these security agencies to get the Army or some soldiers to harass people. This is quite unfortunate –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Bikwasizehi for giving way. The report, in table 15, on page 175, highlights the main responsibility for violence. It is attributed to candidates as demonstrated by the following:
1. Rivalry among candidates carries 22 percent.
2. Fear to lose seat by the incumbent – six percent.
3. Bribery of voters by candidates – eight percent.
4. Rivalry, candidates clashing – six percent.
5. Rivalry, candidate’s supporters clashing – six percent.
6. Members of Parliament imposing favoured candidates – two percent.
7. Multipartyists – one percent 

All that totals to 51 percent. I thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, honourable minister, for that information. I did not want to read those figures but thank you for that information. You have strengthened my debate at the same time. I thank you.

There has been this case of public servants. In fact, at some point the committee says we should make out a law to prevent public servants from participating in the elections. 

Madam Speaker, I want to propose the opposite. Public servants are people with a lot of experience. Making a law to prevent them from participating in the elections would tantamount to missing people like hon. Sabiiti, hon. Wagonda Muguli and others who have been in public service. 

Alternatively, we should work out a law, which will enable them to come in and participate in the elections so that when they fail, they go back and participate -(Interruption)

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much. I would like to give information that the Political Organizations Act actually recommended that the civil servants should not be part of the politics. So, it is something that we have already pronounced ourselves on. Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Yes, that used to be the case, but I was a public servant. I came because the Sixth Parliament made a law, which enabled me to come and participate. If I had failed I would go back and work. I am just looking at that aspect. So, there is no static law.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of money has been alluded to also in the report as being a major cause of violence. This thing continues because people look at the electoral offices as a major source of income. People invest so much and because someone has invested so much, he or she must do all that he or she can to win hence the election violence. 

Efforts should be made to ensure that the election process is de-monetised. We should ensure that money is not a big issue in the election process, and this should start now.

What is the way forward? Madam Speaker, the way forward is to make an enabling law that will be respected by all. A law, which will empower the Electoral Commission to function without interference from any authority; a law that will enable the security agencies or police officers to handle the election process without any violence; a law that will prevent the use of too many vehicles on nomination day. Because sometimes that is the beginning of the problem - someone carries so many people. 

We should make a law that will limit the vehicles accompanying the candidates. They had proposed four, but I propose two. That way, Madam Speaker, when we make an enabling law we shall at the same time be working out a system of eliminating turbulence in our country. I thank you.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the members on the Select Committee on Election Violence. 

You may be aware that I was a victim of election violence. On the eve of the mayoral elections I was kidnapped for 12 hours. I think the issue of election violence is one of great concern especially to us the victims. When we look at the report, especially the executive summary of the report, I have looked at various suggestions and to me some of these suggestions may not be the solutions for this kind of violence. 

For instance, the report has talked about the limits on the number of vehicles, or the convoy. My colleague has just stated that these vehicles should be trimmed or reduced to four or two. Madam Speaker, this is not the issue. 

We have seen various convoys with several vehicles peacefully moving towards the nomination venue and going back safely without any kind of violence. We have seen them. I had more than 60 vehicles but we never experienced any kind of violence on the way. So, this is not a reason for or the cause of the violence. 

Madam Speaker, at times during the campaigns this is part of the fun for us the voters. It is fun –(Interjections)- yes, having so many people accompanying you is part of our fun and so many voters are waiting –(Interruption)

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you my colleague. You have said you were one of the victims and at the same time you had a convoy of 60 vehicles? Don’t you think that by being with such a convoy you had enough protection? Then how were you being victimized?

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much my colleague. I would like to remind you that we were elected before the local councils. During my election I never experienced any violence, but on the eve of the mayoral elections I was kidnapped from my office and taken for some 12 hours. So, there is no connection to that effect. 

As I conclude on this suggestion that the convoys should be reduced, it is not the convoy that matters or that causes violence. It is the way different people may use this kind of convoy in order to disrupt our peoples’ movements. Otherwise, to me a convoy is okay, and culturally here it is within our norms that people should be accompanied. Even if you are going for introduction, the more you –(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, hon. Sebaggala for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform you that actually I had the biggest convoy one has ever seen –(Laughter)- yes, they were very many, but my election was one of the best in the whole of this country. So, the convoy itself cannot tantamount to violence. I thank you.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: When hon. Sebaggala talks about convoys to and from nominations and maybe after elections as they celebrate, I remember in my constituency I had the worst experience. So many people got a terrible accident at Bwaise when they were celebrating winning an election, over 60 people were hurt and others died. 

I want to find out from hon. Sebaggala whether a candidate can have powers to stop such incidents, which really result in loss of life? And you remember the incident very well.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. It is good that you have said it was an accident. It was an accident. It could happen even without elections. It is self explanatory that it was an accident, as you are experiencing various accidents on our roads even without elections.

The committee talked about the security agencies. We are aware - the Inspector General of Police told us - that the Police force is not enough. But I think that as we approach a very sensitive year, that is 2006 when we want to witness the official hand over from President Museveni to any elected President, -(Interruption)- That is the Constitution. There is no doubt about that. President Museveni is going to hand over power. 

As we approach a very sensitive election period, the onus is on us Members of Parliament to give more support to our Police so that more training could be undertaken. That way, by 2006 we shall have enough Police officers to handle the elections. Madam Speaker, I am running out of time –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleague. I would like clarification. He is saying we do not have enough forces and we heard yesterday a member was telling us that they went to Kabale and people were not sensitised about it. I would like to know, what would you say about the transition period, if you have it in 2006, to bring everybody on board?

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you hon. Kakooza. I think hon. James Kakooza is advocating for his three years’ project. But I believe what I have said is for us to give more money to the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that more Police officers are trained as we prepare for the sensitive years to come. 

As I wind up, one of the causes for this violence is the high competition in all elective posts. Madam Speaker, given the fact that there are high levels of unemployment in this country, all these elective posts are seen as sources of employment. So many people are coming up now and our constituencies are flooded by various people seeking for elections in 2006.

Madam Speaker, as long as the issue of unemployment is still very rampant, competition is going to be high and whenever there is a lot of competition definitely violence must be there. My humble appeal to the Executive is to try as much as possible to put in place various avenues so as to create employment opportunities for Ugandans so that competition for these elective posts could be reduced.  

Secondly, there are working conditions. We are aware that the gap, especially the salary gap, between the elective offices and other offices is very big. As long as that gap continues to be big definitely the competition is going to be there and in such kind of competition violence must also be witnessed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about the election violence. 

Madam Speaker, on the 19th of December 2002, I engaged President Yoweri Museveni on the subject of elections in this country for almost one hour. This was in Gulu barracks. I was among the Members of Parliament from West Nile who were going to meet the leader of the former rebel group, that is UNRF II, the Bamuze group, which of course is now with Government. 

When we appeared before the President in Gulu barracks, he greeted me in a jovial mood. He started by saying, “Onzima, Reform Agenda.” Then later on he said, “people like Onzima who supported Besigye in the last presidential elections should have first asked themselves whether the UPDF would be prepared to transfer its loyalty from me to Besigye, just in case he won the elections.” That was what the man said. (Laughter). 

I then asked President Museveni –(Interruption)
 
MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you very much, hon. Onzima. Madam Speaker, also some time back when the President addressed Parliament at the International Conference Centre immediately after elections in Zimbabwe, he asked, “What if they had won and Mugabe refused, what would they have done?”

MR ONZIMA: So, Madam Speaker, I then asked the President whether it is the position of his government that before we get into any elections, people should first know the position of the UPDF. Then why did they go ahead and arrange presidential elections where many people lost their lives, property and some got maimed? 

The President then answered that, “in Uganda we get into presidential elections not to change leadership but to make those who are in power to perform better”. So, you can see the feelings of people who took arms to fight Obote’s Government just because they had a claim that the 1980 elections were rigged. It is a clear indication that these people took arms –(Interruption)
 
MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I am standing on a point of procedure and I am aware of the issue we are discussing now. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Onzima has talked much about His Excellency the President, who has no opportunity now to defend whatever statement he is uttering. And it is violence that we are discussing now. I want you to guide us, can he proceed talking about something that is not connected with the topic and we keep on listening?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, part of this report deals with candidates in elections and the President was a candidate.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. Yes, the President was a candidate and indeed all of us were candidates. But hon. Onzima is attributing very serious statements to the President, which in my opinion have the effect of misleading the population if not proved. 

You are talking of the President having said that in Uganda people vote for people to assist those in power. The implications of that statement are not very good, in my opinion, for as long as they are not proved. 

So, given that these statements are not arising from the report, which we have had occasion to read, Madam Speaker, is it really proper for the member to continue attributing serious statements to the President, which are not quoted in the report that is the subject of discussion here? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my difficulty is that I was not in Gulu when they were having this meeting. So, I really do not know what was said in that meeting.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, I was not alone in Gulu barracks with President Museveni. I said we were in a group, and I can vividly remember that among the Members of Parliament from West Nile who attended that meeting was the Lt Gen. Moses Ali, who is our chairman for the West Nile Parliamentary Group, and all the Members of Parliament from Adjumani and Moyo. 

From Nebbi we had only one Member of Parliament, that is, the hon. Fred Jachan, who is currently sitting here. From Arua we had hon. Angupale, we had the honourable Member for Arua Municipality - I think Arua was the third. Then from Yumbe we had all the Members of Parliament, they were there at that meeting. 

So, there is no way one can claim here that I am just fabricating a story.  These are facts and they must go on record. (Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee that investigated election violence was open to everybody including hon. Onzima. I hear hon. Onzima bringing evidence of election violence to this Floor. Is he in order not to have taken the evidence to the committee and now bring it to the Floor when we are supposed to be debating the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made a sufficient preamble to your submission. Can you now go to the violence in the report?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you very much. Maybe to help the Minister, this report we are debating now was written far before I met the President on the 19th of December last year. I think this report was ready before. 

So, even what I have said is connected to the election violence we are reporting. To me, it is the genesis of the election violence we experienced. These utterances from the President are a genesis. People were talking of military officers taking orders from their superiors, but who is the overall Commander of the UPDF, for instance? It is clear!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, go to the report.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, what is important to me now is to find solutions to this kind of problem. I think it is incumbent upon this House to make very stringent laws regarding our elections, whether presidential, parliamentary, local, or any other elections. So that if any person goes against them, the law should catch up with that person whether the person is the President himself, a minister, a Member of Parliament, a chairman of a local council somewhere, and they are brought to book.

Madam Speaker, people have also talked about the commercialisation of politics in this country, but we also have loopholes. For instance, why should a person who spent a lot of money in purchasing things like beer, salt and others to bribe voters be taken to court, the court rules against him and he is allowed to contest in a by-election? 

Those who benefited from that candidate during the elections will become even more vigilant to support that person. They will say that, “let us show the people of Uganda that this is our candidate; he is a person from whom we benefited.” 

I call upon this House to make it impossible for any person who has been thrown out of this House to go and participate in by-elections. I think that will go a long way in curbing some of these shortcomings we have in our electoral system.  

Madam Speaker, I feel the Police do not have a lot of influence. This is because they do not suffer a lot of pressure from people who are contesting for presidency, particularly the incumbents. So, I support the idea that the Army should not participate in manning elections in this country. Let us use the Police or other auxiliary forces, but not the Army. 

Like I illustrated, we have a problem; the Army is biased so they will do anything to protect the person they favour.  Like it is -(Interruption)

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: I stand to get clarification from my brother Onzima. He said he visited the President in Gulu and the President said he cannot handover power. I am glad he was a member of the Reform Agenda and still is. Col (Rtd) Besigye was intimidating Uganda and telling people that he has 90 percent of the Army behind him. I am seeking clarification if he knew whether that statement was true or not. If he knew, what did he do?  

Secondly, I would not like to agree with him when he says the Army is biased, because I believe my brother here, Maj. Kazoora, is offended when you say the Army is biased when we are not. Thank you very much. (Laughter).

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, it is true, and the whole world knows, that I was the vice national chairman for the campaign of Kiiza Besigye. We did very well under the circumstances, the terrorism and whatever. 

You see, when Besigye went to West Nile after that tremendous frustration from Government to block him from going there, it is on record that a multitude of people came that day. That record could only be broken by the Pope if he comes to Arua, not any other leader. After that, Madam Speaker, we went to Masaka –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, you have now moved away from the report and you are relating campaign strategies.

MR ONZIMA: Yes of course Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No.

MR ONZIMA: Maybe if I got derailed, it is because you gave the other member the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one who sat down.

MR ONZIMA: Well, my view is that the Army proved itself biased and there is evidence. So, I am saying, like in many other countries, why should we engage the Army when we have the Police?

MR SABIITI: Thank you honourable member for giving way.  If you look at the summary report on page 15, there is analysis of the key players interfering with the electoral process. The committee identifies the armed forces as having contributed 17.7 percent, while others are three, nine, two, and whatever. 

What the honourable member is trying to put across is that the role of the Army, as clearly depicted by the report, is a major intervening variable in the election violence in this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up hon. Onzima.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to reiterate that as we approach the next presidential elections and as the political climate now tells us that the term limit for presidency is going to be scrapped, I wish to make an appeal to Ugandans. 

We should never give way for any person in this country, irrespective of his or her position in the politics of this country, to say that for any Ugandan to become the president of this country, he or she should first know whether the Army, which depends on our taxes, will be able to change its loyalty from the incumbent to any other candidate.  Thank you.

3.48
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when we began this debate, I almost convinced myself that I had been overtaken by events and I almost developed a resigned impression of the whole debate. But after reflecting on it, it occurred to me that there is still hope. If we learnt from history, there is still something that we could gain.   

I came across the works of Winston Churchill and he had this to say: “The further back you look, the further forward you see.” I am hoping that during this debate we will reflect further back and try to see what the future of this country is going to be. 

The issue of election violence, election malpractice, is not coming as an ulcer in this nation for the first time. It has always come up.  We have heard that people went to the bush because of the 1980 elections, and we are about to hear more of that in future if we do not set aside time to re-define the course of events in this country.

Let me address myself particularly to the question of voter registers. Madam Speaker, the report raises this as an issue. Those of us who had the privilege to use a different set of voter registers were a bit disappointed. 

First of all, the voter registers that were used for the election of women representatives were merely handwritten. It gave us the impression that probably it was a lesser election; it was not as important as the other elections before or those to come later. 

Besides being merely handwritten, there were things that could be easily manipulated. Anybody could make their insertions or whatever it was, depending on what they felt at the time.  

I also noted at a time that there were a lot of exclusions in the voters register for the presidential elections. I am actually one of those people who were disfranchised at the time. I did not have the opportunity to vote for my candidate for presidential elections because –(Interjection)- You do not need to know. I am being asked who my candidate was, I will tell you next time. 

The pain I had was that somebody denied me my constitutional right. I keep on wondering what should be done to people who deliberately disfranchise others. Are we going to continue with this deliberate exclusion? 

I call the exclusion deliberate because those who prepare registers should be able to know that all those people above 18 should be able to exercise their right to vote for whomever they want. By the time I go to a polling station and find that my name is not there, I call it deliberate. So, many Ugandans, unfortunately, suffered that bad fate. (Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Would the honourable member like to inform the House how old she was by the time of the presidential elections? (Laughter).

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, at least I am not below 18 and hon. Katirima knows that. There is no way I could have been below 18 by the year 2000/2001, and it does not need my birth certificate anyway. 

What I want to emphasize here is that even at this point in time, as we look towards where we are going, the question of the voter registers seems to be moving at a very slow pace. I would like something that assures me that at the end of the day we do not begin panicking come 2006 when we are going into these other elections again. 

We should not begin panicking, trying to do a shoddy job, disfranchising others and denying them their very constitutional rights. I really pray that the Executive moves fast to give us the opportunity to register and to include those who have been omitted. 

I know that the photographic registration exercise began. But even then, there were a number of people and there are still a number of people who did not benefit. I don’t know when the Electoral Commission is going to try to address those loopholes before the next elections come in. Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS WINNIE MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want a clarification from the member holding the Floor. She says that her name was not registered and yet I recall very well that the registers that were used during the presidential elections were the same ones used for electing the women. 

It is clear that if you were not registered, the law did not allow you to be voted for in that area. How did she get to be voted for if she was disfranchised right from the beginning? I want to know how she went about it legally?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we had a number of updates of voter registers in Soroti District, I do not know about Rukungiri. 

Secondly, I came on affirmative action. So, the register that was used for voting for me was not the general register. I actually did not vote for myself, it was the LCs and the women councils that voted for me. Again I do not know about Rukungiri, but that is what happened in Soroti. (Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable member for giving way so that she receives this information. 

The type of clarification that is being demanded of her, no wonder, is being asked by the hon. Member representing Rukungiri. This is a region where there was a lot of election violence, a region where all the activities were outrightly known. 

Therefore, we cannot be surprised that my honourable colleague, hon. Winfred Masiko, was seeking that clarification, because what took place in Rukungiri was quite different from what happened in other districts. (Laughter)

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I should defend myself because I have been implicated in something that is very inaccurate. 

Somebody who was seeking clarification said what happened in Rukungiri was out of the ordinary. I would like to state it very clearly that there was nothing out of the ordinary that took place in Rukungiri District. The courts of law have already pronounced themselves on these issues so there was nothing out of the ordinary. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order honourable members.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. What I wanted to clearly put forward is that it was a condition for Women Members of Parliament to be registered in the area they were going to stand in. 

It was not legal for somebody to come and contest in an area where she was not registered. Therefore, we need to investigate this issue, because if you were not registered you were not legally supposed to have contested in that area. That is the clarification I wanted from somebody who has been holding the Floor. 

What happened in Rukungiri is clearly stipulated and we shall defend it. There is nothing that did not happen in other areas that took place in Rukungiri, which should make a person come on the Floor and talk about it. I thank you.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to call a whole district representative, hon. Alaso, “somebody holding the Floor”? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We usually address our colleagues as honourable so and so. So, if you did that, it is out of order.

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: I am a bit puzzled. Hon. Alaso said she did not vote for herself, but according to the law you have to be a registered voter. I want clarification, Madam Speaker.

MR ISAIAH IMUMET: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me a chance. The issue of registers should not be a problem in this House. It is the Electoral Commission to blame. The names that were not appearing during presidential elections appeared during parliamentary elections. So, in that context, it is the Electoral Commission to blame. 

Why did the names disappear during presidential elections and appear during parliamentary and other elections? So, let us not dwell very much on this register business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, can you move to violence. Forget the registration and address the report.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your guidance but this question of registers appears in this report and that is why I am bringing it up. My honourable colleague, hon. Masiko, actually suggests that I should be investigated to find out why – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is why I actually want you to leave that subject. It has caused a lot of debate around you.  

MS ALASO: Yes, but Madam Speaker, I probably need to defend myself. She has gone on record that I should be investigated. I thought it would be unfair for me to let go just like that when an honourable colleague is beginning to insinuate certain issues. It is a bit uncomfortable. 

I want to encourage hon. Masiko that I never had a petition. I did not do anything that deserved questioning my being in this House. I would like to tell my honourable colleague, Sarah Nyombi, that under the electoral college, it was only the LCs who were voting, not the whole group. The registers were different.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I happened to go through the judgment of a case between hon. Winfred Masiko and another Winnie. The Judge said that everything that could go wrong in an election  – (Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, you have just ruled now and also in your previous rulings that we must stick to the subject of the debate, which is the report of the committee. Is the honourable member right to raise any matter that is extraneous to the subject of the content of the report of the Committee on Election Violence? Is he is order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that case was mentioned in the report. Hon. Alaso, you have explained that you were unable to vote in the presidential elections but there were updates and you were able to vote in other elections. So, I do not want anybody to bring a motion to investigate you, so please move on to something else.  

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your ruling. I am not worried about the investigation because I will come out clean.  

I want to proceed to the question of the Army and its role in these elections. It is important for us to admit in this House that it is not just that we are uncomfortable with the Army per se. If the Army did the right thing, if the Army did not succumb to manipulation, if the Army did not go in to intimidate the voters, to intimidate the contestants in these elections, nobody would stand up here and say the Army should not be used in these elections. 

We hear of places elsewhere in the world where the army does a number of things for the well being of the community. But the trouble that we have is when the Army takes advantage of its position – (Interruption).

MR VINCENT NYANZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving me the Floor. The honourable member is merely talking about intimidation by army officers. I want to inform her that there are other areas, like in my constituency an army officer went as far as taking me to prison.  

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, that goes to emphasize the discomfort we have. I understand in the Army there is a saying that, “Order ni order”. I understand that you do not ask why your boss ordered you. You first execute the order, whether it is foolish, relevant or anything, then you will sort out the questions later, if you think that you have to question anyway. 

Given that type of scenario, we would only be fair to this nation if we all put our voices together and really said, “Whatever it takes, let us have the Army out of our elections”. It might take recruiting more police, it might take looking out for the other security agencies to help us, but at least let us have the Army out of this.  

Madam Speaker, we are already beginning to nurture election violence come 2006/2007, whatever it will be. The restlessness with which the Executive seems to perceive this debate on the role of the Army gives me a feeling that we are burying our heads in the sand. (Interruption).

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I would like clarification from my honourable colleague as she talks about the Army. I believe being in the Army is a professional job and I think that people in the Army are human beings like anybody else. So, I feel that when she is talking about the Army, she should consider also that they are human beings who can vote and who can decide to do anything without the authority of the Government.

MS ALASO: I am happy that hon. Kakooza was here when we passed the Political Organisations Bill. He was right here in the House and he knows the contents of that Act now. I am just disappointed that he is refusing to reflect backwards.  

Madam Speaker, my concern is that we see politicians now being intimidated in their constituencies, people misusing institutions that are there - offices of the RDCs, the Police at district level. If we see this now and we bury our heads now, come that time we will see more of this. We will see a total repeat, and we will be disappointed that we did not curtail the whole thing from the start.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I just have one thing that I want to seek clarification on. On these discoveries about the financial impropriety in the Electoral Commission, does it suffice just to have people get out of their offices? Or are people also being charged and we shall recover the money? 

It seems to be the trend in this country that thieves even get promoted, or they get fired and they go away with the money. I think it is about time that we emphasize the recommendation that seeks to recover the lost monies from those corrupt officials. I thank you.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of electoral violence is so important that I feel the report is actually inadequate. I am one of those who had pleaded that we should have had a judicial inquiry so that we study the causes of violence in Uganda, but I was a minority. Instead, we had a select committee of Members of Parliament and some of us were either victims or victors in the issue of violence. 

Madam Speaker, it would be a mistake to look at violence in this country and only attribute it to the last presidential elections –(Mr Sabiiti rose_)- I think this is meant to derail my contribution, but he can go ahead. 

MR SABIITI: Thank you, hon. Kabwegyere, for giving way. I would like some clarification from you. You wanted the judicial inquiry and not the select committee. The honourable Minister of Justice made a statement in this Parliament that she was even going to go ahead and put up that judicial commission of inquiry. 

Now the honourable Minister is still talking about a judicial inquiry and he is a member of Cabinet. I want clarification from him whether the Government abandoned the whole idea of a judicial commission of inquiry?  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I think that clarification should be in form of a question to the relevant minister so that the question is answered. At this point in time, we are talking about the report. I am not about to predict or tell the House that either there is going to be a judicial inquiry or not. 

I was just saying that it would be simplistic to think that electoral violence started in Uganda in the last presidential elections, or has actually been there during the period of National Resistance Movement (NRM). 

Madam Speaker, I stood for Parliament in 1980  -(Interjection)- Hon. Wadri wants to hear that I stood on the ticket of his party, which is to his satisfaction. But what happened during that period really was terrible. I was a victim of that violence and I had to run from Bushenyi and hide in Kabale, and I have mentioned this many times on the Floor of this House. 

The fundamental question is why do we have violence during elections? Why does it seem - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order honourable members!  

PROF KABWEGYERE: Why does it seem to be on the increase? Why is it found in many other places as well, even outside Uganda? 

Madam Speaker, the Sixth Parliament, in my opinion, when it decided that we have individual campaigns for every candidate created conditions for heightening violence. We were four candidates in my constituency and we would have had 22 rallies if the four of us were addressing rallies together. Instead, we had 88 rallies because each of us had to address a rally in 22 parishes. 

Now, when you have your population whipped up in each individual address, you are bound to create conditions of high tension. I think it was a mistake to recommend for individual rallies because the population was being turned round and round in such a short time. They were being told this, being told that, and this situation in my opinion conduced some of the acts of violence. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the promises that are made by us to the population can actually be a basis of violence. If you stand up and tell people that if you become a Member of Parliament or a President, they will get everything they want, there will not be paying of taxes, there will be this and that, people can easily be misled to think that heaven will come on earth. They can then be induced very easily to throw stones to cause violence. We create certain images of being in power as if you are going to solve problems some of which, perhaps, we do not even fully understand. 

I want further to point out that funding has a stake in the election project. Funding is becoming a cause of violence. There are probably Members of Parliament here who spent hundreds of millions of shillings, Shs 500 million in some cases, and who sold houses. If you have sold a house and you have staked your future on winning a seat, probably you will use every means. That is not something that is provided by Government or by whoever is in power. 

So, the stakes get too high and -(Mr Wadri rose_) Yes I will take the information but if only you could allow me to finish this sentence. So, the stakes get too high and followers get heightened in their expectations and they may end up taking sides violently. I can get the information.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable Professor and member of the front bench, for being so polite and kind enough to allow me give this information. 

In your just concluded statement, you were lamenting the fact that many people spend hundreds and millions of shillings and that they sell buildings, and that this is not provided by Government. 

I would like to inform the honourable Minister that in 2001, the Movement did create and establish a separate office from which many of the candidates, including probably those who are in this House, went and were served with money from the office of hon. Bidandi Ssali. Was that not from Government?  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Prof. Kabwegyere has just said that some honourable Members of Parliament spent over Shs 500 million and that others sold their houses, and he left it hanging. The people in Kashari may think that I was so desperate, or the country may think I did not enjoy popular support in Kashari and that I bribed my voters down there. Is the honourable member in order not to really substantiate and exonerate some of us who are very clear on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I heard him talking about candidates and their conduct in elections and the extent to which they go. I do not think he said members who are in this House, he said candidates in elections.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I just want to give information to the honourable Minister, which is contrary to the position he is putting forward.   

According to testimonies we received in the committee, people said that in fact the individual merit system, which required an individual to finance, organise, conduct his own election, often resulted even in sale of his property for purposes of raising the necessary funds to conduct elections, pay the agents and so on and so forth. 

This gave this person a feeling that the loss of an election was going to be the end of him or her and they were prepared to do everything including –(Interruption)- well killing if you want. They were prepared to commit violence in order to win because the loss would be a real total loss. 

Therefore, people believed that in fact that system was causing more problems as far as election was concerned. So, that was the evidence we got.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you are agreeing with the Professor, but he can tell you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I think hon. Mwandha was more an anatomical on the point I was making, only that he said it was supposed to be different but the records will show that he was actually on my side.  

Madam Speaker, I was pointing out that people promise more than they can deliver. People arouse the hopes of followers and in the end create situations that can lead to violence. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to add that probably we have given the impression to the population that political positions are full of money. That when we get into Parliament, when we become councillors, when we become chairpersons, money flows. Therefore, people get desperate, thinking that when they do not get in they will miss. 

This is a result of what we have shown in the way we have entertained the population. We have been lavish with voters. We have been supportive of graduation ceremonies. When people want to marry - and expensive weddings - they come unto us. We are contributors, Members of Parliament, contributing money, which we do not have. I am saying this because I know that sometimes we go beyond our means. 

Which means, therefore, that when a supporter of Kabwegyere who sees that Kabwegyere is going to support the funeral of his son or daughter, he is going to support the wedding of his sister and so on, he is likely to contribute to his fees, and he is going to lose that person, even independently he may act violently to support Kabwegyere. These are some of the issues our society must look into, and leaders of Uganda must look at.

Finally, Uganda and violence seem to be on a one-to-one relationship. We are talking of election violence but let us not forget that we have violence in the Karamoja region, which is based on a belief that stealing cattle is a good thing. We have violence in the Northern region, where you have people fighting. 

When you get into a competitive situation where you are saying, “I am better than so and so,” violence becomes a high potential -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Kabwegyere, for allowing me. I would like to inform you that violence was not only exhibited in other parts of Uganda, violence also was exhibited in Karamoja. 

There was a candidate who was escorted by the Military Police. He was carrying a pistol and the people had to question him and said, “You are coming to look for votes, why are you being escorted by the Military Police?” That is one.

Two, they utilise these people to terrorize others, and they also use money, since our politics has been commercialised. 

So, it is not only the cows that the Karimojong now advocate for, I think they have also tasted these elections. That is why during the time of the referendum they asked, “Why is it that there is only one person who has come to campaign? We want others to also come and campaign”. It was because they wanted the money from these candidates!

DR STEVEN CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I will have a chance to contribute tomorrow on the report, I would just like to say one thing, which the Minister seems to justify, that it is okay to have violence in any part of Uganda when you are in government. 

I believe that when you are in government, your first duty is to control violence. If you have failed to control violence completely as a government, then you have failed in your duties. But do not try to justify why violence exists somewhere else where you are supposed to control. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are certain things, which even if we wished to change we would need more time than we have. I would have wished that the hon. Member for Kapchorwa, who is a medical doctor, would have had an impact on the tradition they have there, which mutilates women, but he has not succeeded.

My last remark is on the military being involved in politics. We included the Army in the NCC in 1979/1980 on purpose. We wanted to have a tradition of the Army understanding what is going on in the country. We have continued with that tradition. That is why the Army is represented in this Parliament. So, when we stand here and talk of the Army as if we are talking about an institution that is so distant, that is supposed to be hostile, we are forgetting what we are trying to do. 

This country has suffered from violence coming from the state. So, we included within Parliament a representation of the Army so that we can build an amicable relationship between these organs of running the state. So, when members of this House talk as if they have forgotten the logic behind the historical presence of the Army in Parliament, I wonder. 

Besides - (Mrs Matembe rose_)- just give me a minute. Besides, soldiers do not bring themselves to participate in the violence; they are called. There are situations in Uganda here where some of the soldiers came on their own because they were supporting a candidate. We also know that there are Members of Parliament who are soldiers, who may also have used their contacts in the Army to have a presence of soldiers in their campaigns. We also know this. 

There is nothing we do not know about the nature of our society. To me, therefore, the Army we have now is certainly better than the Army we had years ago; we are trying to improve. If –(Interruption)

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Thank you very much, hon. Kabwegyere. The information I want to give you is that the Army - the people whom we did agree that they should come into Parliament to be able to understand and apprehend all these issues so as to remain good – was a different one. It was that Army, which arrived here and liberated us. 

When they arrived here, for the time we lived with them we were even calling them “baana baffe, abaana baitu.” Everybody loved these people so much that we thought they should become part of us and we a part of them, so we lived happily together. 

However, I want to inform hon. Kabwegyere and this House that things have changed. Let us be honest; things have changed. I am not saying the Army as an institution but those people we were calling our children, “abaana baffe”. Things have changed step by step. 

I participated in the 1989 elections. There was no violence, very good things, no army, nothing. In the 1994 Constituent Assembly, everything was good, nothing. In 1996 things began. In 2001, things became bad! 

You wait next time, things will be so bad if we do not agree that things are getting bad and we change them so that “abaana baffe” could go back to becoming “abaana baffe” and we live harmoniously together with them. And remember, I was in Mbarara and I know what happened there.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank Prof. Kabwegyere for this opportunity. I have understood the Professor’s statement that violence comes about not only from of the officers and men of the UPDF acting on their own instinct, but they are also being called upon and used by other candidates. This is quite true. 

Drawing from the regional point of view, we have seen elections in Kenya, in Tanzania, and as hon. Matembe alluded, even the elections of 1989 and 1996 were not this bad. So, I inform him and the whole House that the Army is good. The army as an institution is a perfect institution when it is being led by people in a professional way. 

The problem, however, arises when we have them in Parliament and they cannot go back to direct things the way we want them to. I do not think it is proper to only have them in Parliament. It should be a culture not only for those in Parliament but also in the entire country. 

We should understand this problem, Madam Speaker. It should not be a matter of window dressing. It should be institutionalised so that the UPDF is professional and even if lured into violence they have all the time, wit and knowledge. 

Besides, Madam Speaker, they are individuals like us. They are Ugandans, they are brothers and sisters so they are knowledgeable, not just instruments of coercion as the Professor would want us to believe. Thank you.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate what hon. Sekikubo has said. But since the comprehensive Army Bill is at hand and in this House, this indiscipline and violence will not happen. It was happening because there was no proper law. Now that this law is coming here, I do not think soldiers will misbehave. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I certainly do not share the apocalyptic picture I get from hon. Matembe that the world is about to come to an end. I do not believe that. Neither do I have paranoia about things failing apart. 

I think this Parliament is full of capable people, and Uganda is full of very responsible citizens and leaders. Things cannot go wrong, especially when you have hon. Matembe telling the world all the time. I am sure there are people who will hear and take the necessary action, if she is right. 

I wanted to conclude my remarks by saying that violence must be approached in its generic and social context. We have a violent situation because violence and poverty go together –(Interjection)- please, allow me to conclude this because I think this is my concluding remark. Violence and poverty go together. 

We are poor not because we like it; and not because we even understand why we are poor. Madam Speaker, I missed going to your district but the message was delivered. The districts have raised on the average 5 shillings in every 100 shillings they use. And 95 shillings come from the centre, from this Government, a lot of which is borrowed or is donations from abroad. 

When you have that situation, honourable members, violence is like the situation of the Nsenene (grasshoppers) in a container. They bite each other not knowing that they are making themselves ready for the one who caught them -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I want to refer the Minister to the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Bill, page 2. Although it has not yet been tabled, it is extremely important that you –(Interjection)- it has been tabled, sorry. I want you to refer to clause 41, which says, “Officers and militants have powers of police officers.” Yes, you read it. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House needs your guidance on whether or not it is proper for the honourable member to quote a bill, which is before a committee. The committee may alter the bill and of course even this House may alter that bill. The contents of the section he is quoting are not authoritative as we talk now. Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not know the contents of that bill until the committee comes back to us. I do not know what will come back.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My hope and determination as an individual is that we shall fight the bases of violence in Uganda and produce a humane society where all of us can live - elected or not, private or public - as servants. That way we will live happily, and I believe this is possible. I believe that all of us together can achieve that in a very short time. 

I also want us to know that our own practices can easily create conditions for violence. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my other colleagues I also went through an election and the first thing I noticed was that there was violence on the corpus.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the what?

MR OMACH: On the body. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OMACH: Over 70 percent of the candidates did have a lot of violence on their corpus. They lost a lot of weight, they were put under a lot of pressure psychologically, physically and mentally and by the time we finished the elections people were looking extremely different. I do not know whether this is violence or not, but to me it was violence. 

The second violence was on the turnover. About 50 percent of the members of the Sixth Parliament did not come back. Madam Speaker, losing an election, I do not know whether it is violent or not, but it is very violent. It is extremely traumatic; the members do not know what to do, at that particular time if you approach him anyhow he could do anything to you. If he is not handled very carefully, he could easily choose to go to heaven. 

Now we have the opportunity to look at this report, it is a very good report and I must give credit where it is due. The committee has done good work and I appeal to this House to look at this report very carefully and endorse it. 

I believe most of the recommendations are in the right direction and if we do not seal them now, then history may repeat itself and we may find ourselves back home with nowhere to go. It is not very easy to be re-employed.

The committee recommends concurrent presidential and parliamentary elections. I know that this is still to be debated by this House but as an individual - and I believe members of my constituency agree – I say hats off for this recommendation. 

A number of people want to associate with a Presidential candidate after knowing that he is likely to go through, and they want to cling to him. Really, you could see that there are double standards. And immediately the election is over then they know, “I must now move to the right position”. 

The House is a very important place and a person coming here must be a person of integrity, must be a person who knows where he belongs, why he is there and, therefore, should be clear and confident. So, I do endorse this very recommendation that presidential and parliamentary elections do take place concurrently, not merely because of the saving of funds for elections.

The other issue that I would like to talk about very briefly is that of domestic violence. As far as elections are concerned, you find that a spouse would want to take a different direction from what his or her partner is taking and they end up at war. They end up separating the family and the children end up suffering. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that if civic education were sufficient, we would be in a position to eliminate some of these ills. So, I appeal to the authorities that election civic education should be sufficient to ensure that we eliminate this domestic violence.

Madam Speaker, funding has been talked about. The last elections were extremely expensive to most candidates. One of the areas, which brings violence, is the area of funding of the agents. Agents who are supposed –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there is a current debate going on. Hon. Omach is contributing to pertinent issues to this House and the entire country yet I can see over there hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Chebrot and others are engaged in their private debate. These matters surely concern all of us. (Laughter). Is this the way we proceed?

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, what we are discussing here with hon. Anifa Kawooya is what the Minister is contributing to. We are not discussing anything outside what is being contributed to in the House. We are merely consulting. Is he in order to allege that we are doing something outside that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the problem is that your consultation is a bit loud and it is interfering with hon. Omach.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that at every polling station a candidate is supposed to put his agent to ensure that there is no rigging, to ensure that the law is being upheld as far as the voting and the counting of the votes is concerned. 

You will find out that at certain levels some candidates are not able to fund this agent who should be there as their representative. And in the absence of a representative, a number of malpractices are bound to happen. This has also been a cause of violence as far as elections here are concerned. 

It would, therefore, be important that the Electoral Commission funds candidates’ agents at the polling stations so that there is no single candidate who does not have his agent at that particular time of need.

There is the area of registration of children who are below 18 years of age. In these modern times when we have computerization all over the world, it is pathetic to see that a number of children who are below 18 years are appearing in our registers and are actually voting. 

It is also pathetic to note that some people do register more than twice and then attempt to vote more than once, therefore violating the laws. Madam Speaker, I think these ills, which have been identified, should be corrected so that we do not have violence -(Interruption) 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Omach for giving way. I have always known people of Nebbi to be vigilant. Did this escape them so much that they could allow children of 12 years to vote? Could they have not picked them out of the lines and arrested them?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the people of Nebbi have eaten a lot of Moringa leaves and, therefore, they are so well built that you cannot know the age. But it is only important that we have our records right. Right from birth, the children should be registered so that we can easily identify what their age is.  

Finally, there is the issue of delays in taking the ballot boxes and the ballot papers to the polling station. The people get rowdy when they wait one hour, two hours, three hours, and by the time the ballot papers arrive they have already lost some hours. Then by the time they should be closing, they refuse to close and it becomes night and then people are susceptible to voter malpractices. 

In this third millennium, it is only right and fitting that ballot boxes and papers are where they should be at the right time, and taken by the right people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whilst it is a very bad thing in our society, in this report they have mentioned that some of the Members of Parliament are alleged to have come here without proper qualifications. 

To put this House in order, it is time a committee was instituted to investigate and find out those members who are not properly qualified and are here. (Applause). This is a very serious issue. It is because of such people that the integrity of this House –(Interruption)

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, according to the electoral law only one body, the Electoral Commission, is empowered to look into qualifications and the conduct of elections. Could my honourable colleague clarify whether he is referring to the electoral law or some other qualifications that I do not know about as another method of electing members to this august House?

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not a member of the Committee on Election Violence, but I will read the summary, page 31: “The Police should investigate the allegations of the Vice-Chairperson of the EC – I am not the vice-chairperson - that some of the sitting Members of Parliament do not have qualifications.” I am talking about the report. 

The Electoral Commission may have not had powers or means to verify those candidates very well at that time. Forgery has nowadays become advanced, technology is advanced and people can forge anything. It is important that the committee is put in place to come up with the right thing.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Arising from the statement quoted from the report, I would like to seek clarification either from the person holding the Floor or the chairperson of the committee. 

Was there evidence presented to the committee of some members in this House who do not actually have qualifications? Otherwise, it may be speculation. There must be evidence to that effect. I am wondering whether there is evidence to that effect.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Mafabi for giving way. I would like further clarification from the statement you have made that the committee recommended that the Police investigate allegations made by the vice-chairperson. 

Could that be the admission by the committee that it was not competent enough to investigate the election violence, the subject we had given them? 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the Vice-Chairperson of the Electoral Commission then, Mrs Nkurukenda, made a statement to the effect that many of the members of this House did not have the required qualifications by law. And of course we said, “You better substantiate that”. She said, “No, that is not for me to say but if you want you can take trouble to investigate because that House has people who do not have qualifications.” 

However, we felt that it was not necessary for us to investigate this. This is not a small job because you have to look at people’s original certificates and so on and so forth, and see whether they are authentic or not. We were only left with the recommendation that the Police could investigate this matter, if there are people here who do not have the required qualifications. That was the only possible solution to this allegation made by the vice-chairperson.

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA: As a member of the committee that investigated election violence, I would like to add to what the vice-chairman of the committee has said. This lady, Mrs Nkurukenda, had actually offered to inform the committee in camera, but the committee lacked time.

MR PATRICK MUSISI: I am seeking further clarification from the hon. Minister, Hope Mwesigye. She went on the Floor and said that the committee was not competent. I need her to throw more light on that. Was it not competent in law or in fact? Could she elaborate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member would like you to explain what you meant by the committee not being competent enough to investigate.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Tibarimbasa has already said it. I was wondering, having received allegations from the chairperson of that great nature concerning members in this House, why did the committee not go ahead and investigate that very important allegation even if it meant asking for an extension? I thank you.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I will help the committee. We have a book here where all Members of Parliament have registered. I want to tell you that I belong to the professional body of accounting. There are some two members here who have claimed they are qualified accountants when they are not! At a later stage I can name them. For now I want to spare them. So, it shows how this House is full of such things.

On the issue of qualification, it is important that members are investigated and true prosecution is done. Short of that, these are the people who have let us down, who have made us look ignorant, who have made us look like potato growers yet they are just a few individuals. Thank you. 

About politics we have said many things. In this same House it is the Movement, which has brought us a problem on the issue of individual merit, by commercialising politics. You find that some people will go to the Movement Secretariat and they are given money. The money they are given is to be used for politics. 

Now, the one who has not got has to look for a way to get money to go for politics. In fact, if the Movement were not giving away money to people, there would be no commercialisation of politics. So, it has been a major problem from the top. You see that people have been given Shs 10 million and another one has been given zero shillings yet all of you are under the Movement. I do not know who here is not in the Movement by law!

MRS JULIET RAINER: Thank you for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the honourable member holding the Floor to give us some more information. How I can access the money at the Movement and where, because I am in Movement, according to the Movement Act? (Laughter).

I have never accessed even a penny. And if they do give out money, it is taxpayers’ money so I am entitled to it. Can you please tell me where the dishing out takes place?  Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much my honourable colleague. It is true everybody is a Movement person. I saw people smile when you said you are a Movement person. I do not know why; you must be a top Movement person. 

It is common knowledge that hon. Bidandi was giving out money. Unfortunately, I am also a Movement person but I never got anything. But there are those who got and if time warrants, we can bring payment vouchers for those who got the cash.  

Madam Speaker, we have talked about –(Interruption)

MS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I think it is very important that these issues be put on record, and correctly. It is not the Movement Secretariat, which issued money. Plot 10, Kyadondo Road is not the Movement Secretariat. 

There was a task force formed by the President to man his campaign and it was put at Plot 10, Kyadondo Road. It mobilised its money and the President also contributed money, and hon. Bidandi Ssali, not as Minister of Local Government but as an individual, was appointed to chair that task force. 

I think this is very important. My colleagues here are saying it was bad enough. We know where one can act as an individual and that is why we did not go to Uganda House where the Ministry of Local Government was situated. It was situated somewhere else, not even on UDC House. I think it is very important. 

The hon. Minister of Local Government then, after an assertion on the Floor of this House, was summoned before a committee where he explained his activities and actions, and it was clearly put on record. That is why I thought I should inform you.

MR MUSISI: Is the previous speaker in order to derail this House by telling us that when a minister is in a different place he is not an agent of government? And yet we know very well that ministers act as agents of government. It is a known practice, it does not matter where, and it is very difficult to separate their two roles. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you really suggesting that anything that a minister does must be done on behalf of the Government, including eating and drinking and sleeping and –(Laughter)

MR MUSISI: No, Madam Speaker, I am very sorry. But you know very well that you and I are students of Public Administrative Law. We know that these people act in their capacities. We know very well that they are acting in those capacities and we should not try to derail Parliament when we separate their roles.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but the honourable member seems to know how that gentleman came to sit in that place and she has explained that. That is how she understands it.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This issue of money is a very controversial issue because we even saw some payment vouchers published in the papers. I would like my colleague also to throw more light on that. 

We saw them in the papers a claim that some people had been paid from Crest House. So, when we are talking about it, it is a problem we must fight at all levels. We should not give examples selectively.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have very high regard for my chairman, hon. Mafabi, and I highly respect him as a professional. He has told us as a professional accountant that he is aware that some people were given money for elections and that although he is a Movement person, he did not get any money. I want him to clarify to this House how non-receipt of money commercialised elections in his constituency?

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from hon. Mafabi. I am a professional like him. He said some members did not receive money from the Movement, and I am one of those members. But I want him to relate it to violence, because I did not get money but there was no violence in Ntenjeru North. So, could he clarify how not receiving money could be related to violence.   

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Zziwa for the information. She has told us the place where money was. So, we all know that money changed hands. That is number one. Two, how does it commercialise elections? If I get money and I give you to do something, I am buying, exchanging; that is commerce. 

My colleague asked, “How did it bring violence?”  If you see that the money you have given has gone for free, you want it to be recovered and you have to use some violence. You had no violence because you had to fight for nothing; you were using your intelligence. I hope it is now clear.

Madam Speaker, I will go on and comment on the appointment of people at the Electoral Commission. I can see that the Secretary who is currently there was just put there. Even in such an important body, we are now using technical know-who instead of technical know-how. When shall we have professionals being employed? 

We must find out how this person reached there because even Public Service is questioning how this man called Sam Rwakoojo was appointed Secretary of the Electoral Commission. You can see where violence begins. Such a person would violate from the day he goes there because he knows one person is the one who appointed him and he would be the one perpetuating violence.

Madam Speaker, I go to the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs). You will have to give me time because my time was wasted by points of information. We have so many former CAOs in this House who have been named as having participated in taking cash during elections. The others who are not here have been sacked.  

Now, those who are in Parliament, what are we going to do to them? It looks like Parliament is shielding wrongdoers! If there are Members of Parliament who also took money and have been named, they should go to Luzira by themselves. They should not sit here, to show a good example.  

You said that a man took Shs 50 million, why should he sit here? He knows evidence has shown that he has taken money; he should just walk directly to Luzira to demonstrate to the public that he is a law-abiding citizen. Those who are not in Parliament have been sacked and those who are in Parliament are being shielded.  

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of the voters register. The firm, which was contracted to do photographic registration, took 17 million dollars. The report has been silent about such theft. They should have come out with how to deal with these persons. 

There are Ugandans walking on the streets. They are now under cover walking with our 17 million dollars – Shs 34 billion of taxpayers’ money! These people should have been arrested by yesterday.

Madam Speaker, we have an issue about politics. Some people who join politics and take it as the alpha and omega are the ones who bring violence. In fact, I have carried out research; people who are not sure of tomorrow are the ones who bring a lot of violence –(Interjection)– Yes, I will substantiate on that. He believes when he leaves politics, his life has reached the end. 

If you are sure that tomorrow you will survive, you cannot fight. It is because politics is a game. It is like football and in football there cannot be two winners, there must be one winner. So, if you go in knowing that there will be a winner, you cannot start violence. In fact, we would suggest that people who are not sure of tomorrow should never stand because they are the ones who are going to kill Ugandans at their own cost.  

Madam Speaker, the report talks about civil servants and army officers to first retire before they stand. I think this is very illegal of the committee. You cannot tell people that they should retire first then they go and stand! You cannot do that because you are going to try politics for the sake of trying. 

If you say that they should retire, these are the people who will bring violence because they will be saying, “alpha and omega”. So, the report should change that item and say people should just get leave as they have been getting but they should not use resources from Government.  

Madam Speaker, the Movement Secretariat; this is a place for failures. All people who have failed in politics are dumped down there –(Interjection)– Of course you know that, check the record. All people who have failed are there. They are even in some places of operation. 

What could they do? When they try politics, they have to come with all the violence because they have known what happens. In fact, the Movement Secretariat should have been scrapped. If any person from the Secretariat stands, there will be a lot of violence because he has tested and he knows what it means so he has to use violence to get it. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform this House and my honourable colleague in particular that I, Wadri Kassiano Ezati, was one of the victims of the NRM Secretariat. 

The Parliamentary Elections Act is very clear that if you are a serving officer, except for classified officers like ministers, you were supposed to take leave and hand over all government property and vehicles in your possession. 

In my case, as will be attested by my senior brother, hon. Francis Ayume, one of my colleagues with whom I was in the race, a Director for Research in NRM Secretariat, - I do not know what research he does – went fully armed with an AK-47 and a Pajero, registration No. UB OO49B. He did this and yet the law actually forbade him to do that!  

Government officials who were supposed to enforce and make sure that the rules of the game are observed kept watching him from day one up to the end of the game. That is the information I wanted to give you. He is, of course, in the dumping ground right now as I talk.

MR FRANCIS AYUME: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I thought my colleague was still on the Floor. He was referring to me as a witness of an incident where one of the candidates was armed with an AK-47 rifle. 

I do not quite recollect where that incident took place or whether that was when the Electoral Commission representative, returning officers, were meeting us. I do recollect that he complained about that, but I did not see the AK-47 rifle. So, I could not have been a witness.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Member of Parliament from Terego has made an allegation, which should not be just left in the Hansard without being challenged. He said that the person who stood against him in the elections was using a government vehicle and that he informed Police and Police did not take action. 

To the best of my knowledge, Madam Speaker, a case like this happened in Kapchorwa. There was a candidate by the name of Mrs Kuka. She went with a government vehicle, Police was alerted and this lady was put in prison and the vehicle was withdrawn from her. 

May I know from the hon. Member from Terego whether the information he is giving is true. And if he informed the Police, why Police did not act to retrieve the vehicle of the Secretariat? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the clarification I really want is from hon. Tibarimbasa. I don’t have any idea whether Mrs Kuka was really imprisoned. Is it really true that Mrs Kuka was imprisoned?  

Secondly, I want to let him know that even with this election malpractice and problems we have had over time, there are people who are still at large irrespective of the complaints that have been raised. I am aware of the members of Kalangala Action Plan under Maj. Kakooza Mutale who went round this country beating up whomever they could. He has never been imprisoned, so I do not know whether you think this is the standard.

MRS GERTRUDE KULANY: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that I was the opponent of Mrs Kuka and during the campaigns she actually used government vehicles and bodyguards. We alerted the Police, they confronted her but she disappeared from them. She was never put in prison. 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give hon. Nandala is that I think we should desist from calling people we defeated names. In a way it also contributes to election violence. So, if you have defeated somebody let it rest, you become colleagues and you continue working together. But by calling them names, failures and so on, I think is not a good practice. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is also not true that every director at the Movement Secretariat is a failure in elections. There are people at the Secretariat, and I can mention some, who have consistently won elections and have never lost an election. Whereas a few have lost elections, I do not think all have. 

Madam Speaker, there are people who have won elections by a small margin. If you got 15,000 votes and you beat somebody who had 14,500, that person should not really be given these types of names. Otherwise, we will also encourage violence.  

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleagues who have contributed. You can see members have been shot down by themselves. So, I have nothing to answer.  

Madam Speaker, what I am trying to say is that people who have been employed at the Movement Secretariat have never done interviews. The Secretariat has never advertised that they are going to recruit directors. People have been appointed easily and they pick them from that lot, which has tried and lost. Among them failures – (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: I think it is not fair for hon. Mafabi to continue talking about the Directors of the Movement Secretariat when he knows very well how they are appointed under the Movement Act.  

Secondly, not all of them - in fact they are eight or sixteen - have ever tried to stand for political positions. I know, for instance, the Director of Legal Services, Margaret Oumo – (Interjections)- She may have tried –(Interjections)- Yes, I am bringing that out, give me a chance.  

Madam Speaker, I am giving this information and hon. Mafabi had accepted it. Margaret Oumo contested with hon. Alice Alaso, but Kasujja Zamzam did not. Even the Director of Information, Ofwono Opondo, lost but Muwanguzi Alice, who is the Deputy Director, has not lost. 

About 40 percent of the directors have tried to stand and 60 percent have never tried. It is not fair to just say that all of them are failures. After all, some of them were appointed to directorship before they stood and failed. 

So, I think we should not stand here and say this yet we are the ones who passed this Act. And we participated, through our NEC Representatives, in appointing some of them.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you know that in this very House, members have been complaining about how they are described by other institutions.  So, since those people are not able to come here to say whether they are failures or not, I think let us leave that matter. If we do not, we are going to create a situation where we bash them and they bash us in another forum and the battle does not end.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.  Order!

MR NANDALA: In Bugisu when you mix rotten oranges with good ones, the rotten ones will always spoil the good ones. 

Madam Speaker, I will now comment on the presidential elections. The report talks about the incumbent having an unfair advantage over others. I think we should come strongly on this. 

I recall during the elections that our President was given maximum advantage over others. While others got Shs 15 million and a car, which they had to fuel, he got everything. This could have been unfair. 

If that is the case, any candidate who is standing for presidential elections should be given either unlimited fuel or unlimited mobility so that he can manage his campaigns. Short of that, the incumbent should also come down and maybe leave the office for others until elections are over. That is when he can come back, if he has won his elections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I will wind up. In conclusion, I suggest this to the committee:
One, a committee be put in place to investigate the qualifications of Members of Parliament.

Two, the company, which participated in the photographic exercise be investigated further, and that they prove to this country who took the resources of US $17 million.

Three, the officials in the Electoral Commission who are there and were not appointed by Public Service should step aside so that we appoint better ones. Public Service should advertise for the jobs so that we can get people on technical know-how, not technical know-who. 

Four, the CAOs who were involved in corruption and are now Members of Parliament should come up and answer the charges. I think for the time being they should go away and come back when they have been cleared. 

Five, the public servants and army officers should not retire first when they are going to stand. They should be given leave as usual and they stand. Otherwise, if you say they retire and they go, we could easily lose very good persons who could lead us. Or they could be the ones to go there and determine either death or life because they must win the election, and they would bring violence. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.27
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA KASULE (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the colleagues who have thanked the committee for the work done. It is very good and detailed. 

Madam Speaker, I would have been happier if the committee had told us why election violence was too much in Rukungiri and Mbale, as they mentioned in the report. Why particularly those areas? Was it cultural? What were the factors behind it?  (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I also expected the committee to tell us why the elections were so commercialised in Western Uganda as compared to other regions. Another question I also expected an answer to in this report is that, why is violence on the increase in elections? 

I want to suggest that in my own understanding, at my own age and because of my experience, I think it is because the incumbents fail to do what they promised people during their campaigns. So, when time comes for them to give accountability, they do not have enough accountability so they try to use all the possible forces around to make sure that they stay in power.

In the executive summary of the report, on Page 15 it mentions key players who interfered with the electoral process. I want to tell you, Madam Speaker, that I feel they left out the Presidency. During parliamentary campaigns we heard the President going to campaign for some individuals. This could have also been a cause of election violence in those areas. 

He went to campaign in Lubaga South, for example, for a certain candidate and when the incumbent, hon. Lukyamuzi, appeared he was arrested for some minutes. That was already a cause for violence in that area. So, I think they should have also included the Presidency, or the President, because he did it. Some may say he is an individual, but he travelled in a government car.

Madam Speaker, it is so sad when you read in the report that 17 billion was paid to a company to come up with photographs to attach to our voters cards. All the 17 billion was paid but there is nothing yet on the ground. The people who paid the money to the company have not done something about it. 

Whereas people in our hospitals do not have medicine, people are dying of hunger. In our areas we do not have roads, women cannot even access maternity services at night because the road is so bad. But then money is paid to an individual and we continue clapping, that we are all in the Movement, which Movement Government is not doing something about it; billions not even thousands! (Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, may I inform the Member of Parliament holding the Floor that the Electoral Commission has now produced the photographic voters registers. They are ready. 

A copy was presented to the Public Accounts Committee and we told the clerk to the committee to take a copy to the library. So, I refer the member to the library to see that copy.  

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much for the information. But I want to add and ask; was it within the duration that the cards were expected to be out? The cards have been produced, fine, but I have not seen any. If you have seen any, then maybe you had that privilege. But was that the original cost we had expected it to be?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, it is not correct that the Electoral Commission has fully computerized and that the photographic exercise has been completed.  There was only a sample for districts. 

What I know and what I think the honourable member is talking about is, as Public Accounts Committee we ordered for a register. They never produced the photographic register to Parliament, but they provided a register without what the honourable member is talking about. It is, therefore, not correct to give this impression that the photographic register is now available in the library. That is not correct.  

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA:  Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Lumumba, that actually some of the people who caused the financial losses in the Electoral Commission were retired and given full packages. That even added to our loss. Probably we would have recovered the money from those retirement packages if Government had withheld them.

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Member of Parliament from Rukiga, who happens to be my vice chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, to come to the Floor of the House and tell lies about the correct voters register, which was handed over to the Public Accounts Committee in our session and is now in the Parliamentary library? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I will direct the Clerk to produce that register here.  You produce it in tomorrow’s session.  

MR DOMBO: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We sit here today to deliberate on election violence and issues like pointing fingers, throwing stones, have characterized election violence. 

A while ago, an honourable member addressed a colleague by pointing a finger, which could easily turn out into violence in this House. Madam Speaker, was the honourable member in order, and could this be entertained as an accepted method of work in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I have got some difficulty with that problem because a number of members speak and gesticulate with their fingers. So, sometimes I do not know whether they just gesticulating or pointing. (Applause)   

MRS ZZIWA: I had information I wanted to give to hon. Justine Lumumba in connection to the Presidency campaigning in Lubaga South, Kawempe and other areas.  

I had thought that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi would be here to give the true record. But I want just to mention that Kampala had extremely suffered from big politicians and heads of parties coming to campaign for candidates, specifically in Lubaga South. 

Hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere appeared to campaign for hon. Damiano Lubega, and that really was a very big infringement on the rights of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I think that is why when the President Museveni came to campaign in Lubaga hon. Ken Lukyamuzi thought it wise to go to the President of the broad based. So, that is why he appeared there, and I do not remember him being arrested –(Interjections)- No, I thought I should give this information because it is a fact. When I went to those campaigns and rallies, I saw it.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. When you give me information and say people heading parties went to campaign for their candidates, and yet according to the Constitution we are all in the Movement, then the Chairman of the Movement goes out to campaign for certain candidates, it beats my understanding.

Madam Speaker, in the Executive Summary, Page 10, it says that the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) were fully involved in campaigns. But I want us to look at the nature of the RDCs work and the kind of appointment an RDC carries in that chair. 

These people’s contracts are for one year. It is renewed after every one year. So, for somebody to continue sitting in that chair, he or she has to campaign for that person who makes him or her sit in that chair. Maybe the issue would be to change the kind of appointment letters they receive. That would solve the problem. 

If I am sure I have five years, then that means I would act because I know I am sure of the five years. But where it is annually, I have to pay full allegiance and follow all the orders as they come from above so that my contract is renewed after one year. 

Then there is this business of saying that police are not enough; why don’t the people concerned recruit more people? We have people outside there who want to serve. In fact, whenever they come to recruit people for the Army, many people turn up and they go away desperate because they have been left out. Why don’t we have these people recruited in the Police if they have the qualifications so that we do not continue this talk of “the police are not enough”?  

Another issue is, the Police are not well facilitated to do the work. If a full District Police Commander has no vehicle –(Interruption)

MR HENRY BASALIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to misread the report and say that the RDCs were involved in campaigning for people whereas the report says that these are public figures and they must never campaign for any candidate? Is she in order, particularly when I was an RDC and I never campaigned for any candidate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that what the hon. Kasule is reading is a recommendation arising from the findings. There must have been a finding on the issue of Resident District Commissioners.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would expect every member of this Parliament to come to this House after they have read the report and understood it, not to come here and expose that you did not read the report. It is on Page 10.  

Madam Speaker, I also want to support the committee on the recommendation that we should have elections on one day. This might solve the issue of election violence. If we have the presidential elections at the same time with parliamentary and LCV elections, everybody would be struggling for his or her own.  Nobody will have the time to intimidate people for the other to go through. I really support this. 

As Members of Parliament, when it comes to the time of voting, let us vote for this. It will help us.  You will work on your own, you will not intimidate others because you want so and so to go through, and they will not intimidate your people because they want so and so.

I also want to disagree with the committee on the issue of public officers resigning before they go for elections. I do not think that would be the solution. In fact, they would be more violent because the people handling the elections are their colleagues. They will even cause more violence so that they go through because they will have nowhere to go. 

I am suggesting that maybe we should strengthen the law we have so that people hand over. If it means handing over publicly, they do it. We should also educate our people that they are not supposed to use government vehicles –(Interruption)

MR OGWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform her that I was a civil servant. When I was given leave to go and campaign for two months, the law required me to hand over all the government utilities that I had - the vehicles, the motorcycles, the keys, everything. So, I think the law is already in place. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, hon. Kasule.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you for the information. I equally did the same because I was an education officer in the very place where I was going to campaign. 

Madam Speaker, I want to advise my colleagues that where we have election violence increasing every year at this momentum, that means in 2006 it will be hot. If you really look at it, they always deploy the Army mostly where people are not vigilant. Train your own people and they will defend you during elections. Thank you very much.

5.43
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe District): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the work that they have done. I also want to thank my colleagues for the contributions that they have made.  

Madam Speaker, having read the report I see so many recommendations that indicate that there were a lot of emotions expressed during the committee’s investigations, that even the committee had to depict them in its resolutions. I also see a lot of personal issues being brought out in the report, many people being attacked here and there. 

If I sum up the report, I clearly see the committee talking much about the causes of electoral violence and mismanagement of the electoral process, be it by the Electoral Commission or by people who are supposed to be helping in one way or the other.

Madam Speaker, the issues raised above, particularly the issue of violence or the cause of violence, is an indication that even the perpetuators of election violence can fall victims of the violence themselves. The committee, on page 5, indicates candidates as the biggest cause of election violence.  

I participated in elections and also participated in presidential elections, campaigning for the President. Madam Speaker, if you can remember that the candidates - my respectable colleague, hon. Awori, is not here but he had his sign. But there is one candidate whose sign depicted violence from the day we learnt about it, that was “enyondo” –(Interjection)- Yes, the hammer. 

The people of Kassiano were actually terrified, Madam Speaker. Some people depicted it saying that the person who will manage a military man is one who can come with a symbol that indicates that if it is hit on your head, you will not rise again. So, these are indications that candidates do whatever they want to do to win an election; the end justifies the means. 

The causes of violence, Madam Speaker, may arise from the different political groupings. It may arise from the candidates themselves. But the issue we have to realize here is that as long as we do not have a democratic culture among ourselves, even if another committee is set up the country is actually having a very big problem.

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the issue of deployment. The need for heavy deployment of security in any of our elections is an anticipation of violence in the electoral process. 

If you can see an example of the elections we had in the House here, even if you may say the number here is small, as long as the Speaker anticipates violence you will have the Army, you will have the Police and so forth. So, the presence of the Army, or the presence of Police is an anticipation of electoral violence. And this will continue as long as we do not really talk about democratic culture in this country.  

I do remember there was a problem of shortage of the policemen. The committee talked so much about the Army but there was need for the Army to come in because of the shortage of the police forces that we had at that time. But, if there was no such problem, then we would not have the Army being deployed. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I need your guidance here when we start making statements, which are going to be recorded. I do not know what the law demands when the two candidates compete. Do they have a symbol, and does the law allow that? Two, is it true that one candidate had a hammer as a symbol? I wanted this explained so that we do not put wrong statements in our Hansard.  

I wanted your guidance on this, or from any minister who is well versed with the electoral law. I would like to know whether those symbols she is talking about are official symbols, which were put in the law. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member holding the Floor for the contribution she has given. At one point she did make reference to the people of Kassiano and that, of course, meant the people of Terego. 

I thought about when she was referring to the hammer as a symbol. But when I look at the political history of this country, so far we have had four political parties that have ever come up with symbols. The Democratic Party has a fist, UPC had an open hand, CP has the two fingers showing up, and UPM has the two hands together. 

Can the honourable member holding the Floor explain to us as to whether any of these symbols that I have alluded to have ever caused, insinuated or been used for violence? Has the hoe and the fist that has been folded in the Democratic Party symbol ever been used to cause violence? Has the open hand, the UPC symbol, ever slapped? Have the two fingers of CP ever plucked out eyes? I want to understand this. 

For her to say the people of Kassiano were put in a mood to cause violence because the hammer was a sign of violence, I want clarification, Madam Speaker. Let the honourable member clear the air otherwise, I will not have sleep. I might think that the people of Terego contributed to violence in this country.  Can I have that clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson giving information? Let us hear from the chairperson.

MR MWANDHA: I think members must be aware that neither the Presidential Elections Act nor the Parliamentary Elections Act provide for symbols of any kind. So, there was no question of any symbol that was recognized in law. That is point number one. 

Two, on the question of deployment of the Army, I know the argument given was because the Police was not adequate. But when we are making the law, the Presidential Elections Act as well as the Parliamentary Elections Act, we made a provision that where the presiding officer was short of policemen he had the authority to recruit election constables. 

The argument of many people who came to the committee was that there was absolutely no need for deployment of the Army because if there was shortage, there was a provision for recruitment of election constables. 

This is our recommendation, that we either use the police if we have them or in fact allow these people to continue recruiting election constables whenever there is shortage of policemen. In that case, there would be no need to recruit or to deploy the Army to get involved in election management at all. So, this is the recommendation that we made.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I respect my colleague hon. Kassiano Wadri. I was talking about the people of Kassiano and I was not really meaning DP or UPC, I was generally meaning Arua. You know, hon. Wadri Kassiano is a man of Arua, so when I talk about the people of Kassiano I was meaning the people of Arua. He is Arua himself, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the issue of the hammer, well, my elderly colleagues say that there was no electoral law providing for candidates to have symbols. But in my preamble I did say that all of you participated in campaigns either for yourselves or for the Presidential candidates and symbols, in one way or another, had to feature.  

I do remember vividly the issue of the hammer, which was handed over to Besigye in Rakai. He was even called Magulunyondo. This hammer was interpreted in many ways. (Interruption).

MR MBALIBULHA: Madam Speaker, there is a difference between an object and violence. Can the honourable member holding the Floor substantiate how a hammer, a symbol as she calls it, could automatically cause violence? Can she really tell us where our candidate used that hammer to cause violence and? -(Interjection)- Dr Kiiza Besigye, the only doctor in that race. (Laughter). 

Even when we were being manhandled at the Airport down there, can she tell us whether she saw the hammer being used?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been listening very attentively to the contributions of the members. The majority of members have said the campaigns of 1996 were less rigorous, the campaigns of 2000 became really fireworks and they are expecting something worse in the future. 

Now, when an honourable member really diagnoses something and says maybe some of these symbols should be legislated against, she is looking ahead. Maybe we really should listen to her so that we amend the law to say, “we do not have this or we do not have that”.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. And with due respect to the Minister of Defence –(Interjection)- I will not take the information because my time is gone. Madam Speaker, the committee on Page 12 gives recommendations –(Interruption).

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, I wish to seek this point of clarification because right now, Uganda is undergoing a political transition. We are moving from a Movement system to a multiparty system and the use of symbols is going to be even more prominent than what the honourable member is talking about.  

I want to seek clarification about a person’s interpretation of a symbol, whether this Parliament can come out and legislate against the use of a specific symbol because people interpret it to mean violence. 

I know for sure when Kalashnikov made the AK-47, he made it as a symbol of peace - to promote peace, to protect territorial integrity - although progressively robbers and thieves have abused the AK-47. The initial intention was to use it as a tool of development. I know the hammer too is a tool, which is used in carpentry to fasten materials together, and it could easily be abused depending on how somebody interprets or wants to use it. 

I want to seek clarification; would you wish in future, as we go through the multiparty system, to legislate against the use of a hammer as a political symbol, which somebody may wish to adopt? 

MR FRED BADDA: Madam Speaker, I would also like to seek further clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor. Could we not now focus on major issues that were the causes of violence, other than the signs and languages and symbols? 

Even the hammer had an origin; if somebody said, “I am a quarter-pin”, the other says, “the only thing that removes the quarter-pin is the hammer”. I think we should not continue debating along the lines of language and signs. I think we should focus. Should we not really focus on major causes of violence?  Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, during the recent LCI elections they used symbols, not names. In all LCI elections they used symbols and I have not heard any case of violence. So, symbols per se have no problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry; I was just looking forward. My wish is to see this country going in a trend whereby partisan political interests will not polarize people and lead to violence.  

Madam Speaker, when I read the committee’s recommendations further, I ask myself certain questions - why were electoral bills introduced late? Why are funds not released in time? Every time we are going for elections, the Electoral Commission is complaining that funds are not released in time. Why the existence of unqualified staff in the Commission, as the committee puts it? 

Madam Speaker, we know the problem of developing countries, but the Executive should not let the people suspect that mismanagement of the electoral process is a deliberate attempt by Government.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude on the committee’s recommendations on the Army. The committee says that the Army should start voting with the people, they should come out and put on civilian attire, they should come out with their wives because it is the time for them to interact. This gives an impression that there is already a bad feeling about the Army at a time when we feel that the Ugandan Army has been exemplary enough.  

Madam Speaker, when your son or your brother takes on a profession in the Army, from that time he is a trusted citizen of this country who desires to be treated with a lot of respect, who desires not to be segregated when we are making recommendations here and there. I am calling upon my colleagues not to take some of the mistakes made by a few individuals as a wholesome mistake made by the entire Army. I thank you very much.

6.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I take this opportunity also to thank the committee for a well written report. It is my prayer that in the end, the recommendations made in this report and the solutions that will come out will be implemented to solve the problem of election violence in this country.  

Madam Speaker, that which is conscious in one’s mind but denied an outlet is called bad faith.  This bad faith, which the French call mauvaise foi, is trying to hide the truth and problems expecting that the bad faith will get out by itself. 

It is very dangerous if you have bad faith. When we are debating this report here, I would urge my colleagues to desist from having bad faith. Let us debate this report objectively. Where the truth is, where the problems have been, let us identify them and sort them if we want a peaceful country.  Failure to do that, members have already said here, trouble awaits us.  

We no longer want trouble in this country. This country is too large to accommodate all of us and we should live in it peacefully until God himself decides to take our lives.

Madam Speaker, a number of issues have been raised in this report. Some of the issues I will just comment on as a point of emphasis. Honourable members have raised here the issue of qualifications. Some issues have been raised that some of the members here in this House do not have qualifications and they have lied.  

Hon. Nathan Nandala quoted our directory and said that some Members of Parliament have alleged that they belong to the professional bodies like ACCA. Even in the report on Page 26, it is very clear that of the senior staff in the Electoral Commission, 52 percent are unqualified for those positions.  

Madam Speaker, we have so many unemployed people on the streets and yet there are unqualified people occupying positions in the country. We must attach a premium to education. What signals are we sending to the children we are educating under UPE if they know -(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for Kasilo for giving way. Members have contributed on the issue of qualifications at the pain of being accused of sour grapping. 

Look, for example, at notable officials in the Electoral Commission - the Secretary happens to be the person I stood with. To put facts on record, because I feel it should be on record, the report says they asked for his qualifications and he had a university degree. But for sure, I was nominated with him and I know very well he lacks a university qualification or even a professional qualification for that matter. 

However, since we are discussing the Electoral Commission and election violence, in Sembabule and in Lwemiyaga in particular, you remember it took three days after winning elections before results could be declared. Three full days! Bullets were fired, he wanted to be declared the winner, people surrounded the district offices, and the Riot Police was called in. Now, to put such a person to be in charge of the elections! 

Even the junior ranking officials, for instance the district registrar, had to be taken away immediately he become Secretary to the Electoral Commission. I think I should not do injustice to that young man who was victimised on my behalf simply because he hid before results could be declared. So, as it was being repeated, I thought it over and I said the fact has to be on record. 

It is bad; you cannot have somebody under-qualified to the basic you can imagine, violent to any extent, and limited in all those aspects put in the Electoral Commission –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I am puzzled because we have a finding of the committee that Mr Sam Rwakoojo is qualified to a level of Bachelor of Arts degree. 

I understand the feelings of my colleague especially when he declares his interest that he did stand with Sam Rwakoojo; I understand your feelings. But are you now trying to amend the findings of the report? Have you carried out an independent investigation? Did you attempt to appear before the committee to give those facts and evidence? 

I fail to follow your argument, because we have findings of the report and the report has made the recommendation basing on those findings. Madam Speaker, the honourable member is introducing new facts. Can I be guided so that I know what to follow?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the issue of investigating qualifications was not part of our terms of reference. The qualifications we got with respect to the Secretary to the Electoral Commission, Mr Sam Rwakoojo, are as they appear in the records of the Sixth Parliament. 

So, the Minister should not take it that we looked into the qualifications of the Secretary and satisfied ourselves that these are the qualifications. We took the qualifications as they were. 

Of course, our concern was that according to the Public Service Commission, a Permanent Secretary must have a Master’s degree, which he did not have, and a number of other things. So really, the question of the qualifications of the Secretary is not a matter that we will say, “yes, the Secretary is qualified or he is not qualified”, because we took the information as found in public records. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sekikubo, the chairperson has clarified and as far as we are concerned, they said he did not have the requirements to be a Permanent Secretary. But does that mean that actually he has no qualifications?

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I am talking about the basic qualifications. The basic could have been a university qualification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, I do not know, but if I remember well for our elections the minimum is ‘A’ level or its equivalent.

MR SEKIKUBO: For him to be in the position of the Secretary to the Electoral Commission, he must be a graduate of some college with some qualification, or of some university. I was reflecting on what hon. Okupa Elijah was mentioning and referring to that, not his candidature. Of course, he can stand even though he failed so long as he had the minimum of two principles passes, which I am sure he has, nothing more to add to that. 

The surprise of it all is how he happens to be in that position, but most especially on the issue of morality. Someone engineering election violence in one part of the country and then being put in charge of the entire electoral process is what I am really wondering about, not his appointment, not his elevation. I am just wondering about the morality and the moral authority he has in managing the affairs of the Commission.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you in a position to really go to the Police, make this report and substantiate? This is a very serious allegation. Are you in a position to do so?

MR SEKIKUBO: Very much, Madam Speaker. This is not personal sour grapping. The committee had all the time to call for the records, even in the district where we stood.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In view of what hon. Sekikubo is saying, before he advances his allegations further, I think it would be fair to this House to bring that evidence and then you proceed to make those allegations. It is fair to us. Otherwise, my opinion is that you seem to be getting out of the perimeters of the report.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from you. What could hon. Sekikubo have done in a case where he is a Member of Parliament and he has the privileges and immunity? Because now here is a case where somebody has gone personal on him, he is also coming here to go personal on him. What could he have done? 

Elections were tough and he says they took three days to declare him the winner. He has his power in there because of the political attachment; he is holding a very big office where he was part of the causers of violence. He takes up the post and he transfers somebody immediately because he is now in charge. You, as the Speaker, how do you help hon. Sekikubo?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you see, I have asked hon. Sekikubo whether he is actually in a position to go and report this matter so that it is investigated and handled. That is the way he can be assisted, so that this gentleman, if he does not have papers, should be removed from that position.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I think we could be assisted because the report is very clear. I think hon. Sekikubo may have said these words with emotion. But on Page 31, it is clear Mr Rwakoojo lacked experience other than that of the financial controller. 

All the way from Page 25 they describe what qualifications the Secretary of the Electoral Commission should have. It is categorically stated that he should have a Bachelor’s degree in any humanities, he should have a Master’s Degree in Management, at least 15 years of working experience, six of which should be at an executive management level, with a wide exposure and thorough working knowledge gained through services in Public Service. 

They brought the curriculum vitae of the honourable, which the chairperson has confessed that they did not get from him but from the records of Parliament. He says that he is aged 46, he holds a Bachelor of Arts majoring in Accounting with minors in Business Administration, and his experience is from 1996 to 2001. 

He was a treasurer of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, vice chairperson to the Sessional Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and financial controller at Joint Clinical Research Centre, with a few other things. It is on that basis that the committee drew this conclusion. 

I think he may have added some kind of emotion, but the point which hon. Okupa was driving at, which hon. Sekikubo picked up from, was the fact that it is alleged that some of us do not have qualifications. Even very distinguished people holding posts, some of them do not have qualifications. Where is this country going? I think it is that point, which we should really stick to.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, when hon. Sekikubo talks about the moral authority, on Page 31 in the last paragraph, the committee reports says that PAC had reliable information to the effect that Mr Rwakoojo was one of the representatives of Lithotech, the South African Company, which was doing business with the Electoral Commission then. 

Accordingly, PAC advised the Electoral Commission against appointing Mr Rwakoojo as Secretary to the Commission. I think the question of moral authority really comes in.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek your guidance on interpretation of our rules. Hon. Sekikubo has made very many allegations, which hon. Adolf Mwesige has demanded that he should prove to this House. Does immunity of a Member of Parliament extend to telling lies? Because as far as I know, Mr Rwakoojo has a Bachelor’s degree in Arts!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, that is why I was asking hon. Sekikubo to separate the issue of whether Mr Rwakoojo had all the requirements to be a Permanent Secretary, from the issue of whether he actually does not possess a Bachelor’s degree, meaning that the Bachelor’s degree he holds was forged. That is what he is insinuating. 

That is why I am asking him, “Are you in position to go and report that matter so that it is followed up and Mr Rwakoojo is removed from the Electoral Commission?”  That is what I want to know from him.  
 
MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I brought it out clearly at the pain of being misunderstood, like my colleagues have done. Even if you look at the report itself, do not look at Sekikubo as a person speaking. 

Look at the report; it is self-explanatory. I wish we could read the report again. Those are the things that come up. I can even vouch and say that later on there was 15-years experience. Where does one stand up –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am not talking about the experience, I am talking about Mr Rwakoojo not having a Bachelor’s degree, which is claimed there.  That is what I want to know. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I say he does not have it. I wanted to say one thing basing on our files, because I was nominated with him by the way. We all had our brochures and he never mentioned it, and on many questions he was challenged. So, when it comes up here, I really put the chairman of the committee to task; did he look at that university degree that they are talking about?  

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as the qualifications of Mr Rwakoojo are concerned, we wrote as a committee to him to present his papers to the committee. He presented every other thing that we wanted, save the academic qualifications.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, what did he present? Can you enumerate what he presented?

MR KIKUNGWE: As far as his academic qualifications are concerned, nothing was presented.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  When hon. Zziwa was reading, she was saying Bachelor of Arts, Accounting and Administration.  Is that what he has, Bachelor of Arts majoring in accounting? I have been on this earth of God –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Bachelor of Arts majoring in accounts with minors in business administration and economics. This is what is in this report. It says that, “Member of Parliament 1996-2001; financial controller, Joint Clinical Research Centre 1990-1996; accountant, Hope International Foundation, 1982 -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I want to help the House. I have been on this earth of God, I have never heard of Bachelor of Arts in Accounting minors. I know before Bachelor of Commerce was originally Bachelor of Arts in Commerce, something like that. But there has never been –(Interjection)- Which university is that? Maybe you help us with the name of the university.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think enough has been said about this matter. The Government is here, they have heard. The honourable member says he is very strong on that matter and that he knows. I think it is up to Government now to take up the matter and investigate it and let us know.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is why when I was making my opening remarks I talked of bad faith - knowing the truth, knowing the problem and failing to sort it out expecting it to go away one day. It is very dangerous. 

The bottom line is that he does not measure up to the qualifications as prescribed by the Public Service Commission. But it is a surprise that even up to now, and this report came out a year ago, the man is still in that very position.

Madam Speaker, I talked about the senior management in the Electoral Commission, no wonder we had all those confusions. Up to 52 percent of the senior management, more than a half, are unqualified according to the report. We cannot afford to have more than 50 percent of unqualified people manning such sensitive positions. (Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much. In the course of carrying out our work we interacted with Commissioner Florence Nkurunkenda, who had this to say: “Even in your Parliament, a third of the members there do not have the qualifications.”

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think you can see where the problem is. We need to get serious and sort out this problem of qualifications. It is so painful having gone to school and studied for 20 to 25 years, and somebody goes to school for 10 years and he out-competes you in a very dubious way. It is very painful. 

We spent a lot of nights reading, we spent resources and even risked life. We had to do ‘O’ Level exams under very terrible conditions in the rebel infested area. Some members were caned during the examination time. They go through all these but in the end you find yourself on the streets. It is very painful! This issue must be addressed and the premium should be attached to education – (Interruption)

MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to know from the member holding the Floor how members have managed to come to Parliament with forged papers, or without qualifications. And yet I very well know that in my district we managed to get rid of members who did not have qualifications.

MR WESONGA: I want to inform the honourable colleague who has wondered how members have managed to enter Parliament with forged qualifications. 

In the past, this Parliament had somebody who was even holding the position of a minister, but he was a graduate of Primary 6. He did not even know how to forge the papers. They are on record everywhere. I can arrange to give them to this Parliament. His combination was LMG; have you ever heard about LMG being a combination and somebody ends up doing architecture! Wasieba did it. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Rwakimari was asking me how these members come here and yet in her constituency she managed to get rid of the fraudulent people who used forged papers. I think it is lack of vigilance from the respective districts and constituencies. They failed to identify this at initial stage. But now we are identifying them here – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I am really perturbed to hear that while we are talking about lack of qualifications by officials of Electoral Commission, we do not have these qualifications in this House as we sit. I am further perturbed when I read through the parliamentary directory and I see honourable members awarding themselves various qualifications. (Laughter). 

I say this with a lot of pain. Because when you are in Senior 4, you will certainly have your old boys. When you are in Senior 6, you cannot be the only person in the class; you must be able to have your teachers. When you got to the university, you are even fewer enough to know yourselves. When you go up for your postgraduate studies, you are even so few that you get to know yourselves. So, you know who your contemporaries were, your lecturers, which combination you took, which course you did.

Will I, probably at this point in time, request the committee and the whole House that in future when people are making all these glamorous declarations, Parliament should come up with a procedure that you produce these papers. 

We feel hurt when those of us who read, who suffered under all odds, are told that, “after all in that House there are people who do not have papers”. It touches my ego as a person, because when I go out people will say, “Look at these MPs; bano tebalina karatasi” - they do not have papers. How do I associate myself with such? 

I think it would be good if as a matter of procedure people coming here come with their original testimonials, so that we know what kind of degree one has, what kind of postgraduate qualification you have, rather than sitting and having all this information given and taken as gospel truth. Hence, the reason why people outside there are now doubting the integrity of this House, to which I think some of us are not prepared to be associated with. Thank you.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: I want to inform this House that if you did not read this report properly, actually one of the recommendations of the committee is that there should be a body set aside to verify our documents, this Seventh Parliament. It is in the committee report. 

So, the issue raised by my colleague suggesting that in the next Parliament - I want to move today with my head up when I have been vetted. If I do not come back in the Eighth Parliament they will say, “people in the Seventh Parliament were not qualified”, because it is not pinned on our foreheads. 

We should support the committee’s recommendation. Let a committee be set up outside so that we, the Members of Parliament, appear with our papers to be vetted. What is wrong with that? It is okay. 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of qualifications is very serious, but, of course, for Dr Kasirivu there is no question about it. (Laughter).  

Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament when we were enacting the Parliamentary Elections Act, I remember we wanted to stipulate that every person who was going to contest should be cleared by UNEB. Unfortunately, hon. Okulo Epak is the one who shot it down from that angle, otherwise all this confusion would not have come up. We should have presented papers.

On a more serious note, when I was in Senior 4 and I was going to register for the East African exams - for us we did the East African exams - I was going to drop the name Kasirivu so that I get my original name, Kyamanywa. But the headmaster, Br Leonard, advised me that, “Your primary level certificate has Kasirivu. It could cause some problems in future, please, maintain the name.” And I did maintain the name because of that. 

So I could have had the PLE certificate with Kasirivu on it and the ‘O’ Level one having Kyamanywa. And someone could come up and say you could have inherited someone’s certificate. So, it is a serious matter and this Parliament should stand on its feet and say that we put our papers on the table. If you are really wanting, then you are not supposed to be here.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to get some clarification from hon. Kasirivu. I am aware that Dr Okulo Epak is not here and I find it very difficult, because I was also not in the Sixth Parliament, to understand how he shot down a suggestion from that corner. 

It would be good for me to get to know this from Dr Kasirivu, because I will have the opportunity of somebody explaining to me the trend of “shooting down from that corner”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Hansards of this House are available. If you look at the Hansards of the Sixth Parliament on when we were debating that matter, you will be able to identify who said what.   

MR OKUPA: May I hear from hon. Loote? He has been standing for some time. Let me hear the something that is burning, from him.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Madam Speaker, it puzzles me. The committee got some information that some of us do not have these academic qualifications, and members are saying that some documents are forged; yet it is this Parliament, which actually advocates against corruption. So, if it is true that some of us were fraudulent and intellectually corrupt, then we do not deserve to have integrity as legislators of this country. 

Even before we discuss the qualifications of other people, we must evaluate and give in our own so that we have the credibility, the moral authority, the academic authority to criticize others. So, this matter should not be taken very easily and I think we must put our House right. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, to go to Senior 4 is common knowledge. Senior 4 is Senior 4. Senior 6 is the same thing. Therefore, we do not even want to think about the equivalent. It is quite clear because you need to go to school and do exams. This issue is not a light thing. 

I want to come back to this man called Mr Rwakoojo. He claims he was an accountant in America. To become an accountant in America, you must have what we call CPA, America. There is no question about that. So, he cannot come and tell us that he was an accountant working for an American company. It is illegal. 

Let me tackle this chronologically. In 1982–1983 he was an accountant, then in 1983–1985 he became a financial manager. When you become a financial manager that means you have gone up. Then in 1995-1998 again he becomes an accountant. How? How do you demote yourself when you are qualified? Madam Speaker, this person here – (Interjection)- No, in fact in the same area! Listen, let me read –(Interruption)

MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think you should save the House in terms of time and in terms of managing the issue because this report is very clear. 

The Uganda Government, that is the Public Service, wrote a letter to say that actually it did not approve the appointment of Mr Rwakoojo as Permanent Secretary. So, all these things we are referring to are outside the Government, for example referring to California or what not. 

Our basic institution here rejected the appointment of the Permanent Secretary. So, we should stick to that and this is strong enough, more than any other institution that is being set. I refer you to page 31. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I had already asked the Government to investigate that matter. So, we left that subject and we moved on to qualifications in this House. Unfortunately, you will have to wind up quickly.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope this point will be taken very seriously and we save the situation. 

Another issue is the election violence culprits. Yesterday names were mentioned here of people who were found guilty of voting twice. Some were declared by court to have cheated. 

Madam Speaker, we should make this business a very risky business for those who were involved in it. Those involved in electoral malpractices should be deterred from repeating the same. I propose that if a member is found guilty of these electoral malpractices and violence, he should be punished and stopped from standing again for the next 15 years, to enable him reform. 

More to that, he should pay the costs involved in having the by-elections. This is one way we can make this a very risky business and sort out the House. 

Otherwise, some voted twice and they came back to the House and were made ministers! One has been found guilty, he goes back and stands, what will stop him from applying the same, because there have not been punitive measures to deter such? It will also be a lesson to those who are contemplating to do the same. It would be good for the future of our children if we punished the culprits.  

An issue was raised of inadequate police to man the elections. We have time; we should be preparing because we know elections will be coming every five years. Attempts should be made to recruit more staff. 

Allegations have been made, excuses have been made that we do not have the money. But we all know that democracy is a very expensive thing; we must sacrifice. Because we want a peaceful country, investment must be made in the police. We have always seen where there is need to increase money in defence, it is increased because we need security in this country. 

We should also look at ways of having the Internal Affairs budget increased to cater for the Police to keep law and order in this country, not only during elections but also generally in the country. We should be able to keep law and order if we are to attract investment. If we do not have law and order, all these things will take place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please try to conclude.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issue of qualifications of members of this House should be taken seriously for us to save our faces from the public.  

As has been said, let us make the culprits realise that this is a risky business by giving penalties to people involved in that. We need to expand the police and equip them to take care of that.

On the issue of the Electoral Commission, I have said 52 percent of unqualified staff is a very sensitive issue. It should be addressed with immediate effect. We should have that place overhauled and solve this problem if we are to save this country from more problems to come. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that hon. Musisi and hon. Kibanzanga would follow hon. Okupa but there is an activity which is to start at 7.00 p.m. and the guest of honour will be arriving shortly. So I would like us to end here for now but tomorrow we start with hon. Musisi followed by hon. Kibanzanga. Those are the ones I had selected already. 

Honourable members please do not forget we are supposed to go and dance very vigorously. Because of the rain, which we anticipate might come again, the function has been moved to the Members’ Canteen. So, do not go to the grounds. 

The other announcement is that the workshop on the Domestic Relations Bill organised by the women parliamentarians has been shifted to Monday. It is not on Friday because we have that other function of the Budget Committee. So, attend the budget PEAP activity and also attend the one of UWOPA on Monday. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 December 2003 at 2 p.m.)

