Wednesday, 14 December 2011

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome, honourable members. Today, communication is very brief; it is just the Order Paper. I have been informed that item 3 on the Order Paper will not be handled today. That is the ministerial statement on the extension of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP). Is that correct?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are ready with all the documents. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already indicated that the matter will not be handled today as had been previously advised. So, it will not be handled today, but tomorrow. I am not going to change now and I had already crossed it from the Order Paper.

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I want to plead with you because I have some things that I am doing and I have just rushed back from there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But was it you who made the request that it should not be handled today?

MS AMUGE: No please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Alright, the Order Paper stands as it is, honourable members.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in search of your guidance. I am surprised that since the end of the global conference on climate change in Durban, South Africa, Government has not indicated that it will give us a briefing on such an important conference that captured the attention of mankind. That is in view of the environmental catastrophes facing man today. 

It is also on record that Uganda has participated in two important conferences on climate change. One in Mexico last year, and the other in Denmark the previous year.

Right now, Uganda is one of the countries that are badly hit by the phenomenon of climate change. You see, the floods are common; wetland reclamation and deforestation are also with us. The lives of our people are in danger because of that calamity of climate change. I demand that before we break for recess, Government should not have an excuse not to brief us over what happened in Durban.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Migereko, are you doing something for this House to get information?

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for raising this matter. It is true Durban took it up and quite a number of issues on climate and the environment were discussed. I know our delegation has returned. What I am going to do is dutifully pass on the information you have raised so that they can be in a position to come up with a comprehensive statement clearly capturing the interests of our country. 

2.44
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I rise on a point of national importance in my area. Crocodiles are finishing my people. These crocodiles have not started today, and not even yesterday. They have been eating people all these years and I wonder where the Government is. Article 22 of the Constitution allows all Ugandans a right to life. It is negligence of the highest order on the part of Government that these crocodiles have been eating people and they have not come up to do anything. I demand that the minister comes up with a statement showing why the Government has been negligent, as Ugandans, especially in my area, have been losing lives to the crocodiles.

Let the minister show the measures the Government is going to put in place so that we do not lose more life to crocodiles.

The Government should financially support families that have lost relatives. Here with me is a list of over 30 people who have been killed by crocodiles. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that one has to go through a process to be laid such that it can be forwarded to a committee. If you lay it now, what happens to it? Basically nothing. We need to go through a process that will enable you do that properly. Is that fine?

MR MAJEGERE: You can give me information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My ruling is, if you rise on a matter of urgent public importance, you must have all the information. You cannot be given information on what has happened to you.

MR MAJEGERE: But Mr Speaker, so far, I have the list of the people killed by crocodiles.

2.47
MR MUKITALE BIRAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, those of us who neighbour the national parks are faced with challenges because of Government’s conservation policy. I have reported here before loss of over 20 people because of Hippos and crocodiles. Buliisa is a neighbour of Murchison Falls National Park on the River Nile, neighbouring Nwoya, now formerly Amuru, and the other side Nebbi. We have a problem of many hippos and crocodiles. The stocks are high in the park and many of them are coming to the community side of the lake. We have made efforts, but no action has been taken. It is now becoming weekly that hippos and crocodiles are attacking people and the frustration is that the communities which for the last 20 years have behaved so well - not touching the wildlife - may now end up protecting themselves by killing these animals. So, we need an immediate response from the concerned ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Frontbench is not well represented today, but please, let us take this very seriously. There was the issue of elephants destroying people’s crops. I am being informed even from Kasese; now you have crocodiles killing people in Mayuge and Buliisa. These animals are on rampage against the people. We have the Uganda Wildlife Authority, a Government agency created by an Act of Parliament. We have a Frontbench. Can we do something comprehensive about this thing and help people, please?

MR SSEBULIBA: I am rising on a point of procedure quoting Rule 21 on quorum of Parliament: “The quorum of Parliament shall be 1/3 of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.” Mr Speaker, when I see the Frontbench on the Government side with only two Members, I get worried. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed, especially when the Frontbench where these matters of uttermost significance to the nation are being raised and I only see hon. Migereko and hon. Rebecca Otengo. Can we proceed like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on Rule 21 of our Rules of Procedure; it is about quorum and quorum does not relate only to the Frontbench; it relates to the whole House. There is no quorum for the Frontbench; please, let us proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised in regard to crocodiles and elephants are very critical, particularly for the people who are living within the vicinity of game parks. This is a matter, which I know the Prime Minister had already taken up with the Ministry of Tourism because that is where the Uganda Wildlife Authority falls. My duty, therefore, will be to make a follow-up on the instructions which have been given so that the communities that are within the vicinity of the Park can live without fear of the animals; and also those near the lakes can live without fearing the crocodiles.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. This is my second term in Parliament and I have been here for quite a number of sittings. Like you rightly said in your submission and my honourable colleague raised an issue here, these are matters of national importance, and in the past, when the Frontbench has not been represented like it is today, this House would be suspended and the Chief Whip ordered to mobilise. We have had this before; this is an issue of people who live within and around parks. You have heard colleagues saying that they are going to take the law in their hands. You have talked about elephants; there are hippos - Anthrax from hippos; farmers on Mt Elgon.

We raise these issues again and again, and because the minister is not there, these issues are confused. The anger and anxiety of Ugandans is running out of control. In your own constituency, Mr Speaker, you know what elephants are doing. I would like to request that the acting Leader of Government Business gives us a definite timeframe. I would like the House to be suspended until the Frontbench is brought to order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even if you had a full Frontbench, the matter has been raised as a matter of urgent public importance, and the rules give me 15 minutes to allow for handling of that matter. I do not think that even if you had a full Frontbench, even with the presence of a precedent, they would be able to deal with it in 15 minutes.

So, the matter you are raising is substantial and I agree that it is; that is why I have asked that the Frontbench takes it seriously and we should be given some time. The Frontbench owes it to us that we get timely information. Each time matters are raised, you should be quick to respond to them. You are not only responding to the Members of the House, you are responding to the people you made pledges to, and that is the people of the Republic of Uganda. So, let us not make this a ping pong game that each time we come, we raise matters, we sit down, go back, and the next day we come and raise them again. It is becoming a game that we cannot play for a long time any more. Please, take this seriously so that we can move this House in making us play our proper representative role, speaking and acting for the people of this country.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, before you pronounce yourself on this matter, I had wanted to seek some clarification from the minister now that he is standing in for the minister responsible for Wildlife Authority. Last month, a few of us had an opportunity to tour some of the game parks in Nairobi and even others faraway from the city. we realised that because the authority was conscious of the fact that animals, both wild and non-wild cannot mix freely with human beings without causing injuries, Government was able to have electric wire raze along all game park points so that no animal whatsoever, which is supposed to be in the park can escape from there and destroy people’s crops or cause mayhem to the people, their crops and domestic animals. Can the minister, as he goes to carry out consultations, also discuss with his colleague responsible for that portfolio, as to whether such a thing is workable? What happens if an elephant, a buffalo or whatever it is, comes out of the game park reserve to where human habitation is and people happen to help themselves and taste animal protein? The Uganda Wildlife Authority will go for you, that you have interfered with the freedom of movement of this animal and you will be held responsible, and yet this is an animal which has invaded peace-loving people in their own habitat. 

So, if you had the possibility of raising this electrical wire all along, then we would not have had some of these problems. 

The Uganda Wildlife Authority raises insurmountable amounts of money in terms of taxes. Even when I decide to go to Terego via Para, I pay as a tourist and yet I am a Ugandan; but I pay money. So, how do you use this money to make sure that these animals are kept under check so that they do not cause mayhem to the neighbourhood? I think that will go a long way in saving us from these troubles that we are encountering with the animals. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the minister close and let us move forward. The matter has been sufficiently raised. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, it has always been the arrangement that if there is any Member of the Frontbench who is not here and is meant to respond to issues, it is the duty of either the Leader of Government Business or the Government Chief Whip to make sure that you promptly write to that minister so that he is in position to respond to issues raised in a timely manner, and this is what I am going to do. 

Secondly, regarding the fencing of game parks, this is really standard practice and I believe that resources permitting, even here in Uganda, we should be in position to embark on the fencing using electric barbed wires, so that this – it can be chain-linked, barbed wire and so on – so that the animals can be stopped from interfering with the lives of people who are going about their normal business in their homes within the vicinity of the parks. I thank you and I am going to take up this one. 

3.00
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under rules 43 and 44 of our Rules of Procedure, putting you on notice that I would like to table before this Parliament a motion in respect to a resolution of Parliament to cause a review of the National Security Information System (NSIS) project, commonly referred to as the National IDs. I recently raised this matter in this House. It is a very serious matter and I pointed out how Government is going to lose a lot of money, and how Government is duplicating various projects aimed at achieving the same goal; and it appears that as you have rightly said, when we raise some of these issues, Government does not quickly respond. 

I understand we are soon breaking off for Christmas and I would like this matter to be attended to urgently so that a serious review is made in respect to this project. I beg to move that I will table this motion before this Parliament. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that the rules are very restrictive on this kind of matter. Even if you give oral notice of this nature, we still have to be given three days within which you can bring the substantive motion. However, our estimation is that we may not go beyond tomorrow depending on the schedule of business that we have, and in the circumstances, and given the matter that it now looks urgent that this House should have a good amount of time to have a comprehensive debate on it, we will see how to deal with the rules to permit the honourable member bring the motion tomorrow. 

3.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to address myself on the same matter for which the Member wishes to bring a motion. I want to offer myself to second this motion in advance before it even comes and, therefore, I am proposing that I wish to offer myself, and even right now, thank him for the information. Even the IDs that we have right now with us - I have personally picked mine - we spent a long time lining up to give in our details, but the information I have found on my ID is that my village is Shimoni, my parish is Nakasero, the sub-county is Kampala Central, my district is Kampala, my county is Kampala Central Division and my signature is there; and yet I spent almost two hours lining up to tell them I come from Karambi village, Kisenyi parish, Kizinga sub- county, Kasese District. So, I really do not know. If a whole MP’s ID can be messed up like this, what will happen when they go to the villages? This is money wasted – (Interruption)

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member and I would like to thank you for your ruling that this motion be moved tomorrow. I would also like to support my sister and tell her that the problem is not only with the national ID cards, but much deeper. I have been researching for the last 30 days on the same issue and I would like to offer myself to second or be the third mover of that motion because, like hon. Mawanda said - and just giving information to my colleague here - the issue is much deeper than the ID cards. (Interruption in power supply)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the cameras will not catch you. 

MR TANNA: When this Parliament approved that Face Technologies should start building a national data bank - and I have all the information which I will lay on the Table - the rot went ahead during the national ID voter card registration – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tanna, are you going to debate it tomorrow or do you want to finish it today? (Laughter)

MR TANNA: I want to give her information on the rot. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we have agreed that we will have a substantive motion – 

MR TANNA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

MRS KIIZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to give more light on what the Member is about to bring and I think we should all be ready to support this motion –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wonder why we need a substantive motion and yet you can use your Office to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a statement to this House on the current status of the national IDs, because probably by the time he presents the statement, which will be debated anyway, it could have resolved most of the issues, other than a substantive motion, for which I am worried about the lifecycle and lifespan. I was just trying to seek guidance on that matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, you see, the Speaker cannot, on his or her own, request a minister to make a statement. It has to come from the honourable members. Let the honourable member conclude and then we see how to wind up.

MRS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I would have said, in the circumstances, that we ask the minister to present a statement, but you are all aware that ministerial statements have a limit beyond which we can debate them. 

I would propose that we just go in for a full-blast motion. This motion will give us an in-depth discussion on the ID project and Face Technology issues that the hon. Tanna is talking about, and possibly, more Members of Parliament will have picked their IDs and will have seen whether they have not been re-allocated to other areas because if I am to use the national ID, I am worried next time I may not contest. So, I want to thank you for raising the issue. I offer myself to support. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to close this now and move forward with other issues, please.

3.08
MR OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, this matter is very urgent and it requires our urgent attention. As you are aware, Rule 14 allows Members of Parliament to suspend certain rules stipulated in the Rules of Procedure and under Rule 14, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House. If the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.

Rule 7 also allows that. Under Rule 2, there are certain rules that cannot be suspended, but in this one, we can move that this rule be suspended and a Member be allowed to move that motion tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Do you want me to take a vote on this? I think this is a straightforward matter; we have already agreed that we will do it tomorrow and thank you for the guidance too. We will do that tomorrow. 

MS NINSIIMA: I would like to seek guidance from you. Much as it is going to be debated tomorrow, one can give some information because I sit on the ICT Committee, which is actually tackling this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be very relevant tomorrow in the debate. Thank you.

3.10
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, subsequently to seek leave of Parliament on notice of importance. 

The matter I am raising is with regard to the parcelling of land, which if at all, belongs to the Uganda Police Force around the Metropolitan area of Kampala. Honourable members may be aware that there is a plan to transfer or relocate almost all the Police stations and barracks currently located in this area that I have referred to. The barracks that will be affected include: Naguru, Nsambya, Wandegeya, Katwe, Kabalagala, Old Kampala, Kawempe, Jinja Road, Natete and Kira Road. This leaves almost no barracks in the metropolitan area of Kampala.

Already, 10,000 Police personnel of the Field Force Unit, which has been, until recently, housed in Naguru and Ntinda, have been relocated together with their families to some bush in Olilim in Katakwi.

Police personnel are human beings. They have families and many of them come from the constituencies that we represent. Today, there is a programme under PPP where investors have been invited to carry out development activities on these various pieces of land. These pieces of land are barracks, which have been in the places where they are now for many years from the colonial times. I have interacted with senior citizens of this country and they have given me this information.

I think it should be the concern of this House that we look into the plight of the Police. The Police should not only be good when it comes to running after the Opposition and “teargasing” them, and yet we do not think about their welfare -(Hon. Kiiza rose)- Yes, I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have already ruled on this matter. If a Member rises on a point of national importance, he or she has all the information. Until that person has finished, it would not be proper for you to rise because you do not know the information.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, under these circumstances, I would like to ask leave of this Parliament to allow me to bring a motion tomorrow, especially given that these sons and daughters of Uganda are actually being chased out of a barracks and taken to places that have no development or little development, if anything.

And so, given that it is a matter of urgent public importance, I would request that I bring this matter by way of motion tomorrow to this House, especially mindful of the fact that we are going on recess. I beg to bring this to your attention and to the attention of the House. I thank you very much for this opportunity.

3.15
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with my colleague that there is a problem regarding the housing of the Police Force. This issue has been raised individually and corporately in this House. The chairperson of the committee, who is with us here today, is aware that this issue has been raised by the committee and is being tackled by the committee.

However, what I disagree on with him, is the fact that the Police officers are being chased away. That is not true. My knowledge and experience is that an investor comes in, secures an alternative piece of land, which is agreeable to the government, develops the apartments and then takes over the land like was done in the case of CMI where one of the business persons acquired land, built the alternative headquarters in Mbuya and handed over the building before he was given access to this piece of land.

So, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. Under the PPP arrangement, it is the responsibility of the companies that are being allocated these pieces of land to build barracks for the Police Force. At the moment, what I see is that the Policemen are being asked to relocate and no single housing unit whatsoever, anywhere in this country, has been built by any of these companies. So, really when I say they were just driven out of this place, I really mean it.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I come from an area, which greatly depends on the security provided by Police and it is on record that in the history of Uganda, if we did not have the Police, many of us would not be living. Police is one of the institutions, which is very poorly paid. I remember that if it was not for my move in the Sixth Parliament to demonstrate against hon. Sendaula who was then Minister of Finance, over the salary scale of the Police, up to now they would not have got any increment. They got increments because of my struggle. So, there is need for us to wake up as Parliament and protect the Police. We deeply depend on Police and without them, this country may not survive.

Therefore, I demand that tomorrow, we move that motion and I will be one of the people to second it.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have to thank the Member for yielding the Floor. I first of all endorse the issues and sentiments raised by hon. Sanjay Tanna. They are not chasing the Police personnel or Police officers from the barracks; that is not true. 

You remember when we were considering the budget, all of us showed a lot of concern for the welfare of the Police Force. We have to salute all Members and the whole House for this concern, but what is happening, as of now, is that construction is supposed to start. 

We have been complaining of the appalling state of the accommodation of the Police personnel here, but for now, Government cannot construct barracks even upcountry; they are starting with Kampala Metropolitan area. So, they are starting with Nsambya, Kibuli and Naguru to construct barracks for the Police. That is why they are asking them to relocate such that construction can begin. This is the information I can give as of now, but the land still belongs to Government. 

Mr Speaker, I am talking as the chairperson of the committee, who has been following these issues and that is why I should thank the Member who gave me an opportunity to give some information. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, why I said I agree with hon. Amuriat on the issue, is that as Parliament and as the overseers, and in the process of implementing our oversight role, maybe through the committee or after his motion is discussed, the oversight role must be emphasised. They must first build the houses for our Police Force before we yield the land to them as was done in the case of CMI.

That is my concern and -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order with due respect to hon. Tanna. We are tackling a matter of great importance. It is common knowledge that in this country, we have a Minister in charge of Internal Affairs who takes charge of matters related to Police. Now we have started meandering here and there in terms of speculation over what is likely to happen. Is the honourable member in order to speak for the Minister of Internal Affairs without the locus standi on Police affairs? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Sanjay Tanna is the Member for Tororo Municipality. He has audience in this House for as long as he has been allowed by the Speaker to speak his mind, and he has been accordingly allowed to speak his mind. So, he is perfectly in order. Please wind up.

MR TANNA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to urge honourable colleagues that the issue of PPP is very sensitive. We are just at the initial stages, so I would like to urge you that when we are tackling the issue of PPP, and especially the housing of Police, we handle that issue very cautiously and steadfastly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming in the VIP gallery this afternoon hon. Marie Claire Kitontwe, Member of Parliament from the Democratic Republic of Congo. She is here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. You are welcome.

The Parliamentary Commission has organised a joint end–of-year party for the members of staff of Parliament and Members of Parliament, which will take place tomorrow Thursday, 15th December at the Imperial Royale beginning at 6.30 p.m. after plenary. All Members of Parliament are invited to attend. This is from the Public Relations Office. You know what to do with those things.

Let me allow the minister for monitoring to make a comment and then we move forward.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue being raised by the Member about this Public-Private Partnership, and specifically on this project of Police - it is a project that has been ongoing for some time, and the whole process is being handled transparently.

I had an opportunity together with some other Members on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the last Parliament, to have an exchange visit and we went to UK to study these PPPs. The policy is a good one and in the case of this issue of Police in Naguru, I have been monitoring it. Regarding what hon. Tanna said, it is true that this is a process that is going on transparently. Police will not be chased away. 

Regarding the tenders, which have been invited, as of now, there is a plan for reallocation before the land is developed -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to come and misinform this House while we actually know that some 10,000 Police personnel have already been moved out of Naguru and Ntinda barracks to Olilim in Katakwi, where there are no houses and other amenities sufficient to handle these families? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not put the Chair in a difficult situation to rule on information that the Chair is not privy to. I am not aware of the truth of that information, so how do you expect me to rule whether it is true or false? I do not have that information, so I am unable to rule on the order. Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, if the House and if the Members need this information, the people who are handling this project are ready to come to Parliament or to the relevant committee to explain how the process is going on, so that the investors who are coming to develop our city to the international standards and even solve the problem of Police -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving way -( Interruption in power supply)- yes it is back. Otherwise, the other time, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister here bought diesel for the generator in Adjumani, so he has done the same already. So, we are covered.

Mr Minister, the issue which I think is of concern to us in this Public-Private Partnership arrangement is not to doubt you in times of providing accommodation for our Police. It is not just mere accommodation that the Police require. The Police have got families; they have children, and so, in relocating them, while this construction is going on, due diligence should be paid to certain amenities like schools for school-going children, clean and safe drinking water for the families, health units, churches and mosques. These are people being relocated and these facilities I am talking about are necessary for human settlement, let alone good road networks so that they can be able to respond at short notice while called upon. 

The clarification I am seeking from you, is as to whether in the Public-Private Partnership arrangement that has been made to relocate these Police officers, it has been taken into account and into consideration these amenities that I am talking about before the Police officers are relocated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I made a rule against attacking the microphone before you are given the authority. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: I am going to give you the chance. I will. Maybe before I allow this other clarification, the relocation plan is going to be taken care of. What is going on is to identify the right person to do that business. Technical competence, due diligence and all this that you are talking about is what is going on now. Once this process is finished and we identify the right person with the financial muscle to develop this project, to come and develop our town and re-develop this land, then the next stage will be to identify another person who will handle the re-location. Once we relocate all these Police officers, that is only when we can start re-developing Nsambya and all these areas.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point if clarification. Before hon. Banyenzaki became a minister, he used to be a friend of the common people, and now he is shifting sides. Our concern is as follows and I want clarification from you; you are talking about 10,000 policemen and women being moved to various locations outside Kampala without the knowledge of Parliament, and yet we all know the catastrophe likely to occur to these people without guarantees. The whole Ministry of Internal Affairs has not briefed this House about such a big move. Why doesn’t Government officially first brief Parliament over what it is intending to do instead of just taking people in accordance with their wishes? So, the clarification we are seeking is, we would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to officially brief this House over what it is planning instead of the Minister in Charge of Monitoring to come and give us terrible stories.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to move forward. Hon. Amuriat gave notice that he intends to move a Motion on this matter, which we have allowed will be given comprehensive coverage. We have spent a lot of time not even making any headway on this subject. Can I now say, we leave this matter there and we move forward and see if it can be accommodated tomorrow? Honourable minister, I will not now allow you to make a comment on this. Let us move forward with matters on the Order Paper.

Honourable members, again in the public gallery this afternoon, we have members of the Greater North Women Voices for Peace Network and Women’s Initiative for Gender and Justice. Please join me in welcoming them. I notice hon. Jane Akwero Odong, former Member of Parliament is with them. Please join me in welcoming them.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether my ears are good enough. I did not hear your ruling on the matter that I raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We said we proceed with it tomorrow.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EXTENSION OF THE PEACE RECOVERY DEVELOPMENT PLAN (PRDP)

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Mrs Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement I am going to make is on the extension of PRDP for Northern Uganda from July 2012 to July 2015. I have the Certificate of Financial Implication and I wish to lay it on Table. The Certificate of Financial Implication is dated 15th November 2011 and the heading is Certificate of Financial Implication in respect of extension of the Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda for three years - 2012/2015. It has been signed by the Secretary to the Treasury and I wish to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have 15 minutes.

MRS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will try my best to work within the 15 minutes you have given me. We may all recall that the Government of Uganda launched the PRDP for Northern Uganda in 2007, and this was after the long spell of war which took place in Northern Uganda, and the Government of Uganda decided that after the war, Northern Uganda should undergo reconstruction. 

You may also recall that the President of this country provided a 14 point strategy for the recovery of Northern Uganda and I wish to list them:

1) 	Facilitation of peace agreement.
2) 	Police enhancement programme.
3) 	Prisons enhancement programme.
4) 	Judicial enhancement programme.
5) 	Revitalisation of auxiliary forces services programme.
6) 	Local government enhancement programme.
7) 	IDP emergency assistance programme.
8) 	IDP return and resettlement programme.
9) 	Community empowerment and recovery programme; that is under health, education, water and livelihood programme.
10) 	Production and marketing enhancement 	programme.
11) Re-infrastructure rehabilitation and urban improvement programme.
12) 	Environmental management, land and natural 	 resources management programme.
13) 	Public information, education and  		communication counselling services, and other support programme.
14) Mediation and reconciliation programme, and amnesty and re-integration of the ex-combatants.

The Office of the Prime Minister after consultation with the different sector ministries, development partners, civil society and local governments, made a programme for PRDP and the framework was for three years. It had four strategic objectives: 

1.    Consolidation of state authorities;
2.    Rebuilding and empowering the 		       community of Northern Uganda;
3.    Revitalisation of the economy; and
4.    Peace building and reconciliation.

PRDP has already been implemented for the last three years using the following modalities:

i)	Under the budget, a grant provided by the Government of Uganda is used as a top-up to the districts which are under PRDP, to add on what they have as the normal budget which other districts also benefit from. This has been done since 2009/10 and we have already provided Shs 100,000 billion and this has been done annually using our budget.

ii)	We have also implemented the on-budget special programmes; some donors provided support through the on-budget special programmes which are managed by the Government of Uganda. An example of this is NUSAF II, funded by the World Bank; DFID, KALIP and ALREP, which are funded by the European Union.

iii)	Off-budget funding; this modality is mostly implemented by the NGOs, which have decided to use their own resources directed through the projects that they are offering to Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, on page 4, you will see the achievements we have made so far, and they are tabulated from No.1 to No.22. We have hydraform technology, which we have talked about and I want you to look at page 4. There you see that the hydraform machine has already been used successfully. 

Using the hydraform technology, we have built 54 houses and 53 quarters for the Acholi Chiefs. We have built 20 houses and 10 chicken stores, and these have been built in Moroto. 

We have built 19 houses and one health Centre in Kamwaswahili in Moroto. We have built 20 houses in Akikere in Moroto, and 20 houses in Nakapiripirit. We have built 24 houses and one centre in Amuria District; 19 houses and one health centre constructed for the widows at Kweyo in Gulu; we have built 2 staff houses and one health centre in Napak Amuru, Acholi sub-region; and six bed-roomed commercial houses have been built for Mr Onyika of Labora. 

For this, I have to explain because this is an old man who offered us a very big piece of land. Mr Speaker, you know about this because it is in your constituency and many of our children are benefiting from skills development. We have also built 72 teachers’ houses and 20 health workers’ houses – they are in the process of building them in Lamwo, Otuke, Zombo and Napak.

The Office of the Prime Minister with other partners, carried out a mid-term review and I wish to report what was discovered. This review was carried out in May 2011 and the Office of the Prime Minister headed the review. It was confirmed that there has been positive progress of PRDP, but with some variations across four strategic areas, which I have already mentioned. 

I now briefly look at the findings of the mid-term review. 

1.	On strategic objective one, which is consolidation of state authority, law and order has improved since PRDP began and state authority has been consolidated to some extent.
 
2.	Rebuilding and empowering the communities; Better services are now being delivered to the communities, but they still need better focus on ensuring that the infrastructure we have provided is made functional and this will lead to service delivery.

3.	Revitalisation of the economy; we have constructed roads which have yielded some positive results in terms of economic revitalisation. But support to farmers and provision of economic opportunities for the youth is still lacking. 

4.	Peace building and reconciliation; the mid-term review came up with a report that unless conflict drivers like land, youth unemployment, and in-adequate re-integration of ex-combatants are adequately addressed, they have a potential to destabilise the recovery in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, following the findings of the mid-term review, we held the fifth PMC of the PRDP Monitoring Committee Meeting chaired by the Prime Minister on 29th June, and this meeting resolved that the implementation of PRDP should be extended. 

The Minister of State for Northern Uganda submitted a Cabinet memo, which was approved by Cabinet on 23rd November, 2011 to extend the lifespan of PRDP for another three years, with effect from July 12th to June 2015. 

What do we expect to see in PRDP II? 

PRDP II is aligned to the lifespan of the National Development Planning Framework, which ends also in 2015. We, therefore, would like to submit that any affirmative action for Northern Uganda shall now be mainstreamed in the sector programming and financing, to address the poverty and regional inequality through the National Development Plan, especially after 2015. 

We also think that although the PRDP II will retain the four strategic objective areas under the current phase of PRDP, the programme should now focus mostly on fine-tuning and consolidation of peace and recovery, so that we lay a foundation for development in Northern Uganda. 

PRDP programming will be based on six guiding principles:

i)	Additionality; here we mean that the districts under PRDP will be given funds to add on what they already have like any other districts. So, their expenditure will have what we call a top-up.

ii)	Functionality; we have realised that we have put in a lot of infrastructure, but some of them are non-functional. For example, we have built maternity wards but without beds for the mothers. We have built some classrooms without desks for the children. Therefore, we want to strengthen the functionality of our investment under PRDP II. The local government will also be able to use the fund to equip the facilities that I have talked about, and also purchase transport equipment as per their sector guidelines, while the staff retention will continue to be targeted through construction of staff accommodation, especially in the hard-to-reach areas.

iii)	Economic revitalisation;

Honourable members, PRDP II will put greater focus on economic revitalisation, in order to address the objective of reducing income poverty and tackle youth unemployment in Northern Uganda, which was identified. Like I have already said, it is a potential conflict driver if it is not well-handled. 

A new programme on enterprise development has been included in PRDP II, and will focus on access to finance and skills training, especially for the youth. 

In addition, the production programme area has also been strengthened. It is proposed that districts will be able to apply part of their PRDP grants to the productive activities as listed. 

iv)	Mitigation of potential conflict drivers 

The conflict drivers include land disputes, youth unemployment and reintegration of ex-combatants. We have strengthened focus on training lower level local courts in traditional and transitional justice, to provide greater support to the communities recovering from the conflicts. We think this is important.
 
We are also going to look at sexual and gender-based violence as a special area in PRDP II. 

v)	Sub-regional focus

We think that to ensure that the relative needs of different sub-regions are appropriately catered for; the  PRDP budget grants, which are allocated to districts, will be weighted according to conflict impact so that the majority of funds are channelled to sub-regions that were most affected by the conflict. 

We also intend to institute sub-regional monitoring teams so that they are able to look at what exactly is happening in PRDP II. We think the monitoring should be ongoing not on spot.
 
Coordination by stakeholders

Allow me to say that at some point, there was laxity in coordination of PRDP I because we were just coming out of a conflict. We think we need to strengthen this in PRDP II. We are going to emphasise synergy, particularly between the sectors and the local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes, please.

MS AMUGE: And between the off-budget and on-budget activities, we think people must align their activities and they must be known to the centre and to the local government. 

Mr Speaker, you have already looked at what we have done so far, but may I also ask you now, in paragraph 5.3, to look at what we intend to do if time could allow.

The total indicative cost of PRDP II is estimated to be $455 million over three years. We think 47 percent, that is $214 million, will be channelled through the PRDP budget grant; 30 percent, that is $136 million will be channelled through special projects. I told you about NUSAF. Twenty three percent, that is $104 million, through off-budget.

In paragraph 5.4, we have listed what we intend to achieve under PRDP II. The 6th PMC meeting, which was held on 5th December 2011, received a PRDP programme document and discussed the process, which they insisted, seconded and supported, that PRDP II must continue. They appreciated the implementation strategy of PRDP II. One, they said that if it were possible, what has been used as a modality in PRDP could also be borrowed by other sector ministries and used to implement their programmes.

Finally, Mr Speaker, allow me to thank His Excellency the President, for having supported the second PRDP; your office and the Members of Parliament for their full support; the Greater North Parliamentary Forum led by hon. Okot Ogong; our development partners; civil society organisations; NGOs; the technical team, especially from the OPM; and sector ministries and district leaders. I thank you very much.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the progress so far made, which is on a DVD.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the DVD?

MS AMUGE: Northern Uganda Advancing Towards Average Level of Development, December 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. Honourable members, this is an important matter. I think we will give it 30 minutes of discussion. No decision is required by the House on this. It is information, but we will debate it. So, decide among yourselves the 10 people who will contribute in two minutes each. I will start with the Chairman, Greater North Parliamentary Forum.

3.54
MR OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her statement and also thank Government for the contributions they have made to the people of the Greater North.

In the last Parliament, as Members of Parliament coming from the Greater North, we had tremendous interactions with Government and other stakeholders, especially the donors. We made clear positions on certain issues. We also met the minister, Office of the Prime Minister, and made clear presentations to them. Allow me, on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, to also make that statement in this House. 

We have noted with great concern that a lot of money and interventions have been put in the Greater North, but we still have a number of challenges in that area.

We have also noted that the level or the magnitude of support that is required by our people is still not met. That should also be met by Government. 

Also, as Members, we have noted that the implementation strategy of PRDP I had a number of challenges we need to improve, as we continue with the programme.

When we met with the Office of the Prime Minister and other stakeholders in the PMC meeting, we made clear presentations. One, we noted that PRDP should be extended and the extension should not dilute the interests of our people. (Member timed out.)

3.56
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, thank you. In principle, we embrace the extension of PRDP, but we appeal to the minister to take on some of the people down there. It looks like in PRDP I, a lot of information would flow from top to down. This time round, take the concerns of the districts. It is also important that when we have the PRDP monitoring committee up here, we should have functional district and sub-county PRDP monitoring committees. 

I would like to say that it is important to do a comprehensive evaluation of PRDP I. I am saying this because you might find that nothing has changed. Very little has changed. Poverty is still biting. People cannot take their children to school. We are told that we must take NUSAF, which is part of PRDP, but it looks like even NUSAF is not helping people so much. So, let us listen to the people.

It is important to have PRDP activities carried out according to the intensity of the impact of the war or the conflict. This is very important because PRDP has spread thin. Much as they say that when you go to Busia, the people there also suffered because many of our people were also displaced there, we have a very big question mark about such statements. This is because the displacement was nationally. So, it should not just be because of the displacement; we have embraced it because we want people to also support us. Otherwise, we would not be able to make it. Let us strengthen - the tractor hire -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Kutamba Aids Orphan School in Rukungiri, Nyakisenyi, represented by hon. Paula Turyahikayo. Please join me in welcoming them to the House. (Applause)

Also in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Nyaka Aids Orphanage School, Kanungu, represented by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Amama Mbabazi. They have come to observe the proceedings. Again, join me in welcoming them.

With me here is an announcement to the effect that the Catholic Chaplaincy invites all Members of Parliament to the lighting of the Christmas tree holy mass to usher in the Christmas cerebrations. The main celebrant will be the Rt Rev. John Baptist Odama, the new Bishop of Arua Diocese, formerly in Gulu Diocese. Mass will start after plenary. I am saying that because I know that by 5.00 p.m. we will not have ended plenary. The chief guest will be the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Ms Rebecca Kadaga. Please keep time.

4.01
MS FLORENCE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the honourable Minister of State for Northern Uganda to the conflict drivers. You talked about unprecedented youth unemployment, but the question is, why are the youth of Northern Uganda highly unemployed? It is because the conflict claimed lives of three generations. This is very clear to you.

The other major question is: Why is Government evading the Northern Uganda education blueprint? This is something we invested time in. We tore down pages of books; we read and we formed an education strategy for Northern Uganda. We even invited President Museveni to launch this in Gulu, and he did. So, what is wrong with investing in the education blueprint for Northern Uganda? I think Government is deliberately avoiding its obligation to Northern Uganda to educate the people. It is very basic. You do not need to meander around saying we will construct this and that; we developed this blue print for you and it is there. So, I would rather prefer that you, as a young lady coming from there, take seriously our investment in the blueprint.

Secondly, we have talked about land conflicts. The land conflicts among the people and among people who are immigrants is something that Government needs to take seriously too. If I was in encampment, in displacement, for 20 years, and I come back to my ancestral ground and I find long-horned cows and bulls graciously eating my ancestral grass, and I am told, “This land no longer belongs to you”, what am I supposed to think? We also know that these are people who cannot be traced anywhere in Uganda. So, what are you talking about? Are you talking about security when you cannot define who is invading my land? (Member timed out.) 

4.03
MS EKWAU FLORENCE IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 2, I see the pillars concerning this PRDP animal. Out of your pillars, nothing touches psychosocial support to the victims of the war. Will you look at this as a concern? These people were psychologically tortured; will you look out for a programme that will cater for their mental rehabilitation?

The hydraform technology would have been good, but the labour at the moment – what people would be paying to benefit out of this hydraform - is far much higher than if you bought or made your own bricks for the construction of your houses. So, make the hydraform affordable to the communities if the people there are to benefit and construct permanent houses. At the same time, some hydraform machines are idle – the design and technology needed is not being utilized and the people cannot use them.

On page 9, when you talk about revitalization of the economy of Northern Uganda, we implore Government to think about looking at factories that will employ the idle and unemployed youth. You cannot talk about revitalisation of the economy with the construction of the roads as the only thing that Government has done. There should be factories in each region of Northern Uganda. Look at what can be done in West Nile. In Teso, there was an idea of starting a fruit processing factory, but we have never seen it. Karamoja would benefit from a meat packing factory. Bugisu would have a coffee plant and so many other areas of Bukedi would also get what they can use to employ their youth. That is how you would create employment for the people. Otherwise, just talking about road construction and classrooms is not enough. Those alone cannot revitalize the economy of Northern Uganda. 

Take note that we are still waiting for what Government is going to do to replace the Lira Spinning Mill. You remember we also talked about the making of yarn out of the cotton that is produced in these areas –(Member timed out.)

4.05
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Betty Ochan Aol ended, that we need to properly evaluate and audit PRDP I. This is important because we have heard of reports about PRDP funds being diverted and misused. We have also had scenarios where, under strategic objective II, on rebuilding and empowering communities, resettlement kits were bought by the Office of the Prime Minister, but could not be used because they were of sub- standard quality.

On page 5, I see the list of houses that have been built for the chiefs of Acholi, but I would like to inform the House that some of these houses are still empty; they have not been occupied by the chiefs. I still wonder whether they have been officially handed over to them. As I move around my constituency, I usually see some of these houses still empty.
Two, under rebuilding and empowering communities, we would like to see specific activities and programmes that have been undertaken under this objective. We would not love to see this objective meddle up with the revitalization of the economy. We would like to see, under PRDP II, specific programmes that are geared towards empowering households on income generation and other sectors that would build the income of individuals. 

Mr Speaker, we thank Government for putting Northern Uganda on the PRDP drip this time, and we would like to add our voices to those that are calling for this programme to continue. However, we are concerned that the designing, implementation and monitoring of the programme should heavily involve the local leadership and community. (Member timed out.) 

4.08
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first of all salute Government for the extension of this programme. However, there is need for us to draw a clear distinction between the resources that are being sent under the normal Government programmes, like money for roads, money for water to different districts. It is from that that it is being sent under PRDP. 

In the last Parliament, we visited a sub-county in Kitgum called Omianyima and we were surprised to find a borehole being claimed by PRDP, AMREF and the district. This caused suspicion within the programme and an audit query. It is pertinent that we put things right by defining clear lines on how we should follow up this programme.

Secondly, on page 46, they give us a breakdown of sub-regional distribution of resources in percentages. One of the regions that suffered the effects of the conflict was Busoga region and part of Buganda; that is, Kayunga, Buyende, Kamuli and Namutumba. It is our prayer that in this programme, as we extend the duration, we also extend the coverage. 

The people of Busoga have been waiting patiently. I do not want to appear sectarian, but at least there is no special programme that has come up saying this programme is designed for Busoga, and yet you have been lambasting us for being the “jiggerland”, for being this and that. What are we doing to save this situation? It is my prayer –(Member timed out.)  

4.11
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like this House to delineate Northern Uganda, Central Uganda and Western Uganda. We must have a clear demarcation. Otherwise, it is almost like a joke. I might as well say we also suffered; all the wars that have affected this country started in my constituency. I think let us be clear on this. If there are other programmes to be made, then let them be very clear, say like Busoga region programme. But if this is for Northern Uganda, let it be for Northern Uganda. (Applause)

Secondly, I want to thank PRDP I for having attached at least the basic unit cost of these various – what does that mean? That means it gives you and me an opportunity to carry out an evaluation and see whether they are doing the right thing or the wrong thing. I wish I had more time. 

On No.5, please for goodness’ sake, there is this very wonderful technology - hydraform technology. I personally benefited from it when I was working in Ntungamo as an administrative officer. This is a very good technology. It does not only save the environment, but it also saves cost, and it employs more people and gives people skills. This is something that we should upscale. Actually, I was thinking of having at least one machine, like Kenya is doing. Kenya is far ahead of us and yet we were the first to use hydraform machines in East Africa. Now there is even an improved version of the hydraform machine. Let us upscale this and every community gets a machine. We will save our environment. We will give our people skills and create employment for the youth. 

Lastly, this project should be monitored thoroughly. It should not be like NAADS; NAADS had a problem where you find that half of the funds are for administrative overheads. I do not know what happens with this. We need more time to scrutinise this. Otherwise, I want to congratulate Government; I want to congratulate the Prime Minister’s Office for having done this. However, we need more time to monitor and scrutinise what is taking place in this project.

I want to thank you very much. I pray that the House takes it up. We should not hesitate to take it on, but we need more time to monitor it. 

4.12
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I have two or three points to raise. Firstly, politically I would like to offer my total support towards the extension of PRDP. 

Secondly, I would want, as a politician who hails from Northern Uganda, to passionately appeal to: The honourable Minister of State in charge of Northern Uganda, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Government of Uganda, that the extension of PRDP must come out with tangible results that are aimed towards addressing the socio-economic plight of the people of Northern Uganda. I am saying this because despite all interventions by this Government, the North is still the poorest region in Uganda. It is still the most illiterate region in Uganda. It is still the region leading in domestic violence. We are leading in bad things. 

Mr Speaker, the war in Northern Uganda took 20 years plus and in each and every year there were devastating effects of the war. Damage was caused. In my opinion, I strongly feel that even the recovery of Northern Uganda cannot be done within 10 years. It needs 20 years plus. That is it. It was the cardinal responsibility of Government to protect lives and all things that were damaged in the North, but 20 years down the road, people of Northern Uganda are suffering because of this war. 	

Mr Speaker, I strongly believe that much as we are extending to 2015, we must put Government on notice that recovery of Northern Uganda will most likely go beyond 2015. I thank you.

4.14
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for giving us this information and thank the government for PRDP. 

I want to start by saying that when I look at this document, on page 2 of the new document, I see strategic objective 1, and it talks about consolidating state authority. I want to refer to the district land administration. For a long time, the district land administration has been ill-equipped, not only with regard to equipment per se, but also personnel. I see there is provision of appropriate surveying equipment, but to many districts which are new in the North, how do you give equipment only without constructing the district land office? I think that has been lacking, and I would really like to appeal that this should be included in the plan so that districts where district land offices have been lacking, can pull up and provide the necessary service.

I want to add my voice to that of the honourable member who talked about economic revitalisation. We should be thinking big; bigger than what we have been seeing PRDP do in the North, and I am talking about factories. In West Nile, there has been only one coffee factory in my district, and it has been rendered non-functional for a very long time. 

Coffee production is booming, but there is no factory which can support production of coffee in West Nile. Our Arabica Coffee goes to Bugisu and they brand it Elgon Coffee. Can you please, honourable minister, take note of this. There is Okoro Coffee Union; can it be rehabilitated to do what Bugisu or any other factory is doing and also provide employment -(Member timed out.)

4.18 
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this presentation, which I have been following keenly. I stand here for the silent voices. The NRM Manifesto and also the National Development Plan have submissions and promises to protect the vulnerable people. I would like to know what the minister has, as deliberate action and intervention, for the older persons and the children. 

You know very well that the extended family systems have broken down because of HIV, the war, rural-urban migration for employment, and you will also find households where there are single older persons. These older persons of 70 years and above are not going to classrooms and they do not even use the roads you are talking about. They do not even have the capacity to go to the wells that you are protecting. 

I would like also to inform the House that we have children who come into conflict with the law; children who are abandoned; children who have nowhere to go; they could be kept in a rehabilitation centre and be given skills. I know that the North may not even have a specific and particularly well-furnished rehabilitation centre for the children. With this money that is going to Northern Uganda, can’t we make deliberate interventions to reach out to the older persons and also try to have a deliberate intervention to protect the children of this country? I thank you. 

4.20
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start with the funding itself. The figure looks big, but in PRDP I, out of the total funding, Government was providing 30 percent of the funding and then the 70 percent of the funding was left to the NG0S, other donors and development partners. However, in reality, most districts did not realise the other 70 percent of the funding from the donors. So, it left a very small figure in most of the local governments’ implementations. 

We have talked about the hydraform machines; yes they are there in most of the districts, but I think the PPDA regulations should be revisited on this. Most of the districts have these hydraform machines, but they are redundant because they do not have a line of funding to utilise the machines. You clearly saw this when the minister was giving us the areas in which they have constructed houses. I never saw classrooms. Even the staff houses and the health centres are very few. It only happened in those areas where there was special funding, like for the cultural leaders. The PPDA should open up so that the districts can construct classrooms using these hydraform machines. 

My other concern comes in when we talk of revitalising the economy and the factories which should be put in place. Last time, we questioned the Shs 5 billion which was given under PRDP for the fruit factory. The minister by then was trying to bring it out clearly that yes, we gave the money to finance, but up to today, there is nothing coming up. I feel, as shadow minister to my sister, that something should come up from there. 

Also, for most of the money which is always left at the centre for overseeing, most of the people in the centre are not going to the ground. We want to see a situation where a team from Kampala goes to monitor what is happening on the ground so that we do not have ghost projects on the ground, ghost classrooms and ghost health centres because they are not monitoring. You should use that money to monitor. There is a huge chunk of money which is left at the centre for monitoring and yet we are not doing the monitoring. So, I think my colleague should do this and make sure that your team goes to the ground because we want value for money. (Member timed out.)

4.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns are three. The first one is that when the PRDP was conceived, it was meant to be affirmative action to the region. Over the years, from what we hear, it is as though the PRDP is just part of the ordinary resources going to the region. I think the minister should ensure that the PRDP demonstrates the fact that it is affirmative resources over and above the routine resources. Sometimes I even hear ministers on the Floor - a month ago, the Minister of Local Government talked of the same as though he does not know that we wish to recover and catch up with the rest of the country. That is my first concern. 

The second is that PRDP I was a gender-blind document. We worked tirelessly with the Office of the Prime Minister and UNIFEM. The women parliamentarians even hired a gender specialist at one point. Now the PRDP II is being presented to this House; the same gender-blind document. I was hoping that hon. Rebecca Oteng would be able to push through with gender lenses and see that this document is engendered and it becomes relevant to the women in the war affected areas. 

Classes without girl-child retention are not going to make Northern Uganda recover. Courts without paralegals to help us - Mr Speaker, you know justice is very expensive; the ordinary woman in Uganda without paralegal help, without volunteers to help her, will never access justice. Health units - If you cannot even put in place a programme to stitch leaking urine, this will not help those war affected women who are raped and battered. So, I hope that the minister will cast this PRDP II and bring in a gender-friendly document. (Member timed out.)

4.28
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, yesterday you said that those of us who persevered up to the end will be given kisanja. So, I was wondering how you could have forgotten me. 

I just have a few questions to put to the minister. First of all, I must thank her for bringing this document to us. It has given us an opportunity to audit the work which has been done by PRDP. However, I want to remind the minister that when we debated the presentation of the Prime Minister’s budget in 2008, the Prime Minister was able to identify the NUSAF project and also other projects which were done before in Northern Uganda as under PRDP I. Has he now been able to identify which ones have been done under PRDP and which ones are under NUSAF? It is important because we want to know. 

Secondly, we want to know the projects that are being funded by the budget line and the ones by PRDP. It is important because we are being told about the bridge and others, but the same figures are in the budget. So, can you, in the next report, tell us that this bridge was paid for by the budget line and the other one by the PRDP, so that we can get to know? Otherwise, this is nothing to me; it is not a report at all. I need to look at the budget of the relevant ministry and I will be able to prove to you that you have not quite accurately given me the report I would like. 

Finally, I would like to say that it is not true for you to say that you built 54 or 53 houses for the chiefs in Acholi. I remember the ministry brought to us a request for a supplementary for the building of those houses for the chiefs in Acholi -(Member timed out.)

4.30
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank Government and development partners for the achievements that we have made in PRDP I. I would, therefore, like to support the extension of PRDP II on the following grounds: 

The guiding principle of functionality, which focuses on ensuring lower level service delivery facilities are constructed, rehabilitated and are functional, is very important. Uganda is doing very poorly on MDGs 4 and 5; unless the rehabilitated and reconstructed facilities, especially of health centres, are really made functional, we shall continue to face the MDGs 4 and 5.

On principle 3, that is, economic revitalisation, this is crucial because Northern Uganda is one of the poorest regions in this country. You are aware that 65 percent of our population are youth; so it is important that skills’ training is given. However, what I would like to request here is, currently, there is only one training facility under PRDP, which is constructed in Gulu District. So, let the other sub-regions also benefit so that we do not encourage drivers of violence. 

Mr Speaker, not many districts have benefited. If you see the achievements on page 3, there are districts which have not fully benefited from PRDP, and this is because there is lack of technical personnel in these various districts. I would like to request the minister to seriously focus on such issues so that all the districts benefit. 

4.31
MS LYNDAH TIBINGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo):  Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have learnt that through the PRDP in Northern Uganda, houses have been constructed and a lot of achievements have been made. However, from one of the presenters, I have learnt that some of these houses have been put in place, but are not being utilised by the people of Northern Uganda. This takes me to a question: When they are giving out these services, do they ever do needs assessment of the services, so that the people can own the projects and properties that have been set in the area? 

Secondly, I have also learnt that a lot of money has been sent and there are services that are offered which are being claimed by almost all projects that are running in Northern Uganda.  Have you, as a ministry, looked at the incidence of duplication of services in the area so that any project that goes to an area is independent and the first of its kind? Thank you very much. 

4.32
MR SULAIMAN KIRUNDA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have listened very carefully to the submission of the minister and I do not have any single doubt in my mind that this programme needs extension for the next three years for the intended beneficiaries because they deserve it. 

I would like to register one concern from page 7, under sub-regional focus. The minister observes that the budget allocations will be extended to districts on the basis of conflict impact. I would like to honestly inform this House that Buyende District registered a massive influx of whole communities that were displaced from Lango and Teso sub-regions during the period of the conflict. These are communities we locally refer to as Bakenye, who are fishing communities that we have accommodated. Their number in my district is roughly 100,000. So, surely, don’t these communities deserve a share of what this programme is intended to do? 

I would also like to say that, as earlier on alluded to by the several speakers before me, surely this programme does not only have to be confined to a region.  We are not talking of a region, but communities that should rightfully and honestly benefit. This is because during that insurgency in the sub-regions of Teso and Lango, when these people were coming to Buyende District, for example, they came with large populations of cattle, goats and all kinds of domestic animals -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a very extensive coverage of this subject. I was beginning to think that we should roll it up. We have urgent matters that we need to handle. I am going to ask the honourable minister to make responses in four minutes so that we can move forward. Thank you. 

4. 37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHEN UGANDA REHABILITATION (Ms Rebecca Otengo Amuge): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank you for all your contributions, especially for supporting PRDP II. I am in agreement with most of the submissions made by most Members of Parliament, but many are saying that some of the projects being put under PRDP are not helping our people. 

I would like to remind you that PRDP is integrated into the local governments’ decentralised system and, therefore, we insist that during the district planning, where we make the district development plans, Members should be able to ensure that the right things are put in the right place.  We go by your priorities as districts.

Mr Speaker, Members are complaining that the capacities of the local governments are not adequate. I do agree with them because the attrition rate of the local government leaders has been so high, like in Parliament too. However, we have a component where we are going to build the capacities of the local government leaders, especially the land boards. I would also like to submit that we are going to look at the enhancement of the local courts, which we have already said. 

Some of these issues can be debated beyond this submission I have made, like what hon. Alaso has said. I want us to continue being in touch. We feel that we have integrated the issues of gender, but if you feel we can still enhance them, we can continue dialoguing even with the local government and the civil society. I do totally agree with you.

I am shocked that many districts want the hydraforms, but they cannot access them yet we have those that are not using them. As a minister for Northern Uganda, I have told the district leaders where I have been that if you cannot use them, instead of leaving them idle we are going to shift them to the districts which need them.

I have gone to places like Amolatar and I discovered they have built their council hall using the hydraform technology. What we have done is to train the users of the hydraform, and if you feel that the members we have trained are not doing a good job, we are still open to training them.

We want Labora to be a centre of excellence and we are going to have other satellite centres. Already, there are four satellite centres. After we put Labora, we are again introducing other satellite centres, but all are still in Acholi. We are looking at equity so that we also stop some of the conflict drivers we are talking about. So, all regions must have those satellite centres so that we are able to train our young people.

Psychosocial support may not be a stand-alone, but if you look at programme area 13, on page 33, maybe we could be able to look at that. You may say that we need to strengthen it; I totally agree with you.

Regarding Busoga, I want to remind this House that in the Eighth Parliament when we were debating NUSAF II, I was one of the Members - I actually moved that we needed BUSAF for Busoga because I felt that Busoga had its own unique problems and it needed a social fund. But really, it may not fit in this one. I have read certain proposals and I think they should be formed into policies so that we have a comprehensive programme for Busoga.

We still insist that work plans be formulated by the districts and we just look at them. We are going to respect the district planning system.

The issue of NGOs and CSOs is quite a serious matter. You have some NGOs going to the district and they do not report their presence to the district; they do not tell you what exactly they are bringing in the basket and yet they want you to go and commission what they have done. We have discovered that some people have taken advantage and different projects are actually claimed by many people. We are now asking the NGOs that if you have come to help us, tell us what you are doing; are you complementing, supplementing, competing or you are doing nothing? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think we will roll this debate up and see how to move forward on this matter.

MS OGWAL: Before we wrap up this matter, I think it is important that this information gets to the minister, that we actually want desegregation of the funding under PRDP. We want to know which one is budgeted, which one is NUSAF, which one is donor funding so that we understand the projects in our respective areas. These are very important components and I would want, before this matter is concluded, that we get to know about it. Thank you.

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, we have gone ahead to engrave different projects and stated the funding, but I make an undertaking that we are going to clearly do that. We have been doing it, but I still make an undertaking that we will continue doing that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think now we need to make progress with other matters which are on the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXPEDITIOUSLY INTERVENE BY ASSISTING COTTON FARMERS

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a series of days discussing this matter and today, one way or the other we need to take a decision. I am glad the honourable minister is here because I had received an earlier message saying the minister was not here, but now he is here. So, I guess –(Interjections)- Yes, I know because it was the honourable minister of state who had written to me that the minister was not there. 

Now that the minister is here, honourable members, I think we can proceed with this debate, except that it is going to be decision time for us. We are not going to debate this matter; we have debated it exhaustively. By the time we were leaving yesterday, the honourable minister had come with some responses he needed to make to the text and the spirit of the motion. I will now allow the honourable minister to make the response and then immediately after that, we proceed to take decisions on the motion. Is that okay? I think we have debated this matter for two days now and this is the third day. It is important. Let the minister respond then we see how to move forward.

4.43
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to allow me respond to the issues raised under this motion. I have got about six points on which to elaborate. One is the price, the second is the cotton fund, the third is production, then the review of CDO, and there was something mentioned on the revival of cooperatives and Lira Spinning Mill, and then I will give the way forward.

As a way of setting the stage, I want to review the cotton process. During the 2010/2011 season, the average international price was US$ 2.30 per pound. This translated into an average farm-gate price paid to the Uganda farmers of Shs 2300 per kilogramme of seed cotton, and some farmers went as high as Shs 3000 for those who sold a bit late. Those are the facts. The impact of these prices was that the spinners bought a lot of cotton expensively and went on to buy more in anticipation of even higher prices.

By comparison, the average international price for the current season, 2011/2012, dropped from US$ 2.40 to US$ 1.10, which is less than half - less than 50 percent. That translated into an indicative farm price of Shs 1600 per kilogramme of seed cotton at that material time. As things went on, prices went on dropping from US$ 1.10 to 95 US cents and that continued dropping and dropping. Some of the reasons that contributed to that kind of worsening situation were: 

First of all, there was the strengthening of the Uganda shilling against the dollar, from Shs 2800 to Shs 2500 in December. This meant that there was a reduced amount of money from exports. Two, the bank lending rate increased from 22 percent to about 30 percent, which also increased the operating costs. Thirdly, the increased load shedding from early November caused ginners to constantly use generators to process cotton and this led to increased costs. Fourth, the lack of demand for lint on the international market, since many spinners had bought a lot of lint expensively during the previous season, led to depressing current demand for more lint. The fifth point is that the continued credit crunch crisis in Europe and American markets caused less demand for fabrics. 

The net aggregate of all these caused a drop in the prices payable to the farmer, and all these factors happened after the announcement of the indicative price. These are the hard facts, and these hard facts affect not only cotton, but all the crops or commodities that are sold in international markets like coffee, tea, tobacco and cocoa. This is the practical reality pertaining at that level.

Before going any further, I would want to persuade this honourable House to appreciate that these are the hard facts and that the suggestion made earlier to reduce or to urge Government to offer 75 percent of the price in international markets is not, in my view, a good recommendation.

The second point I want to refer to is the cotton production fund. The background to this fund is that, following the drop in cotton production during the season 2009/2010, from 125,310 bales to 70,300, ginners agreed to mobilise funds to supplement Government efforts towards promoting cotton production in the next season and subsequent seasons. So, during 2010/2011, the ginners collected about Shs 46 billion, which was utilised to support cotton production during 2011 and subsequent years. That point came out very clearly, as I heard from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She was spot-on. 

This money was, however, utilised as follows, and this is - first of all, before I go to the utilisation, I want to make it absolutely clear that this is not Government money. It is money put aside by the industries themselves - the ginners and spinners – and, therefore, Government has no absolute control over this money. Having said that, utilisation of the Shs 46 billion was like this:

·	Shs 12 billion was fixed and reserved for supporting cotton production during the season 2012.

·	Shs 16 billion was refunded
 -(Mrs Ogwal rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable member, let the minister finish then we raise those points.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: You will have time to respond to this, and this time I came with sufficient copies to distribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish then we can raise the point of clarification.
MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection.

•	Shs 16 billion was refunded to every ginner at a rate of Shs 200 per kilogramme of cotton as result of increased operational costs, which I enumerated earlier.

•	Shs 18 billion was used to support cotton production in 2011 as follows:

1) 	To procure and distribute planting seeds at a subsidy of 50 percent, where a cost of seed would have been Shs 6000. So, instead of paying Shs 6000 a farmer pays Shs 3000.

2) 	To procure and distribute subsidised pesticides and spray pumps. Again, where a pesticide would have cost a farmer Shs 12,500 the farmer paid Shs 3500. The actual cost of a spray pump would have been Shs 130,000 but the farmer paid only Shs 50,000, which is about 38 percent of the cost.

3) 	The money was used to establish demonstration plots for farmer training on cotton production. The CDO employs all the extension staff specifically targeted to promote cotton production, and they recruited 325 field extension workers who are all paid from the cotton fund.

The impact of the ginners’ support fund to cotton production is in the three bullets, namely:

•	The availability and easy access to production inputs up to the parish level.

•	Better crop management and improved yields as result of demonstration and cotton production is expected to go up and indeed it increased.

•	Farmer Protection from the External Shocks
 
•	At the moment, the request for Government intervention so that farmers are protected from external shocks by receiving not less than 75 percent, is not possible for the following reasons:

•	The Ugandan economy is liberalised and so there are no price controls. Only indicative prices reflective of international prices can guide the farmer, and this is true for all commodities offered at international level.

•	The international prices have a bearing on the local prices of our exports including coffee, tea, cocoa and cotton. That is why none of these commodities have fixed prices.

•	Subsidies are not sustainable. Moreover, even other export commodities would require such protection.

•	It is, therefore, not prudent to fix prices for cotton and any other commodity for that matter.

Lira Spinning Mill 

This is not directly under my ministry, but because it was mentioned, I can say something small. This belongs to another ministry, but I know that Lira Spinning Mill was privatised and sold to a private investor called Abdul Khan of Kasese.

Revival of Cooperatives

I think this is a good idea; however, co-operatives should evolve by members who share similar interests and want to promote their common good. Management should be by the members themselves and not by political appointees as it happened in the past.

Review of the CDO as an organisation

At the moment, and in my opinion, there is no need to review CDO because cotton production is going up and it has also done well in terms of handling the public-private partnership relationship. That is why that kind of fund was established and is operating reasonably well. Therefore, given that kind of scenario, we are not tempted to review that organisation at this moment. Should circumstances change, that may be considered.

Way Forward

I think the way forward is very important given what was said on the Floor of this House. In our view, we should promote value addition so that the cotton industry is vertically integrated to use the bulk of the cotton locally other than depending on the export market. This will minimise external shocks. Nyanza Textile Mills and Phoenix are using just between five and 10 percent and this is not adequate. Other countries that were cited during the debate are using much more of their cotton. 

I think we can have a way of persuading investors to put money in this area so that we increase the proportion of yarn upwards. I think this will be a good idea. In fact, this is not only true for cotton but even true for tea, coffee and so on. In areas of tea, we are consuming only five percent; in coffee, we are consuming internally here not more than 10 percent, unlike Ethiopia where the consumption is much higher than this. So, this concept of adding value for internal use is extremely important because it would minimise external shocks when we have to depend on an external market.


We also clearly have to continue to support farmers by way of seeds, pesticides and spray pumps. As I may have mentioned, cotton is one of the most important crops that are targeted in our investment strategy and investment plan. It is one of the crops that we must continue to support.

Thirdly, we must promote and support the co-operatives to handle the industry. This industry should come closer to the people so that they can handle it themselves. 

The fourth element is to increase participation by Ugandans in ginning the crop. I know some of the honourable members who are in that industry, though I will not mention names, are doing a good job. I wish we could persuade more Ugandans to participate in ginning the cotton. 

I attached some appendixes; I hope all of us have these papers. When you look at the first table, you will see a situation of declining prices; they are mainly in the negative. However, the most interesting table is the second one. If you look at column five and six, you will see that column five is showing the indicative price for more than ten years and the selling price has been above the indicative price. That means that for all intents and purposes, the indicative price is professionally done and it works. However, it is only last year when the situation changed suddenly and it did not seem to work. That is why the farmers were getting paid below the indicative price. Even then, if you look at the time series over a period of time, the price that is being offered is still much better than the previous one except for last year’s season. Mr Speaker, I wish to submit.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just understand from the minister his way forward; are you proposing amendments to the motion, so that I can ask the hon. Akena to respond to the issues you have raised?

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, I am proposing, first of all, that in view of the hard facts I have given, it is not possible for Government to guarantee 75 percent of the world price. First of all, this is because of the hard facts I have given, and also because of the liberalisation of our economy. Secondly, cotton is extremely important and everything possible is being done. It is part and parcel of the key crops that are enshrined in our investment plan. Therefore, to urge Government to do what it is already doing is not viable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see the minister only has a problem with the 75 percent; he does not seem to have any problem with the other proposals made. So, if you need some clarifications – I think hon. Cecilia needs some clarification. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The most important thing is to respond to what the minister has said on page 2. Is the minister telling us that CDO actually levied an illegal tax to the farmers of Shs 600 per kilogramme? If so, who authorized it? In which account was that money put, because you have acknowledged the use of that money? You actually used our figure of Shs 46 billion and this Shs 46 billion has not appeared in any Government report; not even in the budget. Where has this Shs 46 billion been kept, because it is the farmer’s money?

Secondly, who authorized the use of that money? On page 2, you said that Shs 4 billion was used. I want to tell you, Mr Speaker, the Government policy is to distribute cotton seeds free of charge. The minister is now telling us that farmers are buying seeds. I want to confirm to you that farmers are buying seeds, but in the budget, we budget for purchase of seeds for free distribution to the farmers. Can the minister tell us where that money goes? 

Will anyone in this House tell us whether what the minister is saying is true; that they bought ox-ploughs and so on; in which areas were they distributed? I am willing to go and have a look at them. They are not in my area of Dokolo. How can you tell such a lie in the Parliament of Uganda, in full view of all the 30 million people, the majority of whom are depending on cotton? Somebody must bring to us that Shs 46 billion which belongs to the poor farmers, which was taxed yesterday. 

The CDO must tell us why they sat down yesterday to reduce the prices even further. People have been comfortably buying –(Member timed out.)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to speak on behalf of the cotton farmers of this country. The situation has even been made worse. I wish to propose that Government can afford an increase of a minimum of Shs 2500 to the farmers. When you go into business, you should be ready to make a loss or a profit. The Ugandan farmer goes into cultivation and yet you make that farmer to also pay for the cost of ginning; that is unheard of elsewhere. You deduct money from the Ugandan farmers and give that money to the ginners to compensate for their losses. Who is going to compensate for the losses of the Ugandans who put a lot of money into cotton growing thinking that they are going to be paid heavily?

The cotton season this time in Kasese has made people sweat. Farmers put in a lot of money thinking that they would get a lot of money, but now that you have reduced the price, who is going to pay for their operational cost? They have paid the operational cost of the ginners, according to what the minister has told us. I have no words to tell my farmers as to why there is lack of market. When AGOA was being launched, His Excellency the President went to Kasese and told the people to continue cultivating cotton; that there is ready market by AGOA. So, when you tell me that the prices have gone down because there is no ready market, I get surprised.

The President himself stood and told Ugandans that the credit crunch was not going to affect Uganda. He was even candid enough to say that actually, Ugandans are going to profit from the credit crunch, most especially the farmers because they are going to sell their produce. Now, the Minister of Agriculture is saying that the credit crunch has affected the cotton farmers. What should I tell the people of Kasese who listened to His Excellency saying that they were going to profit from the credit Crunch? –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, when the American Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) was passed, the President went to Phenix and whisked off just one container. Phenix was given a grant of $5 million, the money that should have gone to the people of Uganda, to promote the export of cotton textiles to America. That was the single container, and that was the end of business. The minister has just told us here that 5 to 10 percent - who killed NYTIL? Who killed African Textile Mill in Mbale? Who killed the cooperative system? I am glad the minister comes here and says, “Politicians should not intervene in the cooperative system.” Bugisu Cooperative Union is being interfered with and we are asking Government to get out of that, yet they want the cooperative system to be promoted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member - 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: They want the cooperative system to be promoted. This is the information I wanted to give the honourable colleague. (Laughter) 

MRS KIIZA: Thank you honourable member for the information. The other clarification I want from the minister is that; I come from a cotton growing area. I personally cultivate cotton. I would have loved to be among those farmers who would be interested in getting pumps and all these kinds of stuff you are talking about. Our money was cheated. We were duped. You took our money telling us you are going to keep it for us, to stabilise the prices. You used it to buy equipment which is in the budget and you did not give us our money back. We want this money back from the budget because under budget support for the Ministry of Agriculture, we got money to purchase these items. We are sure the money is there. Can it be reverted now to stabilise the prices for farmers so that our people can get sufficient funds to take their children to school?

Mr Speaker, I will not hesitate to join my farmers to demonstrate against this thuggery. This is thuggery of the highest order; where you get money from people and do not take it back to them after taking it under the pretext of keeping it on their behalf. I ask the minister to sincerely reconsider his position and think about how Government can come in to protect the interests of the farmers, instead of looking at protecting the interests of the businessmen. There is the private partnership arrangement you are talking about. It should not be at the expense of other people - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Member. 

MRS KIIZA: Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I -

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday when we were ending this debate, myself and hon. Mukitale, through you, requested that cotton is a sector and the issue on Table also affects the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. This is about marketing issues and industry. You ordered that today, we would have a statement from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives regarding the value chain. May we hear from the minister of that sector?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are wide policy issues involved in this debate, but at the same time, there is an emergency issue of the price. How do we want to move? Do we want to handle the issue of price now and move forward or are we bringing in issues of the entire policy issue in which case we go inter-ministerial and begin? If we are going inter-ministerial, then we can as well go to the committee and have this matter more properly discussed. If we have a burning issue, which I thought was - according to my assessment, I thought the key issue we needed to deal with to save the farmers from the prices they are facing right now, was the price. Did I understand it correctly? Maybe I have been presiding without understanding the subject of the debate. If these are two distinct issues, can we handle one aspect first that will provide an immediate remedy to the farmers of this country and move forward with other bigger policy issues? The others can go to the committee. Honourable members, I need guidance on this. If you are rising on a matter that is different from these two, kindly do not stand up. The honourable member from Budiope, do you have an idea? 

5.12
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to make an input on the issue of prices. A few days ago, we hosted the President of Uganda and during the time he was making a submission to the people; the issue of cotton prices still came up. This is because in Budiope East and generally in Buyende, the prices of cotton are very minimal. In fact, a kilo goes for Shs 1,000. So, in his response, the President said his government is going to propose to CDO to come up with a stabilisation fund. This stabilisation fund works this way. When the prices of cotton are high, some money is chopped off and retained. When the cotton prices are low, that money which was retained when the prices were high, is brought in to cushion the farmers against any shocks. I am kindly requesting the minister to pronounce himself on this proposition by His Excellency the President. I thank you.

5.14
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, in Kioga, Amolatar District, cotton is regarded as an indigenous crop. Over the years, large scale production of cotton has been promoted. To many, cotton cultivation is an effective means of earning income. This means that the only means of earning money to meet the basic needs of these peasants is through selling cotton. I have had the opportunity to look at the way forward provided by the honourable minister. He has talked about promotion of value-addition; continued support to farmers; promotion and support of cooperatives; and also increased participation of farmers in ginning. I see all these ways forward as being medium and long-term. I do not see any immediate solution to the problem of pricing that we are concerned about now. 

I wish, therefore, to inquire from the honourable minister; what are his immediate solutions to the problem of farmers regarding  the pricing of cotton? We have these farmers with cotton in their houses but do not be surprised, Mr Speaker, if I give you a call around this Christmas time, and tell you that in my constituency, people are selling cotton at Shs 200. I wish to know from the honourable minister what his immediate solution to this problem is. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us deal with these issues in a comprehensive way. I will allow hon. Tanna, then Dr Epetait.

5.16
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I hail from Tororo, and Tororo is known as one of the largest cotton producing districts. We also have one of the largest confluences of ginneries in the larger Bukedi region. This is a motion that touches many of us. Cotton was at one time promoted as a major cash crop in this economy. Even while we were still at school, we were taught about the 3Cs, which stood for Cotton, Coffee and Copper. Now we don’t have Copper anymore because it has been exhausted. But the issue of cotton really hurts me, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

Despite the natural catastrophes – it is as if God has also set out to punish the peasants that grow cotton. But to make matters worse, the government has strategically failed to organise the cotton sector to benefit the farmers.

I have read the statement of the sector minister and only noticed that it is very academic in content. It is as if the actual situation on the ground has not been taken into account. In the circumstances, I would like to beg the honourable minister to take this issue seriously; he should not just play politics on the Floor of this Parliament. I am saying this because the livelihood of tens of thousands of cotton farmers and families in this country are at stake.

Mr Speaker, the issue of the Cotton Development Organisation was raised here in the last Parliament. Its leadership and membership was questioned in law. The law that set up the CDO clearly prescribes – that body has not been changed in context and content for the last 14 years. So, what are we doing? Is there seriousness by the ministry to address this issue? Should we tell our people to stop growing cotton? We really need not just an answer, but an honest one from the minister.

Mr Speaker, I just returned from Tororo a couple of days ago, but I can tell you that the rains are finishing the cotton that is still in the fields. The Shs 200 that the minister referred to does not even trickle to the grassroots levels. For example, we had South Bukedi Cooperative Union in Tororo, but it was sold off by a few culprits. I have written 14 letters to the respective offices, it is all gone. Nyakesi is a ginnery that used to exist, but is now in the hands of private investors. How it got there, nobody knows.
I would like to beg that the minister, in whom I have great faith because of his background and integrity, comes up with some serious answers; otherwise, we are extremely tired with our people in much need of help as regards their cotton. I call upon the minister and the cabinet at large, to take the issue of cotton extremely seriously. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:, Honourable members, a point of law has been raised and was also raised before, which made me to look at the Cotton Development Act this morning. May I now point out one or two things that can guide Members on how we are going to proceed? 

There is certainly a board of directors, but there is the managing director. These two are not the same. When you look at this law, you will notice that there is a board of directors under section 6 of this law. Sub-sections 6(1), (2), (3) and (4) stipulate that a member of the board shall hold office for a term of three years, and shall be illegible for re-appointment, but his/her tenure of office shall not exceed two consecutive terms. That relates to the board.

So, if the point that the honourable is raising is that a board or its membership has been in existence for 14 years, that would be a violation of this law. But in relation to the managing director, there is section 22 of the same act which reads thus: “There shall be a managing director of the organisation who shall be appointed by the board on terms and conditions that the board may determine.” There are no term limitations in regard to this provision.

So, if the issue is about the board being – because the law does not allow the board to exist for more than six years under this act. So, we might need to be advised on the provisions of the law so that when time comes for us to make recommendations, we take in account the long existence of such a board. I hope that the sector minister is taking keen interest in what the Chair is raising in matters of law because the Chair happens to be fairly knowledgeable on the subject of law. Yes, hon. Sanjay Tanna.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank you for clearly giving us the relevant law. I also respect your credentials in law. You are very well aware that if the board is in place illegally, therefore, its actions –
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am not aware of that. I just spelt out the law to you.

MR TANNA: No, I am talking about the principle. If the board is in place, then its actions are illegal too and that is in the law. So, if the board has lived for more than six years, which is a fact, therefore, its action of appointing that managing director is illegal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May be the honourable minister can clarify on this matter. 

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, my understanding is that the current board expires in March next year and when that is about to happen, we will start the process of getting fresh members of the board. Unfortunately, the former chairman of the board, the late Dr Esele, recently passed away. Otherwise, the current board has mandate up to March next year.

With regard to the managing director, I would like to say that her appointment is the responsibility of the board and this happens in all parastatals. Even when I was still in UCDA, I used to be a member of the board as an Ex-official. That is also provided for in the law. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I want to know from the minister is when the term for the current board began. That is very important because we have discussed this CDO Board for the last ten years, but with it not being changed. Also, while the tenure of the managing director is not curtailed by law, but really if there are reports from the Auditor-General talking about the failures of this board and there is also no legitimate board, then who is supervising the CDO managers?

In addition to that, I think it is even more disturbing, given the information. Unfortunately, the minister is still whispering. When he gets done, I will continue. 

What I was saying is that given the information that the minister gave us this afternoon to the effect that there is a levy - which in my view is illegal - of Shs 46 billion on Ugandan farmers, and that the CDO bought pesticides. Assuming it bought these pesticides, but were the PPDA guidelines followed? That is the problem of having a manager who is not supervised by anybody. 

In my view, there are two problems: a dead board, an illegitimate board, a non-existent board and a terrible and untouchable manager who is there to serve, not the interests of the farmers, but the interests of herself and the powers that be. 

I think the minister would do this country some justice; something fair, and the fairness would be if he acted rather than come here – I know the honourable minister is not an arrogant person, but the statement sounds very arrogant: “There will be no review”. How do you discard the impressions of all of us who represent thousands of cotton growers? And we are saying there is a problem and then you come with a statement and say there will be no review. Who do you represent? Whose interests, Mr Minister, are you taking care of in this cotton development thing? 
(Mr Stephen Kasaija rose_)

5.28
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Mr Speaker, as my Colleague repairs his microphone, I could make this humble contribution on this motion. 

What we are discussing is a very serious matter. In this country, some people’s lives depend entirely on cotton. I want to give the minister some statistics. 

In my constituency, which is a cotton producing constituency, most of the cotton farmers don’t own land; they hire or rent land from the landlord. This season, an acre of land was being hired out at Shs 200,000. After hiring land at Shs 200,000, they do first and second ploughing; each round of ploughing is Shs 80,000 because of the price of fuel. So, for two rounds, that is Shs 160,000. Seed was sold this season. Seed that covers one acre was being sold at Shs 9,000. 

You have to weed this acre four times before you harvest. Each round of weeding was Shs 60,000 per acre. That means, Shs 240,000 for the six months the cotton remains in that garden. 

Pesticides were sold. Each tin was sold at Shs 3,500. You need 13 tins to make four rounds of pesticides spraying in an acre of cotton. 
When you hire someone to harvest that acre, it costs Shs 80,000. After harvesting, you need to uproot the plants so that you don’t encourage more pests the next season. Uprooting that acre is Shs 50,000.

Mr Speaker, when you total all that it comes to Shs 834,000 per acre. In Kasese, on average we harvest 400kgs of cotton from each acre. Given the price of Shs 1,200 you multiply that by 400kgs, you get Shs 480,000 from one acre. You reduce from the cost of Shs 834,000, net loss is Shs 354,000. When you divide this Shs 480,000 by six months, you find that a peasant is working for Shs 50,000 per month. 

Now, we have a whole ministry of economic monitoring. We have the CDO which is supposed to monitor the market trends for cotton.
 
[MRS CECILIA OGWAL: “Information.”] On cotton matters, Madam Cecilia, I am very informed. 

You cannot cultivate an acre of land alone and produce that 400kgs; it will involve madam and the mister; two people. When you divide Shs 480,000 by six, and by two, you find that a peasant is working for Shs 40,000 per month. That is what Government has subjected our farmers to. A salary of Shs 40,000 per month. 

Mr Speaker, cotton is produced through hard labour. At the end of six months, this Shs 480,000 that you get from an acre, you be rest assured that 50 percent of it will be for medical care. 

You have hired this land. The money you get, at a loss after all, you spend half of it in the hospital. At the end of the day, these people have borrowed money from the banks, so the little land they own, where their homesteads are, will be sold by the banks to pay for the loans. At the end of the day, all cotton farmers in this country will be destitute.

That is why the minister and Government at large, should think of compensating these farmers through that money that CDO has been collecting. After all CDO is a liability to this country. This is not the first time I have mentioned it on this Floor. CDO is a liability to cotton farmers. 

Surely, Mr Minister, can you explain what assistance CDO gives to peasants who produce cotton in this country? Because the ginneries are the ones who produce and dress the cotton seeds. These ginneries have been giving cotton seeds to peasants free of charge. When CDO took over the distribution of seeds, they started selling the seeds.

I, therefore, support the recommendation presented by my brother. Farmers should be compensated from that money that CDO is hoarding; that it has been collecting from these farmers. That money should go back to cotton producers.

Secondly, cooperatives – at least in Kasese we are a bit lucky, our union is still operating and it is running the biggest ginnery in that area although we have two other privately owned ginneries. Farmers have been collecting their seed from the cooperative ginnery. We should try to revive these cooperative unions so that they continue helping these peasants. 

I know that the destruction of these unions was a political move to destroy my brother’s party because the base of UPC was actually in the cooperative movement. Now the people are suffering because of political decisions that were taken, and an alternative was not put in place. 

I wish my brother, the minister of economic monitoring was here, I would ask him, what he monitors. If you can leave your peasants so vulnerable to the world market, and you cannot even carry out research to tell people what is going to happen to the market trend of cotton in the next six months; what is he monitoring? 

I rest my case, Mr Speaker.       
  
5.35
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT	(FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that I am speaking after some statistics have been made. In 2003/2004, the farmgate indicative price was Shs 600. The following cotton season, many farmers in Uganda went in for cotton and were shocked when prices were reduced from Shs 600 per kilo to Shs 300 per kilo.

A hot debate ensued here in Parliament which culminated into a meeting of 16 Members of Parliament summoned to State House to educate the President on the issues that we had debated on the Floor. Mr Speaker and Members, I was shocked that the director of the Cotton Development Organisation turned out to be the spokesperson of the ginners. She was defending everything; she was defending the Shs 300 per kilo that had been slapped on the cotton farmer to the extent that she even made a statement that from one acre of cotton, a farmer is able to harvest 1,200 kilogrammes of cotton. And yet we had moved around the country, and the best farm, which had all the basic agronomic practices applied and with very good soils - remember these were demonstration farms - reported that the    
maximum that a farmer can get from one acre of cotton would be 870 kilos, and the CDO director was telling the President that even at a price of Shs 300 per kilo, a farmer can break even because they harvest at least Shs 1,200 kilos of cotton per acre, which was a lie. So, we challenged her and said, Can you tell the President from which farm in Uganda a farmer can get 1,200 kilos of cotton per acre? There were no answers. 

Mr Speaker, when I read this statement, I get the impression that it was prepared by the ginners in cohort with the CDO because I really shudder. Look at paragraph 2.1, page 2; the minister comfortably said that in order to boost cotton production since it had reduced, that the ginners collected Shs 46 billion in order to support cotton production during this year. He then goes ahead to break down the Shs 46 billion, on how it was used - the ginners refunded themselves. In whose interest was the money collected? Even for these so-called subsidies to the cotton farmer, who determines the cost price in the first place? It is the ginners who are sugar-coating the issues that they are giving farmers cotton seeds and agricultural inputs at a subsidised price. Who is procuring them? It is the ginners. They do not want to be touched and Mr Speaker, I am not agreeable to this issue of having the CDO just left out like that. 

On the utilisation of the Shs 46 billion, I suggest that in order to address the emergency issue of cotton prices, this money ought to be used to top-up the indicative price to date so that the cotton farmers do not lose out. And for the CDO, for God’s sake, if you do not review the CDO - and I have always told cotton farmers that it appears that is another form of slave trade. The CDO is not there for the farmers; it is just there to protect the ginners. You can imagine the statistics that have been given. Actually, for somebody to go for cotton farming now is like subjecting yourself to a punishment. If Government cannot care to help the cotton farmers gain dividends from their sweat –(Member timed out.)

3.39
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a very brief submission. The issue of cotton and the Cotton Development Organisation is not new to us and to the minister. I served with the minister on the committee of agriculture with hon. Cecilia Ogwal and this thing came up. I remember we even travelled to Tanzania with the MD to see the practises there, but from the way I see it, instead of looking at the law that keeps the board and the MD, we should be looking specifically at the law that removes them because from the way we are debating, it is like these people are there because the law has put them there instead of saying that these people are incompetent. What is the law that removes them? That should be the issue. 

On the issue of the stabilisation fund, to me it seems the minister is saying that this money came from private coffers and so, we have nothing to do. Really, this should not be the case. The moment this money is collected, it should be accounted for like any other public fund. So, the CDO and the board should tell the public where this money is and the money should be brought back instead of saying, you see, this government has nothing to do because this is from the stakeholders. That kind of argument will not really help this country and I ask this Parliament to be tough on the ministry. It is unfortunate that my elder is a new minister, but you must have found the documents there. Let us be hard on whoever has mismanaged the Cotton Development Organisation –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification first. Why does the ministry continue promoting cotton cultivation in Uganda with no mechanism of handling the price shocks that we are witnessing today? I wish the minister could clarify on that. 

Secondly, the minister has put it clearly in the statement that Nyanza and Phenix are consuming five to 10 percent. I want to know from the minister whether he has bothered to know the consumption Uganda can take and invest in value-addition in Uganda. I know and I mentioned it here that we have enough market for cotton products in Uganda. Why don’t we for example, through primary societies - give these primary societies ginning machines so that the cost of ginning is not shifted to the farmer? These are at a cheap cost, if you went to India, Mr Minister. If you organise the farmers under cooperatives, they can afford and they can get more money from them. 

Lastly, I am talking about the issue of increasing ginning costs in Uganda. I wish to rest my case, Mr Speaker. Thank you so much. 

5.44
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to begin by saying that this year round and this season in particular, I think we have realised huge yields in terms of cotton production and this has come about because of a deliberate effort by Government to engage all stakeholders in mobilising cotton farmers into cotton growing. I want you to look at the prices of cotton from 2008 where the price of a kilo was Shs 700, in 2009 it moved to Shs 600, in 2010 it was Shs 900 and then in 2011, it had moved to Shs 1,600 and when we have finally attained the biggest harvest out of serious mobilisation, we are dropping to below Shs 300 per kilo. When the minister comes up and says that this is a liberalised economy and, therefore, Government has nothing to do, I don’t want to think that Government liberalised for worse; Government liberalised for the better. If today in a private-led sector economy like Uganda, Government can come up to stabilise private investors like Basajjabalaba with billions of shillings, what is wrong with Government coming in to stabilise farmers who are really the most affected people down there? 

Do we have a policy to do with stabilising private investors who have not broken even? When are we going to stabilise prices of farmers down there who are the most affected? Mr Speaker, I think Government has to come out very clearly in this respect, to the effect that the prices of cotton in this country must be stabilised and I think this is why we would like the revival of cooperative unions. If we had cooperative unions, for example, like was the case in the past, we would not be having all these kinds of arguments because they would pull all their harvest into the cooperatives; probably they would hoard stock until when prices stabilise, but in the current circumstances, with all the harvest out there and with our farmers having spent that much like the honourable member from Kasese has given, it is really unthinkable that we as a Government can look on when our farmers are making those losses and suffering to that extent and we come here and say, Government cannot give any stabilisation fund because this is a liberalised economy. We adopted liberalisation for the better. We never chose to liberalise for the worse, and these fundamental issues regarding the economic sector, I think have cropped up from a situation where we wanted an import substituted kind of industrialization; where we urged farmers to grow more cotton. The problem we have is that we have been having quack investors like Kananathan who was pretending to be investing in the textile industry, and so many private ginners who have come around. They are simply quacks and that is why we are having the demand surpassing the supply. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable members on this subject. I think we need to move forward. Honourable minister, the matter that is before us is fairly clear. Before I allow the honourable member to make his remarks, because it is his motion, I will ask the honourable minister to respond to these issues, specifically the issue of the pricing as it affects the farmers right now, and then the other policy issues can be dealt with appropriately at an appropriate time. So, please deal with the issue of the price and then I will ask hon. Akena to see how we can move forward with this. 

5.48
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would really like to make a humble submission that given the position I put regarding the price of cotton offered to the farmer as a function of what is being realised on the world market, I tried to persuade these honourable members to accept that that is the position ruling in the cotton industry as well as other cotton prices elsewhere. But when it comes to the fund, it is a different story and I felt persuaded to be given permission to go and address the cotton ginners and see whether it will not be in their interest to subsidise or do something to the farmer. But that is not a decision I can make here because that money is not the ministry’s money. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard in some places they are buying cotton at Shs 200 others 600 and others 800. Is that the regime you tolerate as the Minister of Agriculture? 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: No, what I was trying to say is that they are getting a price as dictated by the market forces. It is not that I like it that way, but I don’t believe that Government has the money to stabilise this, unless it becomes a recommendation and you urge Treasury to come with a supplementary budget; that is the commitment that I can make. 

But we all realise that there was a fund of Shs 46 billion created by the industry itself - by the ginners, exporters as well as the farmers. Now, this could be perhaps used, but on consultation of the owners of that money - because this is not Government money; I cannot say that it belongs to us. 

MS ABIA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give the minister was that the farmers are actually disgusted with many of your agencies. Here is a copy of an extract, “Harvest Money from the Farmers’ Forum,” I will read this for you: “Merge or disband some agricultural agencies,” CDO is inclusive, Coffee Development Authority and NAADS are all here. The farmers are frustrated; just get a copy of this. 

But Mr Minister, you very well know that when I was the shadow minister not so long ago, we comprehensively talked about the inefficiencies in the Cotton Development Authority. What did we realise? We realised that that company was just fleecing farmers through the ginners. Honourable members, the thieving is done this way; these ginners compromise some officials in the ministry together with people from CDO and they are there just to ensure that the corruption is picked. Mr Minister, you need an intensive investigation into this.

Secondly, the stabilisation fund that we talked about; you know that the financing that you give to farmers basically through commercial banks does not work. We are consistently asking you when the establishment of a serious agriculture development bank will be; when will Government ever think about it? Because you are now scattered; you even don’t know where to get money to subsidise farmers. And yet globally, big business in farming is subsidised by governments across the world.  How do farmers’ products get to the world market? It is through subsidies and their economies are premised on that. But here we take political advantage to do nothing.
 
Lastly, as an economist, you know for sure that unless you insure agricultural risk - if your economy is based on agriculture, you are flat. There is no way you will rhyme because tell me now if cotton and coffee come down, what will support your industrial base? What will be the forward and backward linkages between the industrialist and agriculturalist?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abia, where is the information? That is a full debate now. 

MS ABIA:  Yes, I am informing him so that he can be able to help my farmers given the fact that they stole the ginneries from the farmer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Leader of Government Business. 

5.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I concur with the concerns expressed in the House. But of course, some have been done in a way perhaps to address the gallery.  The most important thing I know here is that this is a very serious matter –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Rt Hon. Speaker, is the Rt Hon. Third Prime Minister, Uncle Gen. Moses Ali, in order to suggest that the seriousness of this matter reflects that Members of Parliament are speaking to the gallery and yet he very well knows that there are no press men here? There are only cameras and besides, cotton is partly the reason he got educated. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to suggest that we are speaking for the gallery presided over by you?  (Laughter) Is he seriously in order that we are just joking when cotton prices are just Shs 200 which is not enough to buy a cigar for him? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debates of this House by the amendments we made to our Rules of Procedure, are now televised live and by speaking to any microphone in this House, you are speaking live to the whole country and not just the people who are attending the proceedings of Parliament from the galleries.  You will, therefore, be speaking to the entire country. The Rt Hon. Leader of Government  Business should know that a Member has a right to speak on the Floor of this Parliament and speak to the nation as by law instituted. (Applause)  So, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister you will retract those remarks of speaking to the gallery and proceed with concluding your remarks. (Laughter)

LT GEN MOSES ALI:  So, Mr Speaker, I was opposed to introduction of television broadcasting in this House in the Seventh Parliament because of this very reason. (Laughter) It is diversionary; people pretend to be talking when they are actually campaigning and preparing themselves for future elections.  I am sorry if I have hurt you, but I should be allowed to talk about the cotton issues now.  But I am also being heard in the countryside. (Laughter) Let them also listen to me, why not? 

So, Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that I concur with the seriousness of this matter and we need an answer. I am proposing that I take it personally on behalf of the government and that of the farmers that we need time to address these issues. We shall invite all stakeholders and the ginners, and we shall get these cotton growers and all concerned people. We would even like to know where the Shs 46 billion is now, and who is responsible; who is using that money? This will enable us see whether these farmers cannot benefit from this 46 billion. I need time as the Deputy Leader of Government Business –(Laughter)- so, I would like colleagues to give us one week. Starting tomorrow we are not going to sleep; I am going to invite everybody. That is my request on behalf of the government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me see if we can move forward on the proposal by the Leader of Government Business. The Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, is it, therefore, possible to have the text of what you have just said contained as part of the resolutions to be passed and then we pass it?  Will that be proper that this undertaking made by the Prime Minister be amended and inserted in the prayer of the resolution and passed by this House?  

Honourable members, there is a preposition on the Floor of Parliament. What I am trying to see is how we move forward. The Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business has made a proposal that they are going to summon all stakeholders in this sector to a meeting where they will ask questions about where the Shs 46 billion is and all these other things.  I am now asking whether we can capture that and put it as part of the resolution of this Parliament so that we can then amend hon. Akena’s motion to accommodate this and then we move forward. 

6.01
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the way forward is first of all to adopt the motion and pass it as it was amended yesterday. Because there were additions of two points acknowledging the fact that Shs 46.6 billion was deducted from the farmers, which the minister has also now confirmed; and the second amendment which was given was that because of the mismanagement of funds by CDO, as cited by the Auditor-General’s report that a review be done in the CDO. So, those amendments were given and the minister has acknowledged. If that is accepted, we can start by adopting the motion and then move forward. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Still it won’t have captured what we want. What I proposed is that what the Prime Minister has said should be captured as part of the resolution; so that it comes from the House and then he can take it over from there to be implemented. 
MRS OGWAL:  Yes, agreed. He can take over from there. 

6.03
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo):  Thank you for that proposition. However, I would like us to be cognisant of the fact that within one week, we will be out on recess. So, let us be honest with ourselves and give the correct timeframe as to Tuesday next week. What I would like to propose is that we should do it at the next sitting of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tanna, this resolution if passed, is not going to be implemented tonight. Even if we pass it the way it has been proposed without the Prime Minister’s intervention. It will not be implemented overnight, will it? It doesn’t require Parliament to be in session for it to be implemented.  No, I don’t think so. It requires that we pass it and hand it over to the Executive and they proceed with the implementation of what we have urged them to do. So, I don’t think we need to insert any timeframes here; we can insert that they can do it within a week and then it will be up to them to convene a meeting, do the necessary logistical issues and put the meeting together and then move forward.  We still have to deal with the motion first. 

6.04
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was in the village yesterday and I realised that people have a lot of cotton and Christmas is about ten days from now. But we have not asked ourselves whether we have silos in the villages where people can keep this cotton. Remember that these people need money for Christmas. So, it looks like the resolutions we are about to pass now may not help them because some are so desperate that they are selling at any price as low as Shs 800. So, I was more of the opinion that if the minister - I know the Speaker tried to ask him earlier but he has been very diplomatic.

If the minister and Government could commit themselves to a price, these ginners are not from heaven. In any case they have even spent Shs 46 billion of the farmers. We don’t want to ask people to start arresting them wherever they are; we have that capacity.  If the minister could just commit himself to the price, because, by the way, the money that the farmers collected is theirs and not the ginners. So, if you could just commit yourself to the price, we would not even need that one week or another stakeholders meeting. The message would go out home and right. People would sell their cotton and we would plan all those other things for next year. I really don’t know what the minister thinks about this?  

MRS OGWAL: I think I agree because if you remember, yesterday, we did acknowledge that CDO had declared the price of Shs 1,600. What we are saying is that if we can get back the Shs 600 which the minister has acknowledged that was deducted and make it 2,200, that will be a starting point. So, can we acknowledge that right now, nobody should buy cotton below Shs 2,200? But we will be expecting the government to give us subsidies to add onto that and that is where we can wait for whether one week or two days or whatever. But as of now, as an emergency, the government must agree that our Shs 1,600 which is a farm-gate declared by CDO plus our Shs 600 of last year, be added onto that price so that from today, nobody should buy cotton less than Shs 2,200 and we are hoping that the government will be able to come with a better price.

LT.GEN MOSES ALI: These proposals are taking us backwards. I said categorically here that Government has no money to give subsidies as it is being talked about now. I said, we need time to go and discuss with every stakeholder including the ginners, even those who collected the Shs 46 billion to tell us where the money is and what they have done with it. Whether the Shs 46 billion cannot be used to help these farmers and as Government, I think we have that authority. I must speak to solve these problems. I want colleagues to understand that for farmers to get something, this should come through Government. That is why we are coming in to talk about the farmers’ plight, whether they can get money or not, but Shs 46 billion -[HON. SEBAGGALA: “Information.”]-—Please, I am informed.

Therefore, I want people to allow us to go forward and they should not worry about the one week I am talking about. One week from tomorrow, we shall mobilise everybody. We shall have first-hand information before we break off. If we break off before I come in, I will keep the Office of the Speaker informed. So, this proposal by hon. Cecilia Ogwal to accept to pay, no; that is taking us backwards. It is a misunderstanding. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide us on matter of procedure. Before we went for recess, the Leader of Government Business stood here and committed that Government would come and give a statement on floods and disasters in the country in a week’s time.

We all believed him and it has gone on for months and months, and now it is almost off the table. Is it procedurally right that we believe him again when he tells us that in a week’s time he will come? (Laughter)

6.10
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my honourable colleagues for all the contributions they have made on this Motion, but honestly, I am right now appealing to Government to try and see sense. 

This issue of pegging a price on an international price happens in liberalised economies. You do not say, because you have liberalised, you have no say in the matter. 

I will give Government a clear example. Cocoa growing in Ghana; they have an organisation similar to CDO which sets the FOB price and 70 percent of that price goes to the farmer. The liberalised market, the traders, deal with nine percent and the rest goes as taxes and Ghana has shown a remarkable improvement in the production and the quality of cocoa. Ghana earns over US$ 1 billion per annum from cocoa; and we say we cannot interfere on a 75 percent? 

Honourable minister, I have gone through your statement and I did the mathematics based on 70 percent of the prices which you indicated, but you have two prices. There is the October price and the price of 95 cents. Working on 70 percent based on the October price, the farmer will get Shs 2,240 per kilo. Based on the 95 cents working on 70 percent, the farmer will get Shs 1,890 per kilo. The ginner or the exporter will be making Shs 810 per kilo and this is a win-win situation.
 
This is taking in the factors which the ginners use and put them as costs, which end up to the farmer, and this includes commission to agents, transport from agents, loading and offloading, store rent, cotton monitoring, purchase of cotton seed, the cost of ginning, the cost of space paid to CDO, paying to the cotton production fund and finance charges. Still at the end, using a percentage formula on the prices. 

I checked COT Look as he put it. COT Look releases an indication every day. You can even release prices on a daily basis based on the international price. I admit it is falling, but still, on a percentage it would be much better than what it is now. Right now, whoever is exporting is exploiting the farmers, and liberalisation as far as Government seems to be looking at, is exploitation. We had AGOA still dealing with the cotton industry. What happened to the AGOA girls? They were underpaid, they were exploited, they were being locked - it was actually what they call slavery, but there is a term which they use - I have forgotten for now, but if it comes I will remember - which if you are trying to export to the American sweat shop - it is called a sweat shop - if  you are trying to export to the American market and you are exploiting workers, you will not be able to sell in that market. You will be blacklisted. That is what we call liberalisation. Liberalisation is a win-win. Let us care for our farmers. If we are going to look into this matter, look at the mathematics; there are models and if you want documentation on Ghana, I am willing to table it.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am also asking the minister to rescind on the review of the Cotton Development Organisation. When you set an organisation to increase production to one million bales and it fails - his own figures which he has presented shows a fluctuation. One year it is up, one year it is down. What exactly is the Cotton Development Organisation doing? If it has a good relationship with the ginners but the production is not steady, it is not increasing on a regular basis, surely it has failed. Let us look at it and find ways of how to develop it. 

Under the cooperatives, we increased to 485,000 bales; that should be a lesson. It is possible, and it was done. Why can’t we do something? Once again, my colleagues have mentioned, Christmas is around the corner, let Government show signs that they actually care for the citizens of Uganda. When someone does hard work to produce, at least let them get some just reward. A lot of thought went into this; you have the emotions of all the Members. Please, I urge Government, do not abandon the people. Your primary responsibility is the livelihood of the people of Uganda not the investor. The investor is supposed to help meet your primary responsibility but there are formulas which is a win-win. There is no loss. 
On the figures, we need to consider something. The formula which I worked, you start with the end product. This is the market price. Remove the cost and then you see what is there. Right now, farmers are exploited and unless Government speaks on behalf of the farmers - the citizens of Uganda, I do not think Government is meeting its primary duty. Thank you Mr Speaker.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion for these comments; but I want him also to support the Government in those proposals. We should join hands together to see what we can achieve from the Shs 46 billion already collected from the farmers. We shall invite him to bring his facts and those people who have information and who are interested will come and help us as we discuss –(Interjections) – they are not listening, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank him. As far as we are concerned, you are the Leader of Government Business; we do not want to call you deputy. 

Mr Speaker, all institutions in Uganda are supposed to produce financial statements which show their income, expenditure and financial positions. 

The Shs 46 billion they are talking about is most likely in the financial statements. Why would you ask Members to come and discuss that money with you when it is in the accounts; unless you are telling us that CDO is not declaring its income; and that is your responsibility? It is a matter of looking at your accounts and start acting.

Mr Leader of Government Business, you claim you got 68 percent of the votes and the people who voted for you by 68 percent are the ones suffering. And because they are suffering, you need to come to their rescue; unless you are saying you never won by 68 percent. So, could you kindly give them their money so that they can have a better Christmas and take their children to school?

LT GEN. ALI: Mr Speaker, this confirms what I said; we are not talking about elections now -(Laughter)- we are turning the farmers’ problems on cotton into elections. This is diversionary. Why shouldn’t I invite the people who are more concerned about the farmer’s plight to come and help us solve the problems. We are not just claiming 68 percent; it is what we got. And if you are dissatisfied, you should have gone to court as usual. (Laughter) I had to answer like that because you also asked in public.

So, Mr Speaker, I want to again say that we are concerned and I want to ask for permission – the Leader of the Opposition was asking me for a methodology. But people do things in different ways. First of all, we are from different training backgrounds, and I am a General of course –(Laughter)– you just have to trust me; I will come with the report. But on who we make it; that will be our methodology –(Interjections)– I am not a liar; I am a lawyer at the same time. 

On the floods, the report on floods is coming because floods have not stopped, they are still going on. So, if with every flood I must come here with a report, that will be very unfair. (Laughter) So, that is my position Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to bring this to a close. The substance of the motion, if I can recap, particularly on what we are required to pronounce ourselves on; I will not go to the preamble; I will go to the specific issues contained in the final prayers. The Office of the Clerk has helped me capture some of the things that we have so far covered. The first one – I do not know whether it was an amendment. 

1) 	It was that Parliament urges Government to review its interventions bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives.

2) 	Government reviews the performance of the cotton development organization in view of the Auditor General’s Report on the sector.

3) 	That future Government intervention ensures that farmers are protected from external shock and receive not less than 75 percent of the world market prices – I am recapturing what I have so that we can see how to move forward on them. 

4) 	The final one, which has been proposed by the Leader of Government Business, is that Government convenes all stakeholders in the cotton sector with a view of addressing all the challenges in the sector. 

I am trying to recapture what has been in the course of the debate and see if there are any gaps which I have not captured – item three – 

MS OGWAL: Item three; farmers should be protected from external shocks and receive the Shs 46.6 billion which was collected from the previous season – it is supposed to be part of this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not 75 percent?

MS OGWAL: The 75 percent is for the future; but for the immediate they return our money. We add in the Shs 46.6 billion there and then for the future the 75 percent. 

MR OTTO: I have been listening to hon. Jimmy Akena carefully and I would pray the honourable Prime Minister would listen. The Shs 46.6 billion, according to the minister, has already been spent. So, it would be very radical to me, to say we need this money back. It is possible, but it would be very radical to pass it as a resolution. 

But from what hon. Akena has said that from the minister’s statement that the price of cotton has fallen to US$ 1.10 per pound, even at that price, hon. Jimmy has just stated that each farmer can get Shs 2,240. So, the minister has admitted that the price has fallen to US$ 1.10 per pound. So, even at that price, you have admitted the farmer can still get Shs 2,240. Other than adopting the other radical opinion that the Shs 46 billion be given to them - it has already been spent - we could just say, “Okay, since the prices are here, we give the farmers Shs 2,240.” It will not be contradicting any part of your statement. 

I just want to move formally that the price be added – that since the price – no, I am moving now – that that particular aspect of 2,240 per kilo be adopted as the price the farmers should sell the cotton at, judging from your statement.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, still, that does not change the text of the motion because it is calculated basing on the 75 percent which is in the motion. Can we – yes?

6.27
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): You are saying that anything to do with figures is going to be contrary to Article 93. (Interjections) No, no, let me say what I know. If we adopt the proposals, they will take into account everything the honourable has been talking about. 

We must find out - because, first of all, Government is not going to – there is no money aside for these cotton issues. We are going to say we want to find out where the Shs 46 billion is. (Interjections) Wait. Let me finish. (Interruption)

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you general, for giving way. I would like to inform the Prime Minister that in Uganda Revenue Authority, there is a tax they call STABEX - Stabilisation Tax. When prices go up, like when cotton prices went up, ginneries were taxed that Stabilisation Tax. A lot of money was removed from their profits as a buffer when prices go low. You go and find out from the Ministry of Finance; from Uganda Revenue Authority.

I have a friend who exports coffee. Last year, the prices of coffee went up. This man’s money was deducted here from Bank of Uganda when remittances were made from his buyers abroad. When he complained, they said, “No, in future when the prices go low on the world market, this money will be given back to the coffee exporters.” That money is there. That is what I am saying; peasants want their money back, which was deducted from the ginners when they were exporting. That is one.
 
Two, there is this tax called Cess that is being collected by CDO. Last year, they were collecting Shs 190 per kilogramme. They collected Shs 5.2 billion. Why don’t they give back this money to the peasant? Then this levy of Shs 600 per kilogramme taken by CDO, do they remit it to Uganda Revenue Authority or they collect and spend it? That is what the Prime Minister should be looking for. Get this money back and give it back to the owners immediately at the price we have stated. Nobody is going to make a loss. People are demanding for what belongs to them. It is not Government money at all. It is being kept by this institution on behalf of the peasants.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think finally, the Leader of Government Business will make a comment and then we see how to move forward on this. 

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I want to thank my colleague for the information. Now, this confirms the need for more consultation -(Laughter)- as I have said. This also confirms that -(Interjections)- when given more time, we shall be able meet these people with this relevant information. I think we should agree not to fix figures.

We are all concerned about farmers. We are going to mobilise everybody for the first meeting. If possible, we need to get contacts. You come and join us. This is a common problem. It is not going to be – elections are very far. Anyway, so, we should help our farmers. Allow us to take a reasonable motion which will take care of everybody. Figures should not be involved -(Interjections)- because if you put figures, you tie our hands. We do not have money -(Interjections)- but we will be able to help these farmers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is in our interest that we go by consensus on this point so that we can resolve this matter. Whichever way we move, as long as it moves this matter forward, we should be able to compromise on it and move forward.

The Leader of Government Business has proposed that we dispense with the issue of 75 percent and restructure it to capture the mood of that provision without assigning a figure to it. He says that would make this matter move forward without us having to lose it altogether. I do not know what the feelings of the Members about this are. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”] Hon. Akena, it might be a better way to move forward. Yes, hon. Tanna? 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the honourable colleagues in exactly the manner you have raised this issue that let us support the motion, but include the feelings of the Prime Minister. 

However, I would like to put on a small caveat that if the honourable Prime Minister has been invited like in this case; Jimmy Akena and a few other colleagues who have expertise or expert knowledge in this field should attend these meetings because I believe it would be a couple of meetings. They should report to this Parliament the results when this Parliament resumes early next year. I beg to propose. 

6.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In line with the innovation from honourable Sanjay Tanna, in the last Parliament when we had a cotton price crisis, the stakeholders whom the Leader of Government Business is proposing, interfaced with cotton-growing Members of Parliament to try and find a solution. I think it is very critical that during that interface, we should not leave our people uninformed. There should be feedback and some semblance of a caucus of the cotton-growing MPs interfacing with the stakeholders. That is very important. 
  
Secondly, I am very happy with the guidance of the Speaker that we should look at the immediate solution for the suffering cotton grower. But I would also want, at the end, to be sure that when the stakeholders meet, we shall come in with a comprehensive medium-term and the long-term review of the cotton sector. If we do not, next year, same time, we shall be discussing the same problem. I thank you. 

6.35
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I think we should not push the Prime Minister so much because he has risen up three times and is insisting on the same point. 

What I would think – because even now as we talk, the Committee on Agriculture of Parliament is in the cotton-growing areas, specifically in Pader, over the issue of cotton. So, whatever we are discussing here probably will even overtake what will come out in the committee report. I was of the strong opinion that what the Prime Minister requested that within a week, he will formally report to the Office of the Speaker; we take that commitment as it is. We remove the figures; we give him the one week he has asked for so that a formal report can be tendered to your office. In the meantime, between now and that one week the General has talked about, probably you could use your office and the Public Relations Department of this institution, Parliament; to issue a press circular, even tomorrow or the other day that, “Parliament sat today, and these things were resolved. The Prime Minister will be reporting to the Speaker of Parliament within one week.” In the meantime, the farmers can wait until we get that report so that out there, before Christmas, at least the whole world can know that this institution is handling something. So, at the end of the day, we will have a win-win situation. 

So, I would support that; but the Prime Minister should commit himself to the one week’s period and I am talking as the Chairperson of the Government Assurance Committee of Parliament. We don’t want the one week to go beyond Christmas. It was you who said it. You are an Army General and a lawyer at that. So, you should really keep your word. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is evident that in one week’s time, we will already be in the Christmas season. But I would like to inform the House that people in my area depend on cotton. They are all waiting for the outcome of our debate on the price of cotton. My concern is that yesterday, CDO met some ginners and resolved to reduce the cotton price further from Shs 1600 to Shs 1200, and now to Shs 1000 per kilogram. That is the concern of the cotton farmers of which I am part.

So, as cotton growers, we have decided to either set our cotton on fire or we just don’t sell it. That is a fact because we are being exploited. The way forward –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that will not move us forward yet we had set that pace.

MRS OGWAL: I was proposing that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have started with that proposal.

MRS OGWAL: I was proposing that we resolve that no further deductions be done of the cotton price below Shs 2,200. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the price is already below Shs 2,200 because you have just said that the price is now Shs 1600. So, what are you talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that part of the executive in Parliament are cotton dealers and so they would be happy to buy it at a lower price for them to make profits and benefit. Most of the people who have a say are Frontbenchers –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, please move us forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the 75 percent was basically talking about the world price. If the minister told us that currently a pound is worth $1.1 that means that for you to get a price of one kilogram of cotton you have to multiply that by Shs 1.2. So, we are talking about the 75 percent of about –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Opposition, we have already passed that page. Now we are trying to find ways to reach minimum consensus of how to move this matter forward. I don’t want us to be forced into holding the voting at this stage. If we can get anything that can move us forward, that would be more beneficial than arguing about details that will force us to vote over this motion yet at the end we get no decision. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think we are moving forward. The farmers have costs that they have put across. If we have that money that was collected by CDO, the Shs 46.6 billion, the minister should not get worried because that works as a stabilisation fund. So, what we can do now is, if it is now at Shs 1,600 and we are only looking for Shs 600 to make the price Shs 2,200, I think it would be prudent for us to resolve that farmers should not be cheated and that they should sell their cotton at that price. Government should be able to accept that proposal because they already have Shs 46.6 billion with the CDO.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see in the same report – and that is where I have a difficulty – it is said that of the Shs 46 billion, Shs 12 billion was fixed on the Reserve Account, Shs 16 bilion was refunded to every ginner at the rate of Shs 200 per kilogram bought as a result of increased potential costs; and Shs 18 billion was used to support cotton production in 2011. In other words there is no such money as Shs 46 billion. 

So, when we continue referring to these figures, it won’t help us in finding a solution. Yes, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, please say something that will move forward.

MR EKANYA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your permission to move an amendment to the motion at an appropriate time. But before that, allow me give some information to the House. Just about 30 days ago, because of instability in the export of cotton, Bank of Uganda issued a bond of Shs 950 billlion for two years in order to get foreign exchange.

Therefore, it is very important that this matter gets resolved because Government needs foreign exchange. If we do not have a percentage to guide the discussion, the meeting will not have a benchmark. But also, the Prime Minister should be knowing that parliamentary resolutions are put in place to advise Government. If Members are talking about the percentage of the world price you should take it because if tomorrow that price goes down to say, 50 percent, that will even be much better for you. And if it increases to say, 200 percent, it still works for you as Government.

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the Leader of Government Business to accept that 75 percent of the world prices. It will be up to Government to do the calculations. Thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a friend of cotton growers in addition to having some cotton growers in my constituency. Anyway, I am at a loss. When you read through what the minister has stated in regard to the utilisation fund of the Shs 46 billion – we are in a dilemma because yes, we want to see how we can assist the cotton growers, but from what the minister has told us – unless I stand to be corrected – Shs 600 is being collected from the farmers and not the ginners. But then, they gave the very ginners Shs 16 billion as a refund, but the farmers whose money was collected got nothing. Why did CDA give that money to the ginners instead of the farmers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the resolutions. Resolution one read thus: “Parliament urges Government to review its intervention bearing in mind the successes and challenges of the cooperatives.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Resolution two read thus: “Government reviews the performance in the cotton Development Organisation in view of the Auditor-General’s Report on the sector.” I now put the question to that resolution.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The third resolution is about future Government intervention to ensure that farmers are protected from both internal and external shocks – yes, hon. Jimmy Akena.

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, since we have got some understanding with the Prime Minister on the removal of the 75 percent, I would like to propose an amendment to that resolution by inserting the words, “and examine alternative pricing mechanisms” after the words, “internal and external shocks.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? So, can you now state it properly?

MR  AKENA: Future Government interventions to ensure that farmers are protected from internal and external shocks and Government examines alternative pricing mechanisms.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that is correct, I now put the question to the proposed amendment as moved by hon. Jimmy Akena.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next one is that Government convenes a meeting of stakeholders in the cotton sector with a view of addressing all the challenges in the sector and report to Parliament within two weeks – one week for the meeting - and makes the report in the second week. After they have submitted a report to Parliament, we will see how to handle it. Is that okay? I now put a question to the amended resolution as I just read it to you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In order to have a long-term solution to this problem, I would like to suggest another resolution. This resolution should read thus: “Parliament urges Government to come up with a comprehensive plan to promote the export rather than raw cotton in the next two months.”

The justification is that in Ethiopia, Government does not export raw cotton. The same thing is being done in South Africa. On the basis of that, I believe – last year in Uganda we introduced a tax bill to discourage export of raw hides and skin. This is part of the plan of the President; to stop giving jobs to the Europeans; it is in the NRM Manifesto. I am just reminding Government about their obligation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, kindly re-state it so that we can all understand it and have a proper caption by the Hansard.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the additional resolution should read as follows: “Parliament urges Government to come up with a comprehensive plan to promote export of yarn rather than raw cotton in the next two months.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? Is there a problem with that? Yes, hon. Wakikona.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can see that hon. Ekanya is driving at something, which other than export - we have a national textile policy, which is being worked on by the Government to increase value. However, apart from that we have also put up some measures for the investors who come here. For example, we don’t allow them to invest anything less than $25 million. That is when they can qualify for the many provisions we have put in place such as tax exemptions.

So, I agree with hon. Ekanya because his views are in line with the policy that Parliament already approved. The policy is about value-addition. But also, as I heard one Member say something about cotton that is being spoiled by rains. I want to say that we are now expanding the warehouses to cope with the weather conditions. I support the proposal for Government to speed up value-addition implementation through cooperatives. This will help to maintain cotton prices for the farmers. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. So, do you suggest that we delete the word “yarn” or we adopt the broader term “value-addition” to stop the exportation of raw cotton? Is it the consensus that we concede to an amendment that takes care of value-addition including yarn, to stop the exportation of raw cotton? If that is the general position, I now put a question to the proposed additional resolution as moved by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to have the last amendment moved and it should say thus: “Government stops, forthwith, the charging of a cotton levy upon the farmers.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that fall within the law because a Member cannot propose anything on taxation except by reduction? Is it an acceptable issue? (Mr Bwamabale rose_)

MR BWAMABALE: Mr Speaker, may I know from Government where the money that is collected by CDO, the Shs 600 per kilogram and the other Shs 170 per kilogram, is taken? Is it remitted to URA or just spent at source by CDO?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, do you think you have an idea about what that matter is?

LT. GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, that is exactly part of what we are going to discuss; it will form part of our discussion. Actually, you have been invited to that discussion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, don’t you think that matter can be better resolved in that discussion rather than have it as one of the resolutions?

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this matter was resolved in 2005 and Government was asked to stop charging that levy. It actually stopped until last year when it was reintroduced. So, I am just reminding Government about its being reintroduced. This levy had been stopped because it had been discovered to be illegal and not provided for in the law. Government should stop that levy forthwith because it unnecessarily burdens the farmers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, all taxes and levies are supposed to be imposed by Parliament because they are usually charged against a statutory instrument approved by Parliament. So, if CDO is trying to levy that charge without such parliamentary authority, then that is wrong. If they are charging that levy in that form, that is criminal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is one of those cardinal principles of taxation – no taxation without representation. So, are we together on this? I have been told that this matter was raised before, agreed upon, but later agreement violated and now it is back here again. Can we deal with it now?

LT. GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, as I said, this should also form part of the items to be discussed in that meeting because we need more information on it. If hon. Cecilia Ogwal won’t be able to come, she can send us that relevant information for us to utilize it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the resolutions we have passed give us a good framework to move forward to the next meeting and have a better way forward in what comes out of that meeting.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am wondering, should the one of the press statement be just administrative? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once the text of the resolution is out for publication – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged. 

MS ALASO: I note that there are a number of issues that we have not been able to resolve. I wonder whether it is possible, now that this motion is passed. While Government goes ahead to implement, I hope in the spirit of this resolution, the committee on agriculture should be specifically mandated to review some of those issues in the cotton sector and come back to us soon, maybe in three or four months’ time if it pleases you, Mr Speaker.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is part of the work of the committee to pick out these issues that are generated and make it their own and come back. That is part of the routine work of the committee. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, if you don’t give a specific direction - the problem is that the committees are very busy and we thought this was a very important matter. If your Chair directed, they would follow it up quickly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that case, wouldn’t it be proper if guidance is given arising from this particular meeting? The whole text of the motion and the incidental matters can be addressed by the committee and we have a comprehensive review of the subject. Would that be proper? I would not know what to refer to the committee because we have just sent them for a meeting next week and then we are moving on to wait for this thing to come within two weeks and at the same time. I am sending some other things to the committee – 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am hoping that one of the key stakeholders in that meeting will be the Committee on Agriculture and, therefore, once they go there, they will pick up what is resolved there and what we have resolved here and see how to bring a position again to the House to update us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think so, too. Thank you very much, honourable members. (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) At least we have come to a conclusion on this matter. We have been able to deal with this matter comprehensively and I congratulate you honourable members for the patience and the concern you have expressed on this subject; and I thank the Government Frontbench for being malleable to the situation that came on. Hon. Akena, thank you very much for the motion and all Members for bringing this to a good close. 

7.00
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 46(k) of our Rules of Procedure in a matter where you, Mr Speaker, will redeem a matter as one of emergency or national importance. This morning, I moved with honourable colleagues and we were in court; I had Engineer Katwiremu, hon. Mariam Nalubega, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Seninde, hon. Denis Obua, hon. Kwizera and very many others. When we went there, we found a matter that we thought we should bring to the attention of Parliament. I am, therefore, rising to put you to notice that we shall move a substantive motion, but specifically on what we saw as the conduct of the Attorney-General and the independence of this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware we sat here on 10th and 11th October – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are moving under rule 46(k), you said? Motion without notices: “The following motions may be moved without notices … (k) any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency;” You see, all the procedure is provided for under rule 46. The actual application of the rules falls under rule 51 because this declares the situations where these arise, but the actual procedure to be followed is under rule 51. In this case, when you rise, there should be some matters to qualify you – is it five members –(Laughter)

MR KYAMADIDI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you realise that on 10th and 11th October, we sat here and discussed a number of issues that had been a subject of debate, and we made a number of resolutions. Pursuant to that, committees had been in place, specifically the one on oil and the one on rules, discipline and privileges, that was tasked to do something on contempt. As we speak, there is an injunction that stops these committees from work and a quick analysis of how these events unfolded indicates that hon. Peter Nyombi the Attorney-General, in this case who is the defendant, was in agreement with the petitioners. He was conniving with the petitioners against Parliament for which under Article 199, he is supposed to be a principal legal advisor. Today, he was actually even denying Parliament the opportunity to defend itself because under Article 119, all the power to defend belongs to him. 

Honourable members, for those of us who were in court and will give testimony if you allow, Mr Speaker, what happened was that even the petitioners were saying that the Attorney-General is telling us this is what it should be, meaning that as Parliament, you are actually not here naturally and legally. Against the Speaker and the resolutions made in this House - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I need to guide the House on this matter because it borders on very delicate grounds. It is substantially before court and how we navigate through our contributions to it could be a challenge. For the benefit of the Members, I have a copy of the ruling of the court on the issue and maybe I should read it to guide the Members on how we can move with this matter. This is the constitutional court Petition No.47 2011. It was served on the Clerk to Parliament on 13 December 2011 - that was yesterday. This is the petition of Mr Twinobusingye Severino against the Attorney-General, and the five judges sat, led by the Lady Deputy Chief Justice. This is what the ruling is:

“Upon hearing Sitina Cherotich, Assistant Director, Legal Services, counsel for the Parliamentary Commission of Uganda and upon hearing John Mary Mugisha assisted by Chris John Bakiiza, counsel for the petitioner in reply, and upon hearing George Karemera, Senior State Attorney, counsel for the respondent in an application for adjournment to enable the Parliamentary Commission to be made party to the petition so as to be effectively heard as regards issues which have to be resolved by this court in the petition;It is hereby ordered as follows:

(1) 	That Parliament being one of the arms of the State is afforded an opportunity to argue the application so as to enable court to decide on the merits as to whether or not Parliament should be made party to the petition;
(2) 	That the application for adjournment be 	and is hereby allowed;
(3) That while Parliament is being accommodated with the grant of this adjournment, there is need to maintain the status quo of the matters in the subject of inquiry in this petition; 
(4) 	That it is hereby further ordered that the Parliament ceases its activities forthwith concerning all matters that are a subject of this petition until the final determinations of the application of Parliament to be added to this petition or until this court orders otherwise;
(5) 	That the hearing of this application for the Parliamentary Commission to be added as a party to the petition is fixed for 14th December, 2011 at 9.30 a.m. and the petition will be mentioned on the same day;
(6) That the cost of today abides the main event.

Given under my hand and the seal of this honourable court this 12th day of December, 2011.

Registrar of the Constitutional Court.”

Now, this matter came and I think we owe a briefing of the development of what happened to the House. This matter came before the Parliamentary Commission and we had a discussion on the subject, where it was outlined to us by our legal team that it does seem that from the response files by the Attorney-General to the petition, it seemed as though the Attorney-General had already taken a position, which he had articulated on the Floor of this House that he did not support the resolutions as they were. 

The Parliamentary Commission felt that since it had a double identity in law; the first identity is to be represented by the Attorney-General, and the second identity is that it is a body corporate, which can represent itself. So, the Parliamentary Commission tasked the Legal Department to file an application so that Parliament could be heard on its own and had its own representation since there was an apparent conflict between what the Attorney-General was presenting vis-a-vis the interests of the House. So, the legal team of the Parliamentary Commission was then given that responsibility and that is why they filed this application so that Parliament is added and not just the Attorney-General because now the petition is against the Attorney-General only and Parliament is nowhere. So, the application is that Parliament should now be added as the second party and presents its own case. That is the application on which this ruling was based and thus adjourned to this morning. 

Now, from the proceedings of what happened this morning - I have not followed, but I think that it is the basis of information coming from the Members who went to court this morning and saw the developments, which they have come to brief the House. I think that is the spirit in which you come. 

Given the circumstances, it is extremely tricky; the ground on which we can move is very narrow between what we can say here and it not having any bearing in what is going on in court. In other words, we might have a very delicate balance and I might have difficulty steering the House on whether we will not be violating our own rules on subjudice and then also a clear guidance that has been made by the court on this matter. Maybe I can ask – I do not see the Attorney-General from the Government side to guide the House. I could ask the Shadow Attorney-General to say something and then you can respond. 

7.12
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I actually do agree with you entirely that we are walking quite a delicate path. This case is as confusing to a lay man like I am sure it is confusing to a well learned man in the law. Because you see, there is what we ordinarily call a cause of action; the reason why you go to court. You must be aggrieved and then the party you are suing is responsible for your grievance. 

Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General has in essence said he agrees with the petition. What are they doing in court? You just see a case of outright collusion and this is quite unethical. I am conscious; I don’t want to degenerate into the merits of this case. But what is confusing and which is about the integrity of this House, is that we take a decision and the principal legal advisor who is supposed to defend our decision goes to a court of law and concedes. Now, who is his client? 

Ordinarily, Rt Hon. Speaker, I thought we were the clients and the Learned Attorney-General should act on our instructions, and if he deeply feels that he has a strong objection on what he did, there was an option. Under the law, he should have discussed this matter with Parliament and said, “Can you get a lawyer?” and then he issues what we call a “commission,” which is permission to that lawyer and that lawyer argues out the case and he pulls out, but he is now actually in court prosecuting Parliament. It is difficult and I think that Rt Hon. Speaker we are discussing it as a client. The only thing is that we can only discuss it in this forum that we are having a problem with our lawyer because our lawyer is actually arguing the case against his client. (Laughter) 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I really can’t sit because I am in shock and I have failed to stomach or internalise it within my mental faculties the situation the Government of Uganda is in today. By the government, I mean the three arms; the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary.

Mr Speaker, I beg the hon. Abdu Katuntu to make me understand by repeating what he has just said so that I can internalise it because what I have understood is that the Attorney-General, who was supposed to defend us has actually done the opposite. (Laughter) Now, I even don’t know what to say because I might be held in contempt of court. So, I am not sure of what to say and would, therefore, want him to re-explain what exactly happened. 

I also want to understand whether these are the Justices that we approved here. Now we are before them, how is it going to work out? I need to understand the law, Mr Speaker. I need other colleagues; unfortunately we have very few lawyers in the House, but I would want to understand what is it really that has happened?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity to enable me seek this clarification. I must declare that I am totally confused and lost for words. I don’t even know whether what I am going to say will make me even - but I thought that tomorrow morning or the next day, there will be some information about this case in the media, isn’t it? So, I was wondering if it will be subjudice if there is anybody in this House right now who has a record of what transpired in court to simply say, “When they said this, the Attorney-General said that.” If there is anybody with that record, let me just hear what the Attorney-General said in court. I think that is not subjudice because it will be in The New Vision, The Monitor and The Observer; it will be in the papers tomorrow and then I will probably understand what we are discussing. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, this is your debate. You are the one on the Floor. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Katuntu. I will just give information without going into the merits of the case so that we don’t touch the sub-judicial part of it. Honourable members, you recall that after we passed the resolutions on the 10th and 11th of November, a voter from Kanungu called Severino Twinobusingye from Kinkiizi West Constituency petitioned the Constitutional Court and his issue was that Parliament acted in error; it had no legal authority to pass the resolution and he sued the Attorney-General. 

The Attorney-General, thereafter wrote to the Speaker of Parliament asking for instructions, which instructions were given. When our lawyers sat with the office of the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General was actually conceding to the prayers of the petitioners. Actually, in the affidavits which he swore and submitted to the Constitutional Court, he conceded to the prayers of the petitioner and then our lawyers were not satisfied because the question was how the Attorney-General can represent the interests of Parliament. 

This matter, like the Rt Hon. Speaker has said, was brought to the attention of the Commission. We did discuss and requested our team	to file an application to the Constitutional Court asking to join the Attorney-General to respond together to this petition. When the court sat on the first day, that is when the temporary injunction which the honourable Speaker has read was given. 

This morning the honourable court sat to listen to the application by the Parliamentary Commission and a number of us, like hon. Kyamadidi said, were there -(Interjection)- I am giving you the chronology of events and how they have unfolded. So, this morning our team, which is a very competent team because according to the law, the Legal Department of Parliament is a chamber in itself; it can represent the Parliamentary Commission. And the Commission is a body corporate; it can sue and be sued. 

So, they made their argument in court, which of course was opposed by the lawyers for the petitioner citing different sections. But also, the Attorney-General opposed the application by the Parliamentary Commission. I will not go into who said what, but generally, the Attorney-General opposed the application and also the lawyers and the argument of Parliament was that if our lawyer cannot represent our interests and he seems to have colluded with our clients, how can he then represent our interests in court. The judges listened and adjourned the court. They will give a ruling on notice. That is where we are.  

But our team as a commission is very competent and I think that is why hon. Kyamadidi who was present in court was sort of like embarrassed to see that our own lawyer is not with us. He is actually now pleading for the petitioner against the interests of Parliament.  So, really, that is where we are; that is the information I wanted to provide to you. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, please conclude on this matter and we leave it.    

MR KATUNTU:  Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, you can sort of see the position Parliament is in now. But the behaviour of the Attorney-General runs one major risk; to cause a rift between Parliament and the Executive. The actions of the Learned Attorney-General are very disastrous to that relationship and the Leader of Government Business should note this because if the Learned Attorney-General goes to deliberately argue or sponsor a case against Parliament, tell me Rt Hon. Speaker,  how shall we ever respect the Attorney-General when he comes here?  How? 

You see, that is the biggest risk of this whole deliberate action by the Learned Attorney-General. So, my view is that we need to handle this matter quite seriously and firmly and maybe not wholly on the floor of this House, but this is a matter that can even attract disciplinary proceedings against the Attorney-General -(Applause)- because according to our professional ethics, you cannot participate in a case where you have an interest. The Attorney-General has an interest in this matter and he has put it on the Floor. How then can he go ahead and have his chambers participate in the very case? 

So, really, Rt Hon. Speaker, I don’t know how you intend to handle this, but if you can handle it, then I think this House might take a decision one way or the other against the Learned Peter Nyombi. Thank you.

LT GEN (RTD) ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to refer to rule 60 of our Rules of Procedure. With your permission I would like to read, “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may in the opinion of the Speaker prejudice the interests of any party to the action.” I would like you to consider this matter in this regard and I have nothing better to add other than saying that this matter is sub judice; we should close it and give chance to the Constitutional Court to take its course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed this because I am sufficiently exposed to the provisions of the rule cited by the Leader of Government Business. We raised this as -hon. Abdu Katuntu says, this is a matter of clients reflecting on the progress of their case -(Applause)- but at the same time, the information so far received is sufficient. The client has been briefed; it is not in any situation and in any condition to make a decision on this matter. There is no Motion that requires a vote so this matter will remain until we get the ruling of the Constitutional Court, but that is the status quo.

Honourable member, I am not going to allow debate on this matter anymore. Parliament has been sufficiently briefed of the implications and everything that is going on. So, let us leave it like this.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to a half past seven; are we able to do 15 minutes? Can we just allow the honourable member present the report in 15 minutes? It is too much.

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, this House -

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the point I wanted to raise before you decide that we should move the way we moved. I was just rising to really register my disappointment at the way this Parliament moves on matters of the economy. 

For the times that I have been here, every time we have the issue of discussing the state of the economy, it is either the last agenda or the House is empty and yet this is a matter which is really the blood life of the country. That is why we are here. So, it is extremely important for that agenda to come even immediately after communication from the chair so that it attracts the justice that the subject matter on cotton attracted.

I think we will be more serious when we sit as a full house and discuss the status of the economy and matters of economics of this country on a very serious note. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we come back tomorrow and we discuss this matter as item No.3. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it the proposition of the honourable members that we start in the morning tomorrow.

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am advised that committees already have schedules to sit tomorrow morning. Let us just start tomorrow; not 2.30 p.m.

2 O’clock, I will be here. If I am alone, I will proceed to debate -(Laughter)- and let the matters that have been adjourned come straight forward to be handled on the Order Paper. House adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 15 December 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

