Thursday, 14 December 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT) BILL, 1995


MR MUKAMA (Kigulu County, Iganga): Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill of Value Added Tax.  Mr Chairman, this is a Bill, which the Minister has given us in terms of ways of realising great revenue to our national coffers.  The Bill itself is good and I stand to support it.  When we are making these laws, I think we have to make a law, which is easy to administer, which is very good, which will be understood by the populace.  

On this, I find that as I support the Bill, there are some areas, which we need to look at.  And I request the House that we look at certain areas.  First of all, the Bill intends to raise funds, which is a very good thing.  I would like to recommend to the Minister, that as we used VAT to raise funds, he could also look at another area of raising funds.  That area is a way of trapping the refugee dollar.  This is the money, which normally floats from various countries which looks for a safe haven.  And normally, such monies are trapped either by establishing a free port area.  So that these people can come in with their monies and they start to put it there, so that it is a bit safe.  So when they bring that refugee dollar, we can be able to tap some of that money and we use it for our development.  

My concern is mainly about the procedure and  administration of the tax.  On Clause 42,’now we give the Commissioner General, a lot of powers by even demanding security.’  But I see that in Clause 41(4);’if somebody has not paid the tax, the Commissioner General can go to court and use the court to get a redress.’  Then after getting a redress, now why do they call for the security at the same time?  So, I felt that, this issue should be looked at and find out whether it is really necessary for the Commissioner General to demand for Security.  

There is another Article 43;’preferential claim to assets.’  Supposing a businessman has been dealing in rice, and he keeps on bringing rice to Kampala and he falls within that bracket.  Now, he has a house in Masaka, why does the Commissioner be given power to have an interest in the Masaka house, when the business itself was the business, which I was carrying on from East to Kampala?  I think that issue should be also looked at.  Otherwise, I find that it has got a problem and the people might not wish to use it.  Because it will be interfering with their human rights to have their own property elsewhere.  It could be left to where the business and aspects related to the business.  

There is another one which I feel we should also re-consider it.  That is article 46. That one says that ‘somebody who has authority of somebody’s property or monies or assets, but from whom the Commissioner or the revenue people want to pay their debt.’ That the Commissioner General can go and ask somebody to pay on behalf of the debtor.  That is how I look at it.  Somebody is having my money, okay! then you go and starting saying please now I am the revenue person, now I know Mukama has got a debt with me, but let me ask hon. Kisamba Mugerwa to pay on his behalf.  I think that is going too far.  So, we should look at that aspect as well.  And then, in this same Bill, when you look at Article 47, when we put a receiver in this, it means these people will be interested all the time to see that they have to withheld these goods.  Because somebody has failed to pay in time, the debts of the Revenue Authority.  

So, I do not see why in this Bill we should put there a receiver to give him an office.  You know when you are in the office, you have also to create work for yourself.  So, if the receiver finds himself that he is seated there redundant, he will be prompting the Commissioner General to say, who is having the debt with you?  So that I can go and detach them and probably later on auction.  So, this issue should also be looked at.  

Apart from those, I feel that otherwise, the Bill itself is good.  We have to pay VAT.  It is done everywhere in the world; CTL everywhere in the world.  But how we are going to administer it is the issue that we have to properly cater for.  I thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I support the Bill.

MR IMAGA ARUNA (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  My supporting of this Bill is purely on the point that, sometimes we learn it through practice.  That is why I support this Bill.  According to some points raised by other Members, I was made to understand that Sales Tax is an expense.  But to my own understanding, Sales Tax is not an expense. Whether it is charged on manufacturer or a wholesaler or retailer.  These are just collecting agents.  As we have known, these are just collecting agents.  As we have known, Value Added Tax will be purely on the consumer.  So, my fear is that, if the Value Added Tax is introduced, it means that the Uganda Revenue Authority will be collecting revenue at different stages.  On that process, it will have to incur a lot of expenses.  It will have to put a lot of machinery in place.  In other words, we are making tax collection more expensive than it used to be.  For example, Sales Tax used to be collected directly from the manufacturer.  If you take for example BAT.  How much does it cost for Uganda Revenue Authority to collect that 6 billion from BAT?  

Now, if you are introducing VAT, according to the remarks made, it is assumed that you will be collecting the tax three times.  Because it has been said here that, by introducing VAT, the tax from sales tax and business levy will increase three times.  It really defeats my understanding.  For example I give BAT as example.  Which area does the Minister for Finance think BAT would have collected more than 60?  But because VAT was not there, then it is collected 60.  And as VAT has been introduced, the tax collected will increase.  Supposing the quality of production is the same?   Because to my understanding, there are other commodities which pass through so many stages and VAT will have to collect tax through all these stages.  

Now, will this not affect the prices?  That is my question.  By introducing the VAT, my fear is that we are going to increase prices which will affect the consumer.  On the long run, it will affect the industry.  Because if the goods become expensive at the last stage, then it will hit the whole line backwards.  For example, take an industry like a Shoe Industry.  A Shoe Industry involves so many enterprises.  It brings in the cattle farmer, it brings in the cattle trader, it brings in leather tanner, it brings in shoe maker, it brings in a retailer.  Now, at what stage will you leave the tax of VAT?  If you tax all these stages, I am sure the price of shoes will be very expensive and as a result, it will affect the shoe industry, it will affect the leather industry, it will even affect the supply of animals.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the concern is illustrating and best maybe illustrated through another example.  That is the Match Industry.  If you take an imported motor or brand of matches, the importer will charge his own VAT.  Then the buyer from Kampala normally a wholesaler will charge VAT.  Then a wholesaler from Arua will come and buy from this Kampala and his charged VAT.  And then from there, the wholesalers from Arua when they are distributing to the distributional points, VAT will be charged at every stage; to the extent that when the final consumer gets one box of matches, it is likely to cost him a great deal of money.  So, I think the point he is illustrating is an irregularity, which should be ironed out.

MR IMAGA HARUNA:  Mr Chairman, in brief, the introduction of VAT is really making the Uganda Revenue Authority to keep itself very busy by just collecting very little.  And the average collection per shilling spent will definitely be below.  Let me give you an example.  I was reading a book which says that, a country spent about 2 billion dollars to collect a tax, and the average was a half cent per dollar collected.  So, what is our average expenditure per shilling we spend in collecting revenue?  If we do not look at that we shall be spending a lot of money when we shall collect little.  It will be just like a chicken, which lays eggs and shallows.  So, this will not give any change in our tax collection.

Finally, this law is very stretching and it appears a lot of time will be spent in implementing this law.  By doing so, a lot of people will be internalised.  And at the end of the day, you will find that you are collecting more money from consumers than from the VAT itself.  So, this will mean that, this type of tax is very suppressive.  So, my request as I said before is, when we go along on, let us try to examine; where we find there is a problem my request the Minister is to adjust accordingly.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the hon. Minister to reply.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I will like to begin by thanking all the hon. Members who have contributed on this Bill and more so, those who have supported this Bill.  In winding up this debate, I will like to reply to the many good points raised by hon. Members  about VAT and some other tax issues.  Firstly, I want to emphasize again that in July next year, VAT will replace two existing taxes, if this Bill is passed.  Namely; Sales Tax and Commercial Transactions Levy, which is CTL.  No other taxes will be affected then, and therefore other taxes like Import Duty and Excise Taxes will continue to apply as before.  

Mr Chairman, in case of the debate, it seemed as if when we introduced the VAT system, we shall do away with other taxes.  I remember in an intervention which I made in attempt to show how to compute, I made it clearly that if one had imported VATable inputs, VAT will be charged on top of the import duty.  So, what we are trying to do in this one is just to replace Sales Tax and CTL.

Secondly, we should note that, there is a multiplicity of taxes.  What we call a box of taxes; we are only removing two. The rest which we have in mind will definitely remain as they have been charged.  I want also to stress that, with the enactment of this VAT Bill, we must proceed more urgently with information and publicity for the change over to VAT.  The success of our VAT depends very much on the quality of our preparation work and this has been emphasized throughout this debate.  The main target group for our publicity work is the business community especially those who will be required to register for VAT purposes and who therefore, will become collectors of the taxes.  It is important that, business people are fully conversant with their rights and obligations under this new law.  The information drive over the next six months will now become more focused and will address the actual provisions of the new law.  I wish to add on that, we have been active on tax education since March this year and introducing this Bill now is increasing the publicity.  Because now, it has become a discussion everywhere.  While contributing, some Members seem to indicate as if they have not been to their respective areas at all.  

I want to promise that now in this Christmas recess which we are about to go to and thereafter, would a Member organise any group of people, we shall be ready for them.  Otherwise, since March this year, we have conducted several seminars in different parts of the country.  Like in this area, we have been to Bwaise Community, Nsambya Business Community, we have also tackled accountants as a group, we have been to Bwoyogerere Business Community, Nakulyabye Business Community; in Jinja, in Mityana, Mubende, Mukono, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Bushenyi, Kasese.  We have been to Iganga, Mbale, Malaba, Busia, Soroti, Tororo and we have even tackled specific industries like Mukwana Industries, Seminars for Management of Uganda Revenue Authority themselves, Lira, Apac; we have even been to Entebbe.  Seminars for business bidders, Seminars for Kikuubo Businessmen which are really target area and really we have been to every district except we have not entered Karamoja Region as an area. 

HON. MEMBERS: Why?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Now, arrangements are already under way for Moroto and Kotido.  We have also handled workshops for specific people like those engaged in cement and hardware, National Farmers Association, Seminars for manufacturers of soft drinks and their agents.  Seminars for Uganda Investment Authority, Seminars for National Water and Sewerage Corporation; all these in one way or another are affected.  

My experience from the VAT sensitization and from Entandikwa is that, until something becomes a reality, people do not take it serious.  When I start in November last year to sensitize on Entandikwa, people did not take it serious until this started.  Even up to now, one can ask, how do I apply?  Simply because he has heard, the money has arrived in the district.  And I would like to assure the hon. Member before giving the information that now the government has realised 600 million to cover Mbarara District, Pallisa District, Apac District and Rukungiri District.  The only four districts, which have been remaining from the first round. I will take the information.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have always been very happy in knowing that, the hon. Minister can always read my mind almost to a point.  What he did not read was, I wanted to find out whether now that in this Financial Year they are realising the money of the last Financial Year for Mbarara and other districts who did not benefit in the same Financial Year and whether we are now going to get two Entandikwa in the same Financial Year.  This is what I wanted to be assured of.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I will like to inform the hon. Member and the House as His Excellency the President has repeatedly said so in different forums Entandikwa is a continuous process.  It is a revolving fund.  And you know very well hon. Members that the success we have made in the economy has been because we are managing physical and monetary policies.  We are dealing with a cash budget.  I want to assure hon. Members that as we go on and according to the performance of the first round, we are going to continue the second round the next calendar year, which is part of this Financial Year.  Because I could not start releasing funds for districts which received, when I still had those who did not receieve.  So, logically the priority was given to those districts which we had not met their target for that Financial Year.  It is true the 6 billion for this Financial Year stands depending on the cash flow as will be available.  

Some Members who contributed for various very good reasons expressed something about refund system.  Many business enterprises look forward to VAT, because of the fact that it provides for credits of refund of VAT paid on inputs.  For our exporters in particular, it offers substantial benefit because it will allow a refund of VAT on all inputs.  Our non-traditional export sector is still small, but is growing slowly.  We must encourage these exports and our tax system must not create any impediment to this growth.  What is crucial under VAT is that, the VAT refund mechanism must work effectively from the very beginning.  I know many investors especially exporters will doubt our ability to deliver an effective refund system.  But I want to assure the House that this is being given the very high priority in our VAT preparations.  

I wish to emphasize this point that, the whole stretcher of the VAT system will depend on the refund mechanism.  The failure of the refund mechanism, people will loose confidence in the system.  But it is also important to realise; there is an impression which had been created in this House that we are going to be refunding funds - the Uganda Revenue Authority that the government will be writing a cheque for every businessman who is VATable.  No! there are only about three cases where a refund comes in.  

The first one is in case where the item is zero-rated.  That is, it is not VATable.  Those are in Schedule 3.  Those which are zero-rated, but when you are manufacturing it, you get inputs which are vatable where you have paid your tax.  You keep your receipt and when you come for the refund so that we refund you that money to fulfill that, that goods is zero-rated.  And that will depend that you have bought your inputs from a VATable dealer.  Because if you buy them from a non-VATable dealer, it will not be able to quantify what was the tax element. That is the first incidence. 

A second incidence is in case of loss.  Where a VATable registered person on VATable goods has through different reasons, has lost.  Because the VAT tax system as I explained earlier on has an input side; that is the tax you are incurring and output tax, that is what you are charging from the one buying from you.  Now, in this case, what you are charging from somebody to buy from you, like a manufacturer selling to a wholesaler, could be less than what was an input in manufacturing those goods.  In this case, he cannot deduct the money from what he had charged.  Therefore, he will come to Uganda Revenue Authority to get a refund.  But those cases cannot be perpetually on that you will work at loss every time.  And even so, that will be subject to investigation.  But another area where maybe, is serious, is where when we are beginning.  That when we have imported raw materials which are VATable and therefore, you pay in advance and therefore that money is tied up depending how soon you are going to make a turn over.  

MR SSERUNJOJI: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for the House to deliberate on such a very important Motion, when we do not realise a quorum?  Is it in order, Mr Chairman?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  As I was explaining, Mr Chairman, that it is only such cases where either funds will be fully tied up, depending on the out turn, or where they will need a refund.  Otherwise, do not expect that we are going to create machinery where every month the Uganda Revenue Authority will be preparing a cheque in lieu.  You become a tax collector in the sense that, what you charge is more than what you put in and therefore, you deduct it on the base and you only pay the net to Uganda, Revenue Authority.  And in final analysis, the consumer bears the burden and the funds which is charged to the last consumer is equivalent to those funds which have been paid to the Uganda Revenue Authority at different levels, that is of a manufacturer, wholesaler and a retailer.  

During the debate, some Members mentioned the registration threshold of 20 million, which is specific in Section 8(2) of this Bill.  This is one of the issues I am keeping under review.  It may be better to start our VAT system with a higher threshold and later we review the situation when our VAT arrangements are safely in place and working well. We could reduce the threshold to bring the smaller enterprises into the system eventually when the system has been fully internalised.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we are deliberating on a very important law and technical.  I think it will be wrong for us to proceed without a quorum.  I think our Rules are very clear.  As I look round, we are less than 70; we should be 90.  Mr Chairman, we do not have a quorum.  Is it in order for us to proceed without a quorum?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is out of order to proceed without a quorum.  We adjourn for 15 minutes.

(Council adjourned for 15 minutes due to lack of a quorum.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, briefly I think let me continue by saying that, another issue which I would like to touch which was raised by Members, concerned the sections of the Bill, which specify penalties for offences and the VAT law.  I feel that the penalties are not unrealistic and they are scaled according to seriousness of the offence involved.  

Mr Chairman, the penalties are not different from what is in the Income Tax Decree and Customs and Excise Act.  However, they are just transferred and we are working within the same circles except that, what is important in these penalties must act as an effective deterrent.  So they must be a bit high.  Non-compliance under revenue laws, must be treated much more seriously than under other laws.  I think most Members will agree that, we have a difficult history with non-compliance in revenue areas and we have a long way to go yet to achieve a reasonable physical position.  And in most cases, this is focusing just a few section of the population who really do not go with tax compliance.  

The operation of the Anti-smuggling Unit was another issue which was raised by many Members.  It has also been mentioned in the debate.  Members may recall that this unit was established some years ago as a crisis measure in response to a public out cry about smuggling.  The level of smuggling was so bad that legitimate trading was being undermined and the revenue consequences were very serious.  As a result, the Anti-smuggling Unit had to act strongly to counteract the problem.  I believe this has produced very positive results.  

Mr Chairman, for tax administrative purposes, it is not appropriate that the army should have such a significant role in counteract and smuggling.  Now that, the scale of the problem has been brought under control, we can now think of better long term solutions.  In this regard I can announce here that Uganda Revenue Authority is working on the creation of a Civilian Preventive Service to replace the Anti Smuggling Unit.  Hon. Members can expect to see Uganda Revenue Authority advertisement soon, which would recruit for this New Smuggling Control Service.  Finally, serious concern has been expressed in the debate about long delay for Uganda Revenue Authority to clear goods.  I know these are quite bad in Nakawa, at Entebbe Airport and in Kampala warehouse.  Action is being taken to improve this situation.  Extra staff are being recruited by Uganda Revenue Authority to handle the increased work load.  A new computerised system called ASYCUDA, is being put in place soon to expedite documentation process at Malaba. New facilities are going to be constructed and work should start on this in early 1996.  This will allow clearing of goods directly as they arrive; and as a result there will be less congestion at Nakawa.  The monopolies of handling and clearing at both Nakawa and Entebbe are being terminated and I must also point out that the contract of Expatriate Advisor in Customs which has been much criticised in this House is ending later this month, and will not be renewed(Applause). Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled Value Added Tax Bill, 1995 be Read the Second time.  Mr Chairman, with these few words, I beg to move. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 1 do stand part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 2 page 7; where there is a definition of Import Tax, I beg to move that we insert between the words goods and buy, appearing in the second line of the definition, the word ‘or services’.  Mr Chairman, this was an omission; goods or services.  And page 8 again on Clause 2; definition of taxable transaction.  I beg to move that we insert between the word goods and thus appearing in the second line of the definition, the word or services.  So, in most cases, we are just adding on the word ‘or services’.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR YEKO: Under Clause 2, Mr Chairman, when you read through the Bill, you find that in Clause 25(5), Clause 29(15) and the others which I have mentioned here, are still talking of interpretations. So, I am proposing that, these interpretations which are scattered throughout the whole Bill, all be brought under Clause 2 and this is in conformity with all the other laws we have been making.  The interpretation part of it is always under one clause, so I am just re-arranging the Clauses.  I beg to move.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I am sorry; I have not seen his amendment to know exactly what he is saying.  I do not have it.  Interpretation 25.  What are the reasons? Interpretation in the many laws this House has passed have always been in the Clause and not scattered through the Bill; or if it is interpretation throughout, it is the same. I think I better explain.  Many will find that, the interpretations in this Bill may have a wider scope than in the normal circumstances.  So, I would have accepted it is not a substantive matter, but for interpretation purposes, it is put there for emphasis, I may need it there for each section for VAT interpretation.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the amendment being proposed by hon. Yeko.  This is because one thing is clear. We are not making several laws within one law such that, it would call for separation of interpretations here and there.  Whatever interpretation is being made here, it is being made to facilitate, to make easy the understanding of the Bill before us. So, I see no problem with the hon. Minister, depending that they be scaled all through as if they are passed by different parts of the law.  So, I think this is clear.  I beg to support.

MR KIGYAJI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister that we are passing a very important law in this country and apparently he has just received some of these amendments.  I would suggest that you give the Minister time to harmonise these amendments.  Because we are going to rush it through; some of the amendments will be passed without his knowing, and we find a problem.  I do not see why we do not adjourn up to Tuesday, so that the Minister can harmonise all these amendments and we have the work done properly, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I would agree with hon. Kigyaji, this is very technical, we have really to take a lot of care.  But with regard to the proposal by hon. Yeko, this particular amendment of his was questioned in our Committee, why there were various definitions throughout the Statute.  The explanation which we were given by the gentleman representing the Legal Council was that, where you find those definitions in various Clauses; it is because that is where they only occur. And therefore, it is neater in terms of constructing the law to leave it where they are because they only occur in those places where they are.  Therefore, with this advise I think, it is not necessary to adopt the proposal by hon. Yeko.  I think it is better to take the technical advice by the lawyers and leave those definitions where they are. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much.  I want to support hon. Mwandha on this.  A clarification on this matter for instance is given on Clause 25, which is the definition of tax fraction and this tax fraction refers the formula that is specifically given in this Clause.  It does not mean anything, it does not apply anywhere.  It can only apply in respect of this formula.  However, this formula does not have to be in there.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 2, be amended as proposed by hon. Dr Yeko.

(Question put and negatived.)

(Clause 2, as amended.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 2, as amended agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, Clause 6 page 11; I beg to move that we insert the word ‘or’ at the end of paragraph (b).  And in (b), I beg to move that in paragraph (c), substitute for Clause foreign supplier who must register his business in Uganda or appoint an agent to act in all respects as registered person. The Clause, the recipient of the imported services.  Let us replace it in just those few words. ‘The recipient of the imported services’.  It is clearly understood, other than these words which were there before.  I beg to move.

HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the House to continue in Committee Stage when there is no quorum?

HON. MEMBERS: It is not there. You can check it is not there. Count.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there are 135 hon. Members who have registered in the book.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, we have a case where a Member comes in, registers and goes.  What matters is, who are here?  We may have 130 who have registered, but if we do not have a quorum here at Committee Stage and yet this is where we are decided; we need the quorum when we are decided.  It is immaterial who have registered.  It would be proper if we brought our attendance book and marked those who have registered and they have gone.  Yes.  Why not! why do you register and go away.
MRS KALEMA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am also inclined to support hon. Nkalubo Wasswa.  It is really a great shame to this House.  Members come and register and go.  Members come and spend here one minute and go.  Now, as he says, the important thing is for us to have a quorum here.  The quorum is not in the register book.  The quorum is here.  So let the register books come here now and they mark off whoever is here and then we count and tick off all the names of the Members who are here and the Members who are not here; then they will not be here. 

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  While appreciating that, we may not be having a quorum in the House, but we may have other Members who are in the lobby, who maybe around.  Mr Chairman, I wanted then to move that we adjourn for 5 minutes.

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA ( Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered three Clauses of the Bill entitled Value Added Tax Bill, 1995 and passed them with some amendments. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to report that, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill Entitled the Value Added Tax Bill, 1995 and five clauses and could not continue due to lack of quorum.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, with that we have come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 3.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 December 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)


