Tuesday, 14 December 2004

(Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week this House passed a resolution to inquire into the Acholi-Bur incident of the 22 November 2004. So, I would like to give out the terms of reference and to name the committee, which will inquire into that matter on our behalf. So, these are the terms of reference:
 
• To find out whether the meetings organized by the four Members of Parliament were legitimate;
 
• Followed the normal and prudent practice of organizing such public meetings within the area and the relevant authorities were notified of the movements of the Members of Parliament within the area as a measure of security control; 
 
• To find out whether the Members were evasive in their meetings, movements and programmes;
 
• Determine whether the Members’ programme violated the ceasefire arrangement announced on 15 November 2004, and whether their activities undermine the peace process going on within the area; 

• Determine whether the activities of the Members of Parliament included the utterances having elements capable of inciting the population against the Government;  

• To find out whether within their activities, the Members of Parliament, acted or behaved provocatively against the members of the UPDF;
  
• To find out about the conduct of the UPDF towards the meetings, the programmes of the Members of Parliament from the start of their programmes up to Monday, 22 November 2004, including some days following the incident and whether the conduct of the UPDF was normal;

• Determine the truth about the cause of, and the circumstances that led to the disruption of the meetings of the Members of Parliament and the beating of the same Members of Parliament in Acholi-Bur trading centre on November 22nd 2004;

• To determine the persons responsible for the Acholi-Bur incident and their motives, if any;

• Inquire into and determine any other matter that would be related and relevant to the incident of 22nd November, and the authenticity of the contents of the statements made by the four Members of Parliament and that of the Minister of Defence;  

• To make recommendations to the best methods of operations for the area Members of Parliament while consulting within their constituencies, taking into account their security and the peace process taking place in the area.  

The committee shall report to Parliament within 45 days. Honourable members, I know we had discussed 60 days, but we think that this is a matter, which is quite urgent. So, we expect the committee to go to the field for 30 days and write the report within 15 days so that they do not use more than 45 days. But if they do require extra time, they should tell us but we would urge them to do everything within 45 days.  

So, this is the committee: The hon. Kabakumba Masiko, who is the Chairperson and other committee members include Dr Alex Okot, hon. Namabidde Sinabulya, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, hon. Dr Yeko Arapkissa, hon. Nasser Okuti, hon. Johnson Mallinga, hon. Dan Kidega and hon. David Wakikona. So, honourable members, you should start tomorrow morning and please try and report quickly.

The second matter on which I wish to communicate concerns AMANI, the Peace Forum. I am sure honourable members are aware about this organisation in the Great Lakes Region. It is a parliamentary forum working for peace and contributing to peace building and conflict resolution. 

I did receive the Executive of that organization namely, the Chairperson, hon. Wandera; hon. Betty Amongi is the Secretary; hon. Jane Odwong is the Treasurer; hon. Gertrude Kulany is an ex-officio member; and hon. Norbert Mao, who is an ex-officio member. They expressed gratitude to the Office of the Speaker and to you in the House, for standing firmly for peace in Uganda and the entire Great Lakes Region. In particular, they thanked the Executive branch of Government and the Office of the Speaker for supporting the AMANI Forum, and the House for setting up the Committee on Northern Uganda and the enacting the amnesty law.  

The delegation has been quite busy; in the first quarter of the next year they have issued their programme, they will have the Uganda-Kenya inter-parliamentary dialogue on cattle rustling and proliferation of small arms and light weapons.  They will have a consensus, building dialogue on the transition in Uganda to generate harmony among the citizens as we grapple with contentious issues. And most important, there will be an international parliamentarians’ conference to be held in Gulu to express solidarity with the women and children who were born in the brunt of war. So, I believe these are good initiatives and they will continue to get our support as Parliament.

Honourable members, in the past AMANI Uganda has carried out many activities, including spreading out in the Great Lakes Region; and I am delighted to inform you that the Regional Chairperson is hon. Norbert Mao, a Member of this House. AMANI has chapters in Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda and Zambia. They are due to open another branch in the Democratic Republic of Congo and their secretariat is in Nairobi. 

Among the good things that AMANI has done has been training Members of Parliament in peace building skills, they have moved motions on peace and parliamentary democracy; and they have engaged in dialogue, for instance, the Uganda-Rwanda parliamentary dialogue and they have had fact finding missions to Kapchorwa and Northern Uganda.

Now, in recognition of that good by the legislature of Uganda and its field initiatives, the Uganda Chapter was honoured with an award for Best Parliamentary Practice during the AMANI Forum General Assembly held in Arusha, Tanzania on the 3 December 2004.

I would now like to congratulate AMANI Forum for the good work and I would like to invite hon. Martin Wandera, the Chairman of the AMANI Uganda, to lay AMANI’s field report on the Table as well as the award.  

2.32
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the fact finding mission on the conflict in Northern Uganda.  I beg to lay. 

I also beg to lay a report on the fact finding mission on the Sabiny-Pokot conflict in Kapchorwa and West Pokot of Kenya.  Madam Speaker, copies of these reports will be made available to Members through their pigeonholes.  

Finally, I beg to lay the said award on the Table.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just read it out.

MR WANDERA: It is an award for Best Parliamentary Practice and it was awarded to us at the General Assembly of AMANI Forum held in Arusha on the 3rd of this month, and it was in recognition of this Parliament’s contribution to peace in the region.  (Applause).  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Wandera. I congratulate AMANI on behalf of Parliament, and I direct the Sergeant-At-Arms to place this award alongside other items in the Gallery of Honour of this Parliament.  

Next, honourable members, there is announcement for a meeting. Members of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have been invited to a workshop jointly sponsored by the Legislative Support Activity and the National Democratic Institute to take place in Jinja on the 17th and 18th of December this month. Members of Parliament will interact with the participants from Electoral Commission, from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the NEM Group among others, to discuss international electoral standards and how they can be applied in Uganda.  So, Members of that committee you are on notice; check in at Jinja Nile Resort on the 17th for this meeting.  

The other final matter I want to communicate to you, honourable members, and also to consult you on, concerns when to end this particular meeting.  The Business Committee had originally planned that we end on the 23 December 2004, but I have received communication from Members that they are not comfortable with that date. So, I would like to consult you whether you are prepared to sit on Monday afternoon the 20 December 2004, Tuesday morning and afternoon, Wednesday morning and afternoon, so that from Thursday you do not have to come back here. Can I have your views?

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad you have continued with the spirit of democracy to consult your constituents on a matter of the programme; I commend you on that. Actually, we were expressing concern on the legislative programme of our august House. We note with concern that the Business Committee continues to schedule certain items, which in our opinion may not be as urgent as what had been originally envisioned.  

One, Madam Speaker, we had been conditioned to believe that the matter of constitutional review was very urgent, very important, to the extent that even steps were taken to influence our thinking and yet nothing has come to pass. However, before I express concern on the amendments in the Constitution, my most urgent concern is the Bills, which are outstanding and some of them are really important, for example, the Bill on Prisons. This matter has been with this august House for some time and nothing has come here for approval or for amendment or for debate. 

Why am I saying so? Only yesterday, I was visiting a number of prisons in eastern region, only to find that some of them are wholly endowed financially and other resources, others are literally starving their inmates. As an example, Masafu Prison, I found out that 58 of the prisoners had not had a meal for two days. I had to mobilize resources for them to get ten bags of posho and five bags of beans so that they can survive up to Christmas.

The genesis of that concern is the fact that the Bill on the prisons has yet to determine which prisons should be under local government and which prisons should now be under central government.  Unless we determine that, our local district councils do not have the financial resources to manage these prisons. So, this matter needs to come up very quickly.

Two, Madam Speaker, again trying to influence the august House legislative programme I have learnt, and probably I can produce evidence, that one political organization with headquarters on Kyaddondo Road has drafted a legislative programme for Parliament. Now, when we start having political parties drafting a programme for Parliament, and yet we know we are going to have more than four political parties in this august House at an appropriate time, I find it almost offensive. I do not know if this matter has come to your Office, Madam Speaker, that a political organization called NRM/O can sit at their headquarters on Number 10 Kyaddondo Road and determine a programme how Parliament is going to run until we come to the end of the life of this Parliament. This is a serious concern.  

Last but not least, the welfare of our people called the Police force. As I speak now, the Police Act has yet to come up; as I speak now, Madam Speaker, Nsambya barracks have had no water since last night -(Interruption)

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. On a serious note, since last Friday, there has been no water in Nsambya Police Barracks – they call it a “republic” because it is the biggest barracks in East Africa. There is no water. I thought a government institution, or for that matter, a state organ like Police, Prisons, Army, should have a privilege – what we call dedicated piped water.  How can now the Police stay without water for five days?  

This morning I passed there at 10.00 O’clock, still there was no water. I think something should be done. And on top of that, there is also a blackout all the time in this government institution. What are we really after? What are the privileges of a police officer or of the security personnel, especially water? Here in Kampala you do not have pit-latrines, you have these flush toilets. Now, if you go to the barracks this time, I think you will regret why you went there.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I asked you particularly about next week. I appreciate the problem and I hope the Minister for Water will tell us why the Police have no water, and I also appreciate your discomfort with the order in which we arrange business. But I want to know, are you prepared to sit as we have proposed for next week? I really want to know so that that can get out of the way, and I also have to swear in a new Member. So, can you give me your views on next week’s sittings?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, in conclusion to my –(Prof Nsibambi rose_)- but I always give the right of way to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. I yield the Floor to the Rt hon. Prime Minister –(Interjections) – has he finished? So, Madam Speaker, if the Rt hon. Prime Minister was not going to seize the microphone, I can conclude by saying some of us find it very uncomfortable to go beyond the 18th of December. We are entitled and we look forward to preparing some festivity pertaining to Christmas and a New Year. But to push us up to two days before Christmas is very hard. So, please can we finish our business by the 18th of December?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The grapevine had informed us that actually this is the last week of the sitting. So, many of us are expecting you to confirm that we are finishing on Thursday because the grapevine told us that we were finishing on Thursday; and we made plans for Christmas and so on, and I think we are entitled to at least a week to prepare for Christmas.  Therefore, for me I think we should not go beyond the end of the sitting of Thursday.  

But, Madam Speaker, yesterday one of the donors to this Parliament asked me when we would be going for recess, and I told him that I had no idea but I hear it is going to be Thursday. And he said, “Why can you people not have a programme of business of Parliament? If I telephoned any of the parliaments, say in an hour or whatever, they would tell me when a session will end, when the next one will end.  Why can you not have a programme?” I raised this matter in this House, and I told the Rt hon. Prime Minister that even primary schools have programmes.  They know when the first term ends, when the holidays begin, when the second term begins. Why can the Parliament of Uganda not have a programme so that we do not have to waste time and even negotiate and discuss when to go on recess?  

Now, to also respond to one of your communications, the rules are not very clear, but I wondered whether the House would have a say in the terms of reference, which you have read to us concerning the beating up of our colleagues in the North. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful for the communication you have just made concerning when to adjourn. I buy the view of my colleagues that we should not go to next week. But I propose we could just simply wind up on Friday and go on recess. 

But also, Madam Speaker, I think what is important for us to consider is what business we have when we begin the next session because apparently we have too much on our plate to do. But just as hon. Mwandha has put to the House, we do not know when to start when to end, so how do we prioritise this?  Already there is a lot of speculation out there; the public is saying that we, as Parliament, are dragging our feet because we want to create room for a three-year project. And I think it is the duty of this Parliament to come clean on this matter, to create a calendar in which we deliver and work to our best. And once you have done that, whether three-year or not three-year, we will not be accused of dragging our feet. I, therefore, propose that if we have too much to do we could also get to know when we hope to -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, my honourable colleague. We have got a proverb in my culture that, “Even if you are late to your home and you get in early morning and you sleep in the sitting room, you are already late.” The only problem we have is, we need to sit down and calculate how we go about things. That saying of extension or anything, it is a must and I believe I will be tempted to bring it here.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am not yet too sure whether it is a must, but my colleague is entitled to his view. What I want to add though is that since we have much on our plate, could we start next meeting a little earlier than probably you have programmed. In that case, you would have to give us a clue on when we hope to resume, when we hope to come back. Thank you.

2.47
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Awori who was very courteous today and he tends to be courteous to me, I do not know why, and I will reciprocate. But, Madam Speaker, on Wednesdays we always have Cabinet meetings. But for the sake of this Parliament, we are willing not to have a Cabinet meeting next Wednesday so that we can come here and –(Interjections)- not tomorrow; there are people who came late here who are “lugubriousing” me. (Laughter)

So, we are willing actually to comply with your request.  But I would add that, Parliament tends to be unduly ambushed by petitions, even regarding issues which the Executive is dealing with. And if there are delays by a minister, those people should now appeal to me; if I fail to act, that is another matter. 

There is also the issue of being ambushed on matters where people are speculating like, hon. Aggrey Awori, who said that the NRM/O was drawing up a programme for this Parliament. He is trying to steal our secret, but wrongly and I would urge him not to speculate and cause unnecessary anxiety in this very important House.  

May I also point out lastly, Madam Speaker, that we have had a very important function today where we had our plan launched? But Members of Parliament were very few, and many of them came late and we felt very uncomfortable, especially to our financial partners who were dead on time and who have irrigated us. So, I hope that we shall apologize and also keep time effectively; time management. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have heard your views. Tomorrow the Business Committee is going to sit, so we shall be able to give you the final decision in the afternoon session about how we are going to sit. But there is a tendency to blame Parliament for not having a proper time table, but even the few times we have tried to put it - and I do not want to say everything because I will hit the Executive and hit the Parliament. But sometimes the delays come from both sides. But let us just leave it like that for now.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, I hesitated to call the Prime Minister to order, but I would like a clarification because he referred to hon. Aggrey Awori as having “wrongly” stolen their secret. I wonder whether there is a right stealing. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, the Prime Minister is a Professor of Political Science; so sometimes the English Language I am sure bothers him a bit.  (Laughter). Let us administer the oath first; I will call you. Please admit him into the Chamber.  Can I warn the supporters not to make noise?  (Applause)  Order, honourable members!

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Ali Ndawula Sekyanzi

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me on your behalf welcome hon. Sekyanzi to the Parliament of Uganda –(Applause)- and congratulate the people of Bamunanika for electing a young leader –(Applause)- who I think holds a lot of promise.  Unfortunately, you cannot sit where your predecessor used to sit for technical reasons, but I think you will find your feet eventually. So, when you are ready, your colleagues will assist you to choose one standing committee where you will serve and also one sessional committee. Take your time to understand what is going on and decide where you want to serve. But you are very welcome and our offices remain open to you.  Congratulations! (Applause)

MR BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance on a point of procedure of this House, which has raised major concerns even in the public. Before this matter is put to rest, some Members of this House are not at harmony and cannot debate and proceed properly. This matter concerns my honourable colleague, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, who when we were debating the letter of His Excellency the President to the Minister of Lands on the 8th of last week, made very inciting statements. With the protection of the House rules, he was ruled out of order but he did not apologize or withdraw. This act of not withdrawing or apologizing has caused great concern in the public and in the Members of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I would like with your prerogative to request the honourable Member to apologize, and if he is not willing then I would invoke Rule 40 of our Rules of Procedures and request him –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you my honourable colleague for accepting our Rules of Procedure. When we call you to order, you respect and sit. Madam Speaker, this matter received your attention and you made a ruling. Once you have made a ruling, there can be no follow-up. The only person who can re-open the matter is the Speaker; the discretion of the Speaker to follow up the matter in the event the person did not accept your order. So, for my honourable colleague to stand up and more or less imply that the Speaker was not performing her duty by not following up, is he in order, therefore, to follow up a matter on which you had made a ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my view that matter was settled last week. I ruled the honourable member out of order and he abandoned the matter. I do not think we should create emotional fracas here on that matter, I think it was done.

3.02
MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of serious public concern. Over the weekend, a tragedy befell my constituency; three innocent young Ugandans were murdered in cold blood by unknown assailants. This took place at Manyangwa 14 miles along Gayaza-Kalagi road.

These murderers did one cruel and evil act; they cut the throats of these juveniles and later inserted their bodies in water drums and they left off to wilderness. Madam Speaker, as we are approaching Christmas now, crime is on the rise. I would like to urge security organs in Uganda to beef up security and be vigilant because what has happened in Kyaddondo Constituency might happen everywhere.

Madam Speaker, the political leadership in Wakiso District has thrown in a frantic search for these culprits and I would like to assure this House that we shall leave no stone unturned until these culprits are brought to book.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Sitenda-Sebalu for giving me the opportunity to give this information on this Floor. The information I wanted to give is that, there have been a lot of atrocities committed on children. Sometime back, a child who was being carried by another child was stoned by a mad person in Katwe area. Sometime back in the areas of Mukono - the list is endless and on the Floor of this House, I raised a question to the Minister in charge of the children, who has not had the courtesy to respond to that question –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I was here prepared at the beginning of March to answer hon. Margaret Zziwa but unfortunately, she did not even apologise to me, she was not in the House that time. She was informed, the question was on the Order paper, but my friend did not even apologise to me yet I was ready to respond to her. Is she in order to allege that I did not want to respond to her question yet I was ready to respond to her?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see, normally when a Member is not in the House, he or she assigns somebody to ask the question on his or her behalf then you inform the House. Was nobody assigned? I think I will need to check the Hansard and find out whether it was on the Order Paper, and the honourable Member was not here.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There were two other issues; one was to do with nutrition and hon. Elioda Tumwesigye was very interested also in this issue and we continuously followed this issue. Even the issue of the children many of my colleagues, hon. Bwambale Loyce, hon. Balemeezi Lydia to mention a few, were interested in this issue. As our rules demand, when the question has been put, the Member who has asked the question will be served with an answer. I have never been served with an answer, I have not seen this on the Order Paper; I have continuously trailed the Clerk’s Office to find out the fate of these questions, it has never come.

My concern is, and that is why I raised it up, children in this country are becoming very vulnerable and I think something must be done. We need to rise up to protect these children and I think that is why – other than maybe just the explanation, I think the minister needs to pull up his socks.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, it is known all over the country that I, hon. Okot Ogong, am the Minister in charge of the children of Uganda. It is known that last week we were with hon. Speaker of Parliament in Gulu launching a very important project for the children of Uganda. It is true that last week again I was in Kitgum inspecting the camps to see how we intervene in the problems facing our children.

Madam speaker, we have made laws in this country, we have made policies. Right now I am glad to inform Parliament that Cabinet has already approved OVC policy (Orphans and Vulnerable Children policy) and the policy is going to be launched early next year in January. So, is it therefore in order for the honourable Member to state that I should pull up my socks when my socks are already up and going on -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of children is multifaceted; their security I think belongs to the Police and other institutions. But I can confirm that the Minister for Children Affairs has his socks up because I have been working closely with him on some of these things.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: I would like to thank Madam Zziwa for the information. I would like also to end by saying that as the investigations are going on, I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to beef our investigation with sniffer dogs. We would like to sniff these culprits out of their hideouts so that we can set a precedent in our constituency.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to condemn in the strongest terms if possible these barbaric acts. I would like the Parliament to support me in condemning these acts so that they no longer happen in this country. I would like also, if possible, to implore Parliament to stand up and we observe a minute of silence. I thank you.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt Francis Babu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  Honourable members, I have only got a small problem that seems to be going around this town and as we approach this festive season, we are having problems. There are people masquerading in this town with letters of institutions and they are claiming they have been sent by leaders of this Government. I have just managed to nab one and he is at the police station and he was found with different letterheads of different ministries. They write letters to some of these industries telling them that they have been sent by minister so and so or Speaker so and so; and then they claim that we have sent them to solicit some sort of help. 

In this particular case in point, a gentleman was soliciting for boxes of biscuits to take them to needy children, both in the North and in some schools where children do not have food. This gentleman has a complete set of letterheads of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. He typed a very nice letter; my name was at the bottom with a different signature. 

This, I am told, is a common practice now. They are using people’s names including the leaders who are sitting on the front bench here, and some Members of Parliament and I am trying to investigate further how far this has gone because they have gone to contractors who work with Government, they have gone to different people. Eventually my worry is, they might end up in the press saying that ministers or leaders are soliciting for this kind of help from these institutions.

I would like, therefore, to put it on record, Madam Speaker, that the people who are in charge of internal affairs and security should investigate this information. I am willing to give them a contribution of the ones I have arrested. I have so far arrested two, and the other one was from the Ministry of Health. These people are moving in big groups, and I would not be surprised tomorrow if some of the other leaders are also involved in this big problem.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. The information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker, is appealing to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. But from the press we have read that even they have gone as far as releasing prisoners from Luzira; they are forging signatures from the High Court and they are alleging that they are sent from the High Court to release prisoners - more than ten have been released. So, as we appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, they are also falling prey and victims to the same debacle.

CAPT BABU: Madam Speaker, therefore, my prayer is that since the leaders sit in this great august House, they should watch out and we should be very careful that our names -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I stand to seek some clarification from the honourable Minister of State in charge of Housing. The issue he is raising specifically to the Ministry of Internal Affairs is very important, but I know that he himself is a Member of Cabinet and he sits with the Minister of Internal Affairs in Cabinet. Have they, as Cabinet, come up strongly with a deliberate policy to fight this issue coming up in form of fraud? Because it is becoming so big and unless the Government comes out strongly, it is going to cripple all the positive issues that the Government had won. I want to seek clarification from the minister.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I recognize Members’ rights to make comments on matters of importance relating to the business of this House.  But, I am also aware that today we have an Order Paper, and I am concerned that most of the statements being made do not comply to Rule 36(3), because before Members make these statements, they are supposed to notify the Speaker. And earlier on, it had been agreed that we try to minimize discussing the Communication from the Chair as far as possible.  You already observed, Madam Speaker, that we are constrained with time. I, therefore, beg that that should be the last statement and we go to the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was notified about the statement by hon. Sitenda-Sebalu, so I was expecting it; I was not expecting the problem of hon. Badda. Now, Mr Minister, we want to thank you for that information and the warning, but for us I think as Parliament, what we can ask the business people and the industrialists is to crosscheck with us. If you receive a letter purportedly from my office, please make an effort to find out whether it is actually from me, because sometimes I have also received calls to say, “Have you sent so and so here?”  And I have said, “I do not know that person.” So, I think the business community should make an effort to contact us. Our directories I think are public information; it is information, which is available, our telephone numbers are there. So, I would appeal to them to handle it that way –[Hon Members: Some have changed their numbers]- they have changed their numbers? (Laughter). They can contact the Clerk to give them the right numbers.

Now, honourable members, last week we were considering the question of cotton and we had finished the debate, and we were due to deal with the resolutions. Now, I would like us to get cotton out of the way before we go to education because it is a short thing.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  As a representative of the people, if I have something of an emergent nature to deliver -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you see, if you have got an emergency, you are one of those who never come to the Speaker’s Office to consult.

MR LUKYAMUZI: It has to do with procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your advise on a matter of procedure.  Last week my colleague, hon. Omara Atubo, moved a matter of concern related to the shortages in electricity supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, we agreed that the minister in charge of electricity will make a statement on Thursday, what procedure are you looking for? It will come on Thursday.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, related to that on a procedural point –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, anything to do with electricity will come on Thursday; today we are dealing with cotton and dealing with education that is what is on the Order Paper.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL, 2004

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2004” be read for a first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, does it comply with Section 10 of the Budget Act, the financial implications?  Have got a certificate?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I have the certificate. Unfortunately, it is not with me, but I have already –(Interjections)- I have just left it behind. Can I be granted permission to fetch it now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable Minister, the rule and the practice is that, when you bring a Bill for a first reading, you come with the certificate so that they are sent to the committee together.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, if you allow me I will bring it tomorrow, I thought I had it with me.  I am sorry about that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It cannot be read for a first time because it does not have the certificate. Those are the rules of this House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE LIBERALIZATION OF THE COTTON SECTOR IN UGANDA

3.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, this issue of the cotton was raised last Thursday. I am seeing the minister wanting to give a statement. I thought he had finished with the statement, I was supposed to make some comments and then we proceed on pronouncing ourselves on the resolution.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him tell us what it was, I think he said he had some amendments to the resolution and there were others from this side.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before we move into making amendments, there are some clarifications I had wanted to make on the resolutions I had made, and also on the comments the minister made on that day.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES)(Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that last week I had replied to the resolution.  But when the House adjourned, I had promised that I would come back to the House with a pronouncement over the price issue, which was raised during the debate of the motion; and I had also wanted to move certain amendments to his motion.  

I wished to inform you, Madam Speaker and the House, that because the pricing issue involves financial matters, we have had to undertake a lot of consultations, and up to now those consultations are not yet over. I wish to request you, Madam Speaker and the mover of the motion, to allow us more time to complete this consultation so that we can come to the House with a definite statement on the price for cotton for this season. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So, honourable minister, what you are saying is that, save for the question of the price, the resolution can go ahead.

DR BYARUHANGA: Since it is his motion, we wish to move some amendments. But I can still move amendments even when he is on the Floor. I am ready for every other part of the resolution apart from the price.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the minister left last week, he promised that he would deal with the question of price and stop the ginners and exporters from announcing the price; and immediately the minister left, he said he would call and deal with the issue and ensure that they do not announce the price. Unfortunately, the price were announced on television and other media, and it still stands at Shs 300 per kilo. So, can the minister now clarify why we should give him more time on the question of pricing when he could not within this period deal with the ginners and exporters and stop them from making the announcement as he had promised the House?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to seek clarification from the honourable minister. When he requests for some time while consultations are still going on, what does this mean to the cotton farmers who are selling their cotton at Shs 300? Should we also ask them to hold on while consultations are still going on in expectation of a better price out of the consultation with Government? That is the clarification we want because we must send communication to our farmers.

3.25
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to be a Member of Agricultural Sessional Committee. Last weekend, we were in the field in West Nile, and when we reached one of the ginneries in Parombo sub-county in Nebbi District, people were up in arms. The District Police Commander had to deploy policemen to come, not only to safeguard the Members of Parliament, but also the ginners and officials of Cotton Development Authority. 

By the time we arrived there, the minister, hon. Byaruhanga, had been in constant contact with my Chairman of the Committee to the extent that he told us the price had not been announced; and he instructed us that on Monday we should come back to Parliament and have a dialogue in order to agree on the price. And that was the reason we used to cool the already violent group and we assured them that on coming back to Kampala, we would sit with the Executive and Cotton Development Authority and review the price. But to our greatest surprise, on Saturday as we were coming to Masindi District, the radios reported that the indicative price of Shs 300 had already been agreed by Government.  Therefore, we looked deceitful in the face of the peasants because we convinced them that the indicative price had not been given.  

Can the minister explain to this House as to why he told us to go ahead and assure the farmers who were about to set ablaze their cotton already in stores, even ready to destroy the ginnery and they have even abandoned large acreages of cotton un-harvested on the understanding that unless Government positively addresses their concerns of low price as shown by the indicative price, lest they will go ahead, destroy their farms, destroy the ginnery and even they are threatening to beat up the investors. Can the minister tell us as to why they made this unilateral decision without even waiting to hear from the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Thank you.

3.26
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The prices of any commodities are determined by the commodity market.  I was just looking at the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times of Britain, the three monthly prices of lint, that is, for March is about two dollars. We do not consume cotton internally in this country; we sell it outside. Therefore, the commodity prices outside in the world market are what we should be taking into account when we determine the prices of lint cotton in this country. (Applause)

What we are saying is that, we are determining the prices of lint within Uganda, which is not relevant. We are not big consumers of cotton and most of our cotton is not sold here, it is sold in the world market. So, even if we increase the production here and there was excessive cotton, it is the world market, which determines the price. But we have been blinded and our farmers have been cheated, and reasons given are not clear. So, could the honourable Minister explain how the international price of lint is about two dollars and yet here we are paying less than a quarter of a dollar. Can you explain to us that clearly? Thank you very much.

3.27
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I do not think that the minister is taking this matter of cotton seriously. I do not think he even appreciates that the livelihood of many people in this country depend on this crop. Because the Minister in his own words promised this House that nothing was going to happen; and immediately he left this House, he was going to stop the announcement of this price, and we took him by his word. We went away convinced that the minister is going to live up to his promise. Now this afternoon, he comes and fidgets with the papers and says he wants more time to handle this matter.

One, he does not even say how long he wants. He knows that the matter is very serious but he does not state whether he wants one day or one week or one month and he just says, “I need more time.”  

Secondly, he does not even explain why he did not do what he promised this House; a thing, which he should have done in the very first instance, and if there was some other circumstances which made it impossible for him to intervene, to explain to the House and even apologize that he was not able to deliver the promise he had made to the House.  When he says, “I need more time,” he does not explain to the House why he needs more time, time for what?  He knows that the issue of cotton is ongoing; cotton is governed by seasons, how much longer are we going to wait? So, Madam Speaker, for me I am very dissatisfied with the way the minister has conducted this matter, and I wonder what we should do as a House to bring this minister to order.  Thank you.

3.29
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The exploitation of farmers by those who are supposed to protect them is just the beginning. Sometime back, I had a very hot argument with the minister about the price of vanilla.  Madam Speaker, if you could allow Members present here to switch on their phones, just as a special case, go to messages, write “expo vanilla” within seconds they will see the price of vanilla, which is close to Shs 1.0 million, but the farmers are being paid Shs 4000. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shs 1.0 million per kilo?

MR KIKUNGWE: Per kilo –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, we should not argue for the sake of winning an argument; we can even go to the Internet and get the buyers of all these products.

MR SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I want the honourable Member to assist us because vanilla has never been at Shs 1.0 million per kilo. The highest it went was about Shs 180,000 per kilo. Even when it is processed, it does not reach that high. So, can he really tell us what he is talking about?  Otherwise, we are misleading the people in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, is it Shs 1.0 million a kilo, a ton, what is it? I will start growing definitely!

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, it is Shs 1.0 million per kilo. I am talking about the international price, and when I tell you to go to your phones –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, if I can be allowed to explain otherwise I will not have this one settled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, tell us about this Shs 1.0 million.

MR KIKUNGWE: What I am trying to talk about is, when you use your –(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, Parliament last July had an occasion to discuss something about vanilla, and this House was in details given information on vanilla by the hon. Minister of State for Industry.  I also contributed and told this Parliament that the collapse of the prices – I gave the reasons and I do not want to go back to that. We know that the collapse of prices came partly because the industries have gone to do synthetic vanilla, and that is affecting the natural vanilla we are growing. Is it in order for honourable Member of Parliament to mislead this House that the price of vanilla is over Shs 1.0 million a kilo, which is about US$600? Vanilla has never gone to US$600 in the world market. Is he in order to start misleading this House on the fake price he is trying to advance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I may have to ask somebody in my Office to do what the young man said; that we should do something and get the price because I do not know what the price of vanilla is.  But, hon. Kikungwe, can you express it in dollars?

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, what I wanted to tell this House is that this business of exploiting farmers is on the increase, and my explanation was a simple one. It may not even need any one of us to go out to verify. Just switch on your phone, go to messages and write “expo vanilla” send this message to 197, within seconds you will get an answer. What have you got?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Trade and Industry Committee, and some time back, a research was conducted by the secretariat in this House and the information we got - because I want to emphasize that the information hon. Kikungwe is giving is not entirely misplaced, it may be a difference of shillings - because the information we got was that a kilo of vanilla on the world market is about US$400. So, the information he is giving is not entirely misplaced.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you for giving way, hon. Kikungwe. There is a difference between cured vanilla and green beans.  A kilo of green beans abroad costs something like Shs 100,000; a kilo of cured vanilla is from US$400 to US$500. If you  convert maybe you would get Shs 1.0 million, but that is cured vanilla.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to cotton please.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I think the point is now appreciated. Something must be done; these farmers really suffer a lot. When you look at the resolution of these cotton ginners, you really wonder. They are trying to do one single thing of establishing monopolies in this industry; that is all. They have introduced even charging people Shs 50 per kilo as development fund. What are they going to develop, and who is going to take charge of this kind of money? Is the Auditor General going to be responsible for auditing this money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had handled that part of the debate, including all those items, which are being charged. What we want now is to go to the resolution stage, we did the debate last week.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, my issue was, entirely the minister should also come along with the international price. Thank you.

3.39
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Cotton buying started about two months ago and we are in a very critical season, the Christmas season. Farmers are hard pressed as to how they will celebrate Christmas.  Here is the minister now asking for more time so that farmers continue to be cheated, and really they have no way out. I think the minister is not sensitive. 

He reminds me of a story – I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to tell this little story to the House. In 1977, while we were in Nairobi, some friend of mine came to visit us from Uganda. He came with a very sad story; Tumusiime, then the Executive Director of Nytil had been arrested by State Research. Another ADC, Alfred Baine, had also been arrested. Alfred Baine was arrested because they had found coffee beans on his official Land Rover; that was the time of Kase. They arrested Baine, brought him to State Research because they labelled him a coffee smuggler. 

When this friend of mine told us those stories, there was immediate reaction from a friend of mine called Andrew Tendo, he is a prince of Ankole, and he said, “Alfred Baine to be arrested, at least if he had been arrested for stealing enyana ye nte.  What was Baine doing with a miserable crop of the Bairu?” It looks as if Minister Byaruhanga is not doing anything about the miserable crop of the Bairu. Probably he does not understand this miserable crop. Anyway, I was shocked when the NRA/NRM came to power, the first appointees to head the Coffee Marketing Board were Kakwano and Rwakakoko. I do not know what they were doing with the miserable crop of the Bairu!

This matter needs a lot more seriousness from Government than it is getting. This matter is depressing a large portion of the population. I was in my constituency over the weekend and the cry is about cotton. Some farmers have decided to uproot the cotton even with the bales –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the concerns have been noted; they were noted last Thursday let us go to the resolutions. Please wind up on the miserable crop.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, after Christmas we are going into another serious period of school fees, and the farmers being cheated have school-going children who may fail to show up for the first term because of the low prices of cotton. A good number of us in this House must have gone to school on cotton money. If you look back at the days when we were going back to school, you would weep for most of these farmers. I am asking the minister to do so and act in urgency.

3.42
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, when you ask our colleagues, especially the ministers, the strategy on the economic front, the economic policy, they will tell you liberalisation, privatisation. In my view, those are not polices. In the original NRM 10-Point Programme, there is what they call a strategy of the mixed economy. The problem, I have had the occasion to say on the Floor of Parliament, is a clear and elaborate economic policy to ameliorate the conditions of the peasants in this country. Whether they are cattle keepers, whether they are cotton growers that is the fundamental problem.  

I want to ask hon. Byaruhanga Fabius, in a liberalised economy, how do you come in to set prices? Which economics is this? Why are you deceiving the people of this country? So, I want the minister to explain this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think they are asking the minister to explain. I do not know whether they are going to explain for the minister. (Interjections). Honourable members, the questions have been directed to the minister. Let the minister explain what the Members have asked him first then we go to agriculture.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES) (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I wish to first apologize for breaking the promise that was made to this Parliament on Thursday about not announcing price. On Saturday, His Excellency, the President, acting on reports that were reaching him that farmers were being given a very raw deal and even being offered Shs 100 per kilogram for the seed cotton, instructed that the price that could be afforded by the international prices be announced and the so-called indicative price of Shs 300 was announced that Saturday evening.  

According to Section 20 of the regulations made after this Cotton Development Statute: “The organisation may from time to time publish indicative prices in respect of seed cotton” and (2) –(Interjections)- why do you not just give me a moment because I sat here and listened - “Any indicative price of cotton, which may be published by the organisation, shall have no binding effect to either the grower or the buyer, but shall only serve to indicate to both the grower and the buyer the approximate levels at which seed cotton may be sold or bought.”  But that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, wait. Let him give us his position. Honourable members, how can all of you be on the microphones?  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am getting more and more perplexed and frustrated by the minister because –(Interruption)

DR BYARUHANGA: Is he rightly on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the minister made an undertaking to this House and in his words he said, “Immediately this House adjourns, I will go straight and stop the announcement of the prices.”  He did not do that and the President intervenes on a Saturday, that is, after Thursday and Friday.  The President intervenes on a Saturday and gives a directive and there is no evidence that the minister actually advised the President of his undertaking to this House. The minister should have told the President, “Mr President, I have undertaken to the House because this matter has been discussed by Members, there is great concern in the country, give me an opportunity to advise you on an appropriate price.” He did not do this!  Now, honestly, what can we do with the minister, who is not even able to advise his own President?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other thing that happened on the Friday –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members, please.

MS ALASO: While the minister is saying that the indicative prices were announced as per the Act, the other thing that happened in the Friday meeting was a resolution, which continued to entrench the exploitation of the farmers. I will read to you this, Madam Speaker. Part of the resolutions of the Friday meeting of the Uganda Ginners and Exporters Association resolution (3) says: “Members resolved to continue cooperating, holding regular meetings where fears and challenges are allayed in a bid to minimize loss of funds invested.” 

Then resolution (5), “Any ginner caught buying from an area in which he has not invested, and in which he has not received approval and permission to buy, shall have his ginning registration revoked.”  

Resolution (8), “Any ginner, who has not contributed to the budget anywhere, will not be allowed to buy and gin cotton”

Resolution (7), “No mobile buying of cotton will be allowed; all cotton has to be bought through registered stores.”  

Finally, resolution (9), “A contract ginner, who has not contributed to the production budget, will not be allowed to buy and gin cotton.”  Now, Madam Speaker, can the honourable Minister help us to understand how these resolutions are not entrenching the exploitation of the farmers. If he says that the indicative prices are simply indicative, they are not binding, what about these resolutions? How do we create flexibility after they have resolved to move in this way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, from what you have read, I think the minister needs help from this House. Maybe those fellows are out of control; I do not know! So, I think the sooner we  -(Interruption)

DR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to be heard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I am addressing the House. Honourable members, what I am saying is that it seems the minister is being hit from different directions and maybe he has no control over the ginners. So, maybe it is time that the House assisted him through what we are going to resolve so that we help him to look into these matters and give some solutions. I think we should actually help the minister. But you can complete your answer, Minister.

DR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker  -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have referred to these resolutions, but I beg to lay the document on the Table.

DR BYARUHANGA: The resolutions of the ginners association, as a private sector, may have a –(Interjections)- but it is not binding on me as a public servant. Madam Speaker, I wish to explain as follows – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister explain what we told him to do last time.

MRS OGWAL: No, I think the minister has to be called to order for a very important matter; he has made a very important matter. I am ordering him, yes -(Laughter)- with your permission. Madam Speaker, the minister has just told the House that the decision of a private organisation is not binding on us or on anybody. Is the minister aware that all this we are discussing was decided by the ginners association in their private meeting where costing was done, and this was read to us on Thursday? And in that costing, the ginners include all their cost elements including printing, housing, welfare and everything. What was hurting us most is the imposition of levy of Shs 50 per kilo; that is what we are asking. What is it for?  This levy has been paid for the last eight years and yet the minister is saying, “The decision of the ginners is not binding.”  

Secondly, the zoning of marketing. Madam Speaker, we have evidence from ginners themselves condemning the concept of zoning. They are saying zoning is being done to benefit the lead ginners. We have got evidence! So, really is it in order for the honourable minister not to help this House? We expect the Minister for Agriculture to come to us, well informed, knowing very well that the ginners’ association has been making decisions, which have been binding on the farmers, binding on everybody who is a player in that sector. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, a minister should not abdicate his responsibility.

DR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, as I informed this House last week, at the beginning of the last year’s cotton season, the international price was 67 cents per pound in the international market. As the buying went on, the price actually rose and hit 73 cents per pound. But unfortunately, this year as we begin the season, the international price last week was 47 cents per pound. This morning I was informed that because the United States had announced its production, and which seems to be quite big, and unfortunately the United States exports 70 per cent of its lint, this has caused the world price to fall further to 44 cents per pound. It was in light of that price of 47 cents per pound that the CDO, which is chaired by a farmer and has several other members of the board, interacted with the ginners, who are actually the buyers of our cotton, and they got to that price. 

It has been calculated that because of the 70 per cent fall in price and the fall in the dollar value, this should have caused a resultant fall of the price by Shs 400 from last year’s. But using another method of calculating from the costs of the ginners, they arrived at an indicative price of Shs 300. Hon. Mwandha, I know very well that this price of Shs 300 is unfortunate to our farmers; it is also very bad for the future of the cotton industry. And for information of hon. Mwandha, in the area I come from we grow cotton, we are actually the main producers in that belt and the Kazinga channel belt. By the way, the Kazinga channel belt is the main producer of cotton in this country.  Now, in view –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle the minister; let him respond.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: It is in view of our knowledge that the farmer is going to undergo great problems over this unfortunate price that is being offered by the open market. And in view of the fact that we still require the cotton industry to continue and grow that we, now in Government, are holding consultations on finding a way on how Government could cushion up the price. These consultations are not yet over as I said -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker, I represent the people of Tororo County at the border. As we speak now, I have two of my people badly injured by the anti-smuggling unit because they were taking their cotton across to Kenya. Some of them have had their cotton destroyed and damaged because the price of cotton they are paid in Kenya is Uganda Shs 500 and yet Government is entering into Customs Union in January 2005. How is Government ready to harmonize these policies, and what can Government tell me to tell my people who are at the border who have the freedom to trade?  Is the minister ready to compensate those who have been injured, those who have lost their cotton because of inconsistent policy?

MR KITYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the honourable Minister will help him to raise the price of cotton to at least Shs 500. I have it here on record that the ginners have harvested Shs 26.8 billion from farmers in the last six years. This year they want to levy Shs 50 per kilogram for what they call development fund. But if they have the Shs 26.8 billion - I do not know what it is; if it can work as a buffer fund to add on the Shs 300, the farmers will be happy. Now, I want to suggest that let the Shs 50 be put on the price, now we have Shs 350. 

If we went ahead to get another Shs 50 from the sale of seeds - Madam Speaker, in this Uganda we have never seen cotton farmers buying seeds. In fact why the colonialists left us to do only two functions on cotton, growing it and ginning it, was for us to get the seeds after ginnery. Now, the farmers are buying seeds. If you put another Shs 50 of what they are supposed to be buying, because seeds should be given to the farmers free of charge, then you have Shs 400 for the farmers, and let the government find another Shs 100 and the farmers get Shs 500 as a minimum price.  (Applause)

We are in danger. In 2007, the AGOA will stop to allow us to import material from China and Japan to make apparel for AGOA. 2007 is only two years to go. We have not at all made any effort to make sure that we are growing enough cotton, we make it into yarn and we make it into clothes to be able to go to the market of AGOA. In 2007, we shall be divorcing ourselves as a country out of AGOA because of these bad arrangements we have.  

I want to move a motion, Madam Speaker, that in the interest of the ‘white elephant’ our cotton has been the ‘white gold’ since time immemorial and many Ugandans have thrived on cotton. When we give a little price to cotton farmers, we are just telling them to stop growing it. Now, I want to move a motion that the Government does whatever is possible to raise the price of cotton to a minimum price of Shs 500 per kilogram. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, but there is already a motion, it will be amending the other motion.  Now, Minister, can you finally answer and we go to the resolution stage?

DR BYARUHANGA: Hon. Ekanya, since you live near the border, I believe that you know that because Kenya completely liberalized their cotton industry and removed also every form of Government support, cotton growing in Kenya collapsed completely and actually Kenya’s production is less than 20,000 bales. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I think do not get into those arguments, just answer what happened last week. We had agreed, then something happened, which we do not know, then we shall resolve it in the resolution.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the minister is very unfortunate. He has worked throughout the weekend running up and down making consultations, even as late as this morning he was making his consultations. The Prime Minister chaired a full meeting yesterday over the same matter. We had to be recalled from West Nile simply because we were expected for consultation. Now, we have known the minister for making errors and correcting them. 

A few months ago, the minister talked about catching of small fish. The matter was announced and it was corrected, and we knew and we had that trust in him of influencing wrong pronouncements and it would be reversed. I am also confident that it was not the minister himself who came out with this advice for the price to be announced the way it happened; the matter also took him by surprise. So, we would therefore build on his past experience, and I am also aware that he has had to be consulted by the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs to the effect that at least consultations should go on, latest date to inform Parliament should be Thursday this week.  

Now, the minister came up, instead of saying, “We want to give more days and come back to Parliament with a position of Government,” he left the time open, and this really also makes us become a bit uncomfortable, whether or not Government is serious with this consultation. So, we have made proposals to the effect that if Government can listen - we have identified certain areas, which can enable Government to raise the minimum price; and we have also been told by those authorities in cotton industry that for a farmer to break even at the present cost, the minimum price should be Shs 500. When they were sitting as Cotton Development Authority and Uganda Ginners and Exporters Association, they knew that the Shs 300 they were giving the farmer would be cheating the farmers by Shs 200, but they could not raise anything beyond Shs 300.  

So, I think the minister should come clear to do things; one, to tell us whether the Shs 300 still stands and two, whether they are still committed as Government to come up with a final price on Thursday. If these are the positions, we can go ahead and tolerate this promise; but if he is not coming clear, I think Parliament can come up with a position now and present it to Government. I imagine –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I wanted to give is that the matter, which is being handled, is just a calculation of figures of a cost-effective analysis within what can be put in the budget, which we passed here as a strategy intervention of Shs 50 billion. The Government can come strategically like how other countries in the world are doing - they are subsidizing. It is a matter of coming out with variables and the projection of the input of the costs and they come up with the price. But you cannot do it now, not until the producers, the buyers calm down and sit down and come up with one figure, which can raise the price. Apart from that, you cannot solve that without a cost-effective analysis and you come up with a price. So, if the minister is given time, about two days, to consult the technocrats within the ministry, they can come up with the price, which is best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, honourable members, I propose that we move to the resolution, you include those proposals in the resolution and we give it to Government and they come back on Thursday.

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, honourable members, these matters are extremely intricate and you are right in saying that I did chair a meeting because I did capture the mood of Parliament, the concerns of Ugandans.  Consequently, we had to handle intricate matters through meetings. I would advise that we do not pass resolutions because –(Interjections)- please listen. If, for example, you want to increase the price under Article 93, it can only be moved by Government –(Interjections)- the Attorney General is here, but let me proceed. The Attorney General is here, Madam Speaker, can he clarify on that matter before I proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, we have been informed that this House approved the budget, which contained a strategic intervention, so it has been provided for. So, if it has been provided for they are saying, can you apply part of this to this problem? There is also the Stabex fund.  Stabex was established specifically for that; they are saying, Can you use that money? (Applause)

4.13
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to begin by making a point of profound significance that, “United we stand, divided we fall.”  

Madam speaker, the minister and hon. Odit, the Chairperson of the Agriculture Committee, who have been very intensively involved in this matter, have come up with a proposition that consultations are going on. I understand that the committee is due to meet with the President. If they can continue doing this consultation, meet with the President, so that when we stand here we stand together because you know, if Parliament and the Executive take a common position, I think our people, whom we are all talking about, will be served best. If, on the other hand, we take divergent positions, then I am afraid the outcome may not be in the best interest of the farmers.  

So, if the Minister and the Committee are asking for two or three days to consult with the President, to consult with all the relevant people - I understand the legal question was raised and they had not answered it - really, why can we not, in order to achieve maximum effectiveness as representatives of these cotton growers, stand together and work together to solve this problem?  Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would urge that this Parliament, as it has always done, acts in the best interests of the farmers by allowing the Minister and the Committee of Agriculture a little time to consult with all the stakeholders and come back to Parliament so that we move together. Now, I will take the clarification then I will come back to Article 93.

MRS ANGUPALE AANIMU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Honourable Minister, I know you are competent to answer this question because you are the Attorney General. I wanted to know, the Ugandan economy is liberalized, as stated by hon. Guma Gumisiriza, what is the essence of fixing a price in a liberalized economy? What does it pay to us? I wanted to understand and then we give way.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I want to assure the minister that indeed “United we stand, divided we fall” this is very important. But the minister has not helped us to be united because his colleague told the House that he is not bound by the decisions of the ginners association. The decisions of the ginners association are very fundamental, and the minister has not told this House whether he is going to rescind all those decisions. That is point number one.  

But point number two, the minister has not helped us by saying, “Look, because we must be united, we are stopping this Shs 300 until we have agreed on a common position.” So, he wants us to be united, but in the meantime these looters, the ginners, will continue charging our people Shs 300 and they will be driven to further poverty forever. So, the minister has not really helped us.  

Finally, the minister has not helped us because he said, “Give us a little time.” How little is little? Is one day little time? Is one week little time? Do you want one month? So really, Madam Speaker, my proposal is, we go ahead with our motion and then the committee will carry the motion to His Excellency, the President and tell him that this is the motion of the House on this matter of cotton. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In view of the fact that we have been debating these resolutions, these matters of the ginners and cotton from last Thursday up to the early part of this afternoon, and also bearing in mind that a number of amendments have been proposed on the Floor and also looking at the response that the minister has given us, which does not sound convincing unfortunately, I beg to move that you put the question to the motion as proposed by hon. Okupa and amended by the various Members of this House.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Honourable members, you wanted a specific time frame, and I wish to suggest that by Wednesday the minister will have interfaced, and therefore I oppose that motion because by Wednesday the –(Interjections)- not tomorrow, these matters are intricate. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this matter first came last week, I think we all agreed that there was need for intervention and the matter was urgent. Now, part of the matter has flown, the price has been announced. Now, are the farmers going to sell or not going to sell? What is going to happen? That is now really the problem because the farmers are also waiting. Are they going to sell or not to sell? You have heard that there was trouble in Parongo in West Nile. I was informed actually that one of the Members had to fly back because she was under attack from the farmers; the matter is very acute. 

You see, Rt hon. Prime Minister, what the Members are saying is, is there any cushion that can be provided to the farmers? That is what they are saying, and they are suggesting some solutions.  Hon. Kityo has said that they should move certain Shs 50 from somewhere so that they do not pay it to raise it to Shs 350; he has also said another Shs 50 should come from somewhere to raise Shs 400.  Then the Members are saying that we passed a budget here for strategic intervention of Shs 50 billion, can that not bring the Shs 100 to make it Shs 500?  (Applause). Last week, we asked the Minister, where is Stabex fund?  Can the Stabex fund not be used to cushion this farmer for this period? That is all what Members are asking for.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, we are very grateful to you and to the House for your suggestions. But as you know, these matters must be addressed assiduously –(Laughter)- we cannot answer them on the spot because these are intricate matters.  Economics is economics, so we need to consult and stand together because many of these farmers are our brothers and sisters; we are not apart.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a problem in receiving our proposals, because if you are going to consult you go with our proposals and you consult. It is a recommendation.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really do not think that the Executive and Parliament are at a variance with each other; I do not think so, I really do not believe that. The only thing we are asking for is that, you know, when you talk about figures - the Rt hon. Prime Minister had asked me to talk about 93. 93 can only be talked about in broad terms or in specific terms when you actually have figures. 93 is clear that Parliament shall not pass a resolution, whose effect would impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund.” But really, I did not want to say that because I do not know –(Interjection)- when hon. Amongi is speaking, I do not shout at her, please.  

So, when we talk about this fund, the Shs 50 billion, the Executive has talked about this money in respect of intervention in various sectors, including cotton. So, I do not know whether your resolution will have the effect of exceeding the amount earmarked for cotton or not. Therefore, in order for this House and the people of Uganda to handle this thing sensibly, the suggestion is, let us complete the consultations, the Committee of Agriculture itself is going to meet with the President, have –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. Not that this is a stubborn House, but from the past we have realized that Government at times is not committed to its own promises.  Madam Speaker, you remember even what happened with coffee. There was money, which was slashed, 15 per cent from coffee by then the Minister of Finance was hon. Mayanja Nkangi, before hon. Ssendaula came in. We do not know what happened to that money.  Here we are, the whole committee we travelled to West Nile; before we had even come out to sit with the Executive and all the Members concerned, a price was taken. 

Just within about five minutes or so, the minister has said some of the rules are not binding to the ginners. But what is happening, they have levied Shs 50 per kilo, and when you add the six or eight years, the amount of money that has been collected comes to the tune of Shs 26 billion from cotton alone. Where is all that money?  So, these are some of the questions that are making us worried. For us we feel they are buying time, the farmers are selling, some are losing out and we are going on recess; next week is Christmas, what time are they talking about? We are worried about this and the farmers are worried.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the chance. Now I realize, honourable members, that this issue was brought up last Thursday and that was after Cabinet had sat on Wednesday. Tomorrow is Cabinet. I would like to make an appeal, in addition to what my colleagues have said, that you give us a chance, at least tomorrow is Cabinet day, so that Government can sit as a team and address this issue comprehensively. You see, cotton –(Interruption)  

MR AMURIAT: I just wanted to seek clarification.  While we speak here, Madam Speaker, we speak on behalf of our people, on behalf of our farmers; these people, whom we are talking about, who have ventured into growing cotton. My biggest problem is, these are desperate people; they do not have so many sources of income. Some of them have been looking on to this cotton as a source of generating funds for Christmas, the school fees that is soon to come and by the way, in some of these communities Christmas is a serious issue, you might find marriages breaking up because meat has not been bought in the home. I mean, it looks simple, but it can be as complicated as that.  

Now, Government is asking for some more time, they have to sit in Cabinet. You know, we do not know whether it will be resolved in Cabinet. Meanwhile, we the representatives of the people, who should speak for the people, are about to go on recess.  What is going to happen meanwhile? What advice should we give to the farmers? Should they not sell their cotton? By the way, some of them are already disposing off their cotton because they are desperate; they do not understand where else to generate the money from. 

So, my question to Government is, between now and probably Thursday when they will come back here to this House, what advice should we give to the farmer? Should purchasing of cotton stop forthwith? Should the farmers leave their cotton in the fields? I want a real commitment on the part of the Government before this House so that when I go on radio this evening, I am sure about what I shall tell the farmers. By the way, if the front bench is not aware, the farmers out there are angry with Government and some of the things that they are saying we cannot say on the Floor of this House. It might take several years to come -(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Thank you very much, honourable Member, for giving way. I want to give information to honourable members, particularly those who are supporters of the Movement Government. I want to tell you that the opposition has no capacity to unseat this Government, even the rebellion has no capacity, but poverty will greatly affect the success of our Government. Some of us, when we are talking here, we are talking in good spirit so that we eliminate poverty amongst our people. Outside this House there is a lot of poverty. Growing cotton takes seven months; somebody toils for seven months and you give him Shs 300 and you let him continue selling it at Shs 300 and he remains poor, he remains a slave in his country!  

Ladies and Gentlemen, particularly Members of the front bench, take heart and do whatever you can to make sure that we alleviate the poor from the terrible poverty, which is biting them. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, and I want Members to listen carefully, I would like everybody in this House, especially the Executive, to take what is being said here as very serious proposals. I was here last Thursday; the matter of cotton is really burning. If you are going to talk in the Cabinet tomorrow, why do you not take our proposals as some of the solutions? So, allow us to pass a resolution, you go with it and say, “This is the proposal from the House, let us move like this.” The question of cotton is becoming very serious indeed. I think we need to help one another. So, let us give you our proposals and you go tomorrow and then come back.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I do not think that there is disagreement between what the Members are saying and what Government is saying. Many of the people that you see in Government are also affected by the same issue of the price of cotton; the people they represent also grow cotton. What we want is to be given tomorrow to sit as Government and deliberate on this issue, then by Friday we shall make a final position. It does not benefit any of us –(Interjections)- but I have been interrupted several times.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, leave the minister.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Mr Mwandha rose_)- I am protected by the Speaker, honourable Member. This time I want to finish because my point is very short. Honourable Member, can I finish please? I thank you.  

Madam Speaker, we take the views today of what the honourable members have said. We have known the concern, we have learnt even deeper information that we did not have. Tomorrow we sit as Government and give us Friday to give you a solution; and then a motion can be moved by Friday if you are still not satisfied with what Government is saying.  Otherwise, it does not benefit any of us as leaders to always be conflicting even on a matter where we all agree. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising, I just do not understand how Government works because I expect that the Leader of Government Business is the one who gives an authoritative statement. Now the Rt hon. Prime Minister has requested for a week. I just do not understand whether the honourable Minister is overruling her own boss and coming in with a different preposition, totally different from –(Interjections)-­I wonder whether the Prime Minister is really in charge.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, I am in charge. (Laughter). The honourable Minister of State came and consulted me and then I did authorize her because to say that the minister can make a statement on Friday, she was not aware that on Friday we are meeting. You see what I mean?  But the point why I wanted a little more time is that, we would like to meet many people including His Excellency, the President so that by the time we make a statement it is authoritative, you get the point? That was why I was asking for next Wednesday, but the minister can make it on Friday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know when we started this session -(Dr Mallinga rose_)- no, let us put a conclusion to this matter.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we are making all these consultations, we know that arbitrarily, the price of cotton was set on Saturday and we have made the calculations. We know that just the cost of farming and producing one kilo of cotton is Shs 500. Therefore, while we are carrying out these consultations, can the President again go on television and tell the country that the price of cotton now is Shs 500?

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think there is a lot of injustice - should I say, injustice, I do not want to apportion blame so I am searching for an appropriate English word - from the Executive arm of Government because, Madam Speaker, you have really said it all, I would hesitate to repeat what you have said. There are Stabex funds, strategic intervention funds in our budget. Six million dollars was raised by this very Government to this un-performing Bugolobi factory. Hon. Amama Mbabazi, you know that from the Government coffers, six million dollars was raised to this un-performing factory –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the honourable Member to get up and speak on top of his voice on a matter that has already been said several times? Is he raising anything new?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is only an indication of how serious the cotton issue is.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Mary Mugyenyi is sufficiently cushioned and does not appreciate the gravity of this issue and other issues related to the countryside dwellers. These are my statements, I am the one making them and I can even explain and delve into the details, but I do not have the time. So, we know public funds being expended on a number of issues that are of no economic importance to the majority of these Ugandans.  

So, we are saying, although they are quoting this Article 93 of the Constitution, whether it has got financial implications, when Government releases money without consulting Parliament - they are not supposed anyway to consult - what financial implications do you first of all establish? We are talking about the people who are suffering, prices being set up in the face of a liberalized economy and nobody has come out to explain that, why set up prices. So, for me –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Capt. Guma Gumisiriza, for giving way. Ever since Thursday, the issue of cotton pricing has been a political matter. People have looked at the map of Uganda and they have come up to conclude that cotton is only grown in the northern and eastern parts of this country, and in as far as western Uganda is concerned, it is only Kasese.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ibanda North, where hon. Capt. Guma Gumisiriza comes from, is part of the cotton belt. I have got a whole sub-county called Kicuuzi in Ibanda where they grow cotton. Therefore, is the honourable Member right to say that cotton is only grown in the Northern and eastern parts of Uganda? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, cotton is grown in Kasese, Kitagwenda, Ibanda and Kamuli; it is grown in many parts of Uganda.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I have been very specific. When I say “majorly” it does not mean that other parts do not grow it. Having said that, the cry out there from the public is that, if this was something which closely touches milk, succinct and swift action would have been taken. People are wondering as to whether it is a decisive decision by Government to neglect cotton growing, having known that it is majorly grown in the areas that I have mentioned, because you cannot separate politics from the economic well-being of its people. The economic well-being of many people is the vanguard of societal management and, therefore, I think the front bench needs to take this matter as seriously as the public out there puts it, that a very swift and quick action should be taken, otherwise what will happen to the farmers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I moved a motion, and it is the practice in this House and even in our Rules of Procedure, that a motion is put to vote, it is lost or whatever. But it takes precedence and even the way the debate is going now, it looks like we have to refresh the front bench and tell them that even Article 93 is not yet embodied in the amendments that have been made.  Nobody is proposing to get money from somewhere and put here. If the motion was taken on, the only thing that we wanted to amend is to drop this illegal tax, which is being charged the Shs 50, development fee, which the farmers are being charged. That is the only thing, which I think is illegal; even the Act would defend us if we pass this resolution. Madam Speaker, since the motion takes precedence, would we kindly have the question put to the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed that debate because I wanted all of us to move together and to look at the recommendations of this House as input into whatever the Government is going to do.  Really that is all I was saying, that look at it as input into your meetings of tomorrow.  The other problem we have is, of course, we do not know whether we are going to be here next week, the Business Committee will meet, but let hon. Okupa read the resolutions.

4.46
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, before you put the question, there are some clarifications I would have loved to make here before –(Interjections)- honourable members, I did bring this resolution, if some things are not right, I must put them right to enable you appreciate the import of this resolution. I beg you.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, a lot of things have been said here but I had wanted to put some things right. The issue of cotton, as I have heard from the front bench, that it was just brought on Thursday, it is hard for me to take that because I remember in May when we met His Excellency, the President in the International Conference Centre, we did bring this matter to the attention of the President who gave directives to the Prime Minister, whom I know as a capable person, did write to the Minister of Agriculture to act. It was not acted upon, that is what prompted me to bring this matter to this House. I wanted to put that clear to the Members of Parliament such that we are not just deceived that we just brought this issue to the attention of the front bench last week.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, our attention has been mainly focused on the price, which was raised here. But then there is one question, which has not been answered which was one of the main concerns I did raise here; it was the issue of the illegal charge, illegal levy. On top of the sales, which were two per cent, it is at six per cent. I want to quote the Act, Madam Speaker. This Act Section 28(2), I will read then I will pose the question to the minister, he does not have to answer it now: “The Minister, may by Statutory Instrument, vary or rescind that percentage of the sales charged under sub-section 1(a).” That subsection (1) of Section 28 reads: “Sales not exceeding two per cent on the sales value of cotton sold at every ginnery.” What is difficult with stopping an illegality now from the front bench? That is what this resolution is asking, that this excess six per cent should immediately be stopped, it should not be charged on the farmers. The minister has not made any comment on that.  

I would have expected last time, because one of our colleagues here was one of the board members for six years, I would have wanted him to say something about that additional six per cent, but nothing was said about that additional six per cent because it is an illegality. I have not mentioned who that board member is, but if you feel you are one of them it is a fact you did not make any clarification on that.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give is as follows: The CESS, which is being charged to the ginner on lint, is what is used for the operations of CDO. The levy that the honourable Member is referring to is the money, which is used as CDO fund –(Interjections)- let me explain. When the ginners buy cotton, they are buying it as seed cotton; that means they are buying both the seed and the lint. Now, the seed that eventually comes back to farmers for planting is again bought from the ginners and that is the money, which is charged as levy, that the honourable Member is referring to; it is actually seed money.

MRS OGWAL: Point of order. Madam Speaker, the honourable Member has been a board member of CDO, I understand for six years and he is aware, as the minister also confirmed, that the decision of a private ginners association has no effect on the law. The honourable Member is aware that for the last three years ginners have been contributing the seeds for the farmers free of charge; 20 per cent of production from every ginner is being given free to the farmers, and it is the CESS money of two per cent, which is used for chemical dressing and distribution and so forth.  

Now, for this honourable Member to stand in this House and tell these Members that the ginners are charging farmers for the purpose of seeds, when it is a Government policy that farmers get seeds free of charge, when this Parliament is aware that the intervention fund is being given to CDO for the purpose of dressing the seeds and distributing seeds, is he in order? Has he no sympathy on the poor?  Is he in order to tell lies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not very familiar with how this cotton industry operates. However, the matters he is raising and your objections are things, I think our committee is going to look into and come back and report to us and say, “Dr Esele told us a lie or hon. Ogwal told us a lie.” So, let us look at them as matters of investigation for now.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I am also aware that last year CDO, out of this money we are talking about, helped the Ogwal family to plough 100 acres of cotton –(Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, can the honourable Member be serious? Can he produce evidence that CDO ever came to our farm and made contribution for the production that I have been doing on the farm, that was even visited and appreciated by the Committee of Agriculture? Is he in order, when the family is suffering and helping the workers and labouring 24 hours out of our own sweat? Is he in order to say that I benefited from the CDO fund?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, are you in a position to substantiate what you have said?

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, the information is with CDO; the records are there. So, we should appreciate what should be appreciated. As I was saying, the levy goes into the purchase of seeds, into the purchase of the chemical to dress seeds against bacterial blight, which is an endemic disease in Uganda; and it goes to meet the costs of distribution of seeds.

The provision in the Act about helping a minister vary the amount of the levy, actually last year CDO proposed that this should be varied from the current to eight per cent, but it has not been effected. Thank you.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I note with concern the passion with which we are debating this particular matter. We have got two things that I wanted the mover to clarify to me:  We have got a sale price and we have got an indicative price, and an indicative price has never been a sale price. What is in that Act is an indicative price. If the ginners have been going ahead to use that as a buying price, then there is a very big problem in the whole set-up because indicative prices come about as a result of determining an average of the world market prices.  You look at the world market prices, cotton is not sold country to country, cotton is sold on the world market in bond in Stockholm, in New York and in London. So, all those world prices are put together and an average is got. If that average is got then you determine an indicative price, but you could still sell much higher than the indicative price that has been offered.

Madam Speaker, I would want the mover of the motion to clarify, what is the price you are talking about that CDO did announce? We should be careful about this one here ”CDO announced an indicative price.”  So, if the farmers are being taken advantage of, then that borders on the criminal. But then, I want to hasten to add that much as we come with these resolutions to take to Government, we are just two months away from a difficult situation. We are talking about short-term, what about the long-term because we have got very many cotton farmers in this country here. We only consume 10 per cent of what is produced in this country and 90 per cent of the cotton is exported, which is dependent on the world market prices.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform colleagues here that China and Pakistan, the largest producers, are threatening the world because the largest consumer, which is America, is saying no more quotas. What happens to the price finally? It is what I would ask Members, we should sit and think for ourselves -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Member, you were not here last Thursday. Now you are contributing. All these things were said by Members last week and this morning. Let us proceed to the resolution please.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in fact it is not new, but as you have put it –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But do not respond.

MR OKUPA: I just want to clarify. Madam Speaker, what was announced is an indicative price. But the problem you find here, because we are operating in a fully liberalized economy under cotton, what is announced as indicative price has tended to remain as a fixed price; it does not go beyond that because if this zoning had not been there then the price would go up. But because the zoning is there the price remains fixed, it ceases to be an indicative price.

Madam Speaker, allow me now to read these resolutions.  You will amend as I read them. 

Now, therefore, Parliament do resolve that, as a matter of urgency: -

1. The Committee of Agriculture studies the Cotton Development Act, in comparison with other laws regulating cash crops namely coffee and tobacco, for purposes of addressing all the weaknesses referred to herein above as well as all others that are impediments to liberalization of the Cotton Industry, and make recommendations before the commencement of the year 2004/2005 cotton season.  

2. All pricing and taxation arrangements are reviewed with a view to addressing the issue of excessive and prohibitive charges. 

MS AMONGI: I wait for him to read all the amendments or I amend as he reads?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him read his- 

MS AMONGI: Then I bring the amendments?  

MR OKUPA: 3. All Cotton zoning in so far as it affects trading and causes monopoly for purpose of cotton ginning should be reviewed and established before the commencement of the 2004/2005 cotton season.  

4. The Cotton Development Organization presents to Parliament an up-date on the progress of the Cotton Industry. 

5. The Cotton Development Organization accounts for the UShs31,433,191,350 collected in cess and seed cotton levy from farmers since 1998 and refunds the said amount to the farmers for deposit into a Cotton Development Fund to be formed in a like manner as the Tea Development Fund.  

6. The Cotton Development Act should be amended to make provisions for the establishment of a statutory body to cater for the interests of cotton growers, as has been the case for tea growers in the form of Uganda Tea Growers Corporation.

7. The minister responsible for Agriculture presents answers  addressing the concerns raised by Parliament and the cotton farmers, and handles the amendments proposed herein within two months. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we ask hon. Kityo to move his amendment on pricing?  

MR KITYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The amendment on price, we now have a starting point of UShs 300, which has already been announced to cotton buyers and farmers.  I move an amendment that the Development Fund of ginners be scrapped and that UShs 50 be added on the price; and also other unnecessary charges as displayed by the ginners be scrapped and the amount involved still be added on the price.  We should also use the intervention fund to top-up so that the minimum price is UShs 500.  I beg to move.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to move an amendment, first, on (2), to read as follows. “All pricing and taxation arrangements are reviewed with a view to addressing the issue of excessive and prohibitive charges and eliminating the levy of UShs 50, which has been charged on the farmers.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that different from his-

MS AMONGI: Yes, because his was general.  So, that is on (2).  On (3), I want to move the amendment as follows. “All cotton zoning in so far as it affects trading and causes monopoly for purposes of buying cotton, ginning and curtailing new ginners from entering the sector contrary to liberalization policy, should be reviewed and abolished.” 

MS AMONGI: The fourth one to read as follows.” The Committee on Agriculture should investigate the operations of Cotton Development Organization with the view of either restructuring or abolishing it immediately because it is no longer protecting the interests of the farmers.”  I want to leave (5), (6) and (7) and move an amendment on (8) to read. “The minister should issue by Thursday the minimum price for cotton, which should not be below UShs 500 per kilogram.”  I beg to move.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, on resolution (1), “The Committee of Agriculture studies the Cotton Development Act in comparison with other laws regulating cash crops, namely, coffee and tobacco, for purposes of addressing all the weaknesses.” The amendment I would like to move is in regard to the timing. I find 2004/2005 cotton season rather vague.  I would like to move an amendment to the effect that it be done in two-months time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The season has started. So, are two months okay?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with that amendment.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  Now, honourable members, I put the question that the resolution as proposed and as amended by the various members be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the Clerk, can you transcribe this resolution and transmit to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture by 7.30 a.m. in the morning so that they deal with it in Cabinet.  Thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is still business.  Where are you going?  We are still dealing with education. 

Dr MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  This statement is about two matters.  The first one is a capitation grant funding for National Teachers’ Colleges, Primary Teachers’ Colleges, Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutions for this financial year. The second issue is the student riot at Makerere University, which occurred on the 16 November 2004.  So, this statement is divided into part (a) and part (b).  

The objective of part (a) is to appraise Parliament on the difficult financial situation, which National Teachers’ Colleges, Primary Teachers’ Colleges, Business, Technical Vocational Education and Training Institutions are facing with respect to capitation grants in financial year 2004/2005 and on the emerging coping mechanisms.  

Part (b) has the objective of appraising Parliament on the background, the causes, the character and effect of the riot that was staged by some Makerere University students on the 16 November 2004; and, to brief Parliament on the actions so far taken by the Government and Makerere University administration.  

Part (a), the institutions I am referring to have been classified into two categories: Teachers’ Colleges and BTVET institutions.  Teachers’ colleges consist of National Teachers’ Colleges and Primary Teachers’ Colleges while the rest fall under technical education and training institutions. All these institutions are not part of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF)and, therefore, their budgets and releases are not protected; they are subject to cuts without notice.  

The capitation grants for all the institutions are budgeted for under vote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters categorized as Primary Teachers’ Colleges, National Teachers’ Colleges and all BTVET institutions. 

The teachers’ colleges suffered a budget cut of 50 per cent at the time of budgeting for financial year 2004/2005 as a result of overall downward adjustment in vote 013.  The non-wage recurrent item, which is vote 013, attracted other competing demands like Sub-county Bursary Scheme for secondary school students whose budget increases every year to cover the additional two bright but poor students per sub-county and Primary Leaving Examination fees. All these exacerbated the situation.  

The Teachers’ colleges did not received compensatory re-allocations within financial year 2004/2005 because of the adjusted ceiling for the Vote.  

With particular reference to National Teachers’ Colleges, the required capitation grant for them is UShs2, 95,000,000 a year, which is derived from the unit cost of UShs 1,300 per student per day for 270 days for an enrollment of 8,400 students.  The available budget for financial year 2004/2005 is UShs 1.6 billion resulting in a deficit of UShs 1.35 billion. 

This huge budget shortfall was compounded by the fact that the releases were made on a monthly basis.  The ministry did not have enough funds to disburse to National Teachers’ Colleges to enable them to open for the first term on the scheduled date of 18 September 2004.  Opening these institutions without adequate funds would have resulted into very predictable students’ unrest.  Therefore, the ministry postponed the opening of term one of the National Teachers’ Colleges.  

Following the discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: The clarification I would like to get from you, Madam Speaker, we are now handling issues that concern budget.  I cannot see the Minister of Finance, where is he?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a Minister of Finance here.

MR SABIITI: Well, I know him; he is with Micro-Finance.  Has he been delegated this matter because this is very – particularly the one which the honourable minister is handling- there are many issues, which really the relevant minister should be here to answer because I can see if we continue particularly in this area, members may not necessarily have well informed guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are pre-empting the capacity of hon. Agard Didi to answer these questions  I think you should allow him when the time comes to answer, if he fails you say, “I want the other minister.” But for now let us have hon. Agard Didi there listening carefully and the Minister of Education making a statement.

DR. MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  As I was saying, we have discussed with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury agreed to bridge the shortfall relating to National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs). On that basis and using funds, which had been accumulated through the monthly releases, totalling UShs 606,000,000, the NTCs were asked to open on the 13 November 2004.  

I am happy to report that the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury has since committed himself to provide an accelerated release of UShs 0.37 billion to cover the shortfall for term one.  He has also promised to make good the deficit of UShs1.35 billion across financial year 2004/2005 using the means available to him under the law. On this arrangement and assurance, we worked out a revised calendar for the National Teachers’ Colleges and the students will be able to gain the time that they had lost for not opening on time; and the revised calendar is appended as appendix 1. 

With regard to Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs), we require a capitation grant budget of UShs 9.94 billion for an enrolment of 17,485 students of whom 16,239 are pre-service and 1,246 are in-service.  The available provision in this financial year’s budget is UShs 16.5 billion resulting in a shortfall of UShs 3.44 billion.  The Ministry of Education and Sports requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a supplementary budget to fund the gap in order to enable the PTCs operate in term 2starting on 30 January 2005.  This shortfall must be bridged; otherwise the PTCs will be unable to operate for the rest of the year.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, it should be appreciated that the PTCs did not close, but sent the student teachers for child study in fulfilment of the new training requirements for the award of grade III Teacher’s Certificate.  For that reason, the Ministry of Education and Sports required all PTC Principals to send their student teachers to Primary Schools near their homes to carryout child study with effect from the 25 October 2004 to the 3 December 2004. During their child study, student teachers also practice some guidance and counselling skills with the pupils.  The student-teachers have been guided and supported by the head teachers and qualified teachers in those primary schools.  On return, the tutors will mark and assess the work done and give follow-up lectures.  This instruction is in appendix X1(A) attached to this statement.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I need to explain that child study helps the students to understand children’s physical, social, emotional growth better in order to help them learn better.  Guidance and counselling skills, on the other hand, help the student teachers to assist the pupils and the parents to solve pupils’ personal, social and economic problems that may hinder their choice of careers in their learning. 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, now the matter of Business, Technical, Vocation Education and Training Institutions in short (BTVET).  All these BTVET Institutions, Uganda Technical Colleges, Uganda Colleges of Commerce, technical institutes, technical schools, community polytechnics have a total annual budget of UShs 2.8 billion to cover capitation grants.  This budget is adequate for requirements of students under Government funding popularly known as Window 1, and enough to cover Government contribution of UShs 700 per student per day for 270 days. Government funding in those institutions provides full sponsorship ranging from 30 per cent of the Colleges’ approved capacity/potential enrolment for Uganda Colleges of Commerce to 45 per cent for Uganda Technical Colleges.  

The BTVET institutions do not have a budgetary shortfall in that the Ministry of Education and Sports has tried to fit them in the budget by limiting Government sponsorship to less than 50 per cent.  The problems the colleges are facing are due to insufficient release of funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  It should be noted that these institutions hardly attract private-sponsored students, who could provide a fall back position. 

According to appendix 2, the required expenditure for July/October 2004 was UShs 0.96 billion. However, funds released for the same period amounted to only 59 per cent.  With already a constrained budget just enough to cover less than 50 per cent of the enrolment capacities of these institutions coupled with almost non-existent privately sponsored students, the institutions cannot sustain themselves and it is not a surprise that many threaten to close before the end of term one on 3 December; some actually closed down.  It is a fact that virtually all BTVET Institutions have incurred huge debts due to the failure or inability of Government to release funds as budgeted.

Opening of term 11 for BTVET institutions will depend on a commitment by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release all the budgeted funds as is currently the case for other higher institutions of learning and universities.  

Madam speaker, honourable members, we have another category of BTVET institutions and these are the specialized institutions, which are classified into two categories: National Health Service Training Colleges, Programme 10; and Departmental Training Institutions, programme 11.  I attach a full list of these institutions in Appendix 111/list.  

Under programme 10, the National Health Training Colleges are: the Public Health Nurses’ Colleges, Mulago Paramedicals, Nurses and Midwifery Training School, Health Tutors’ College, Butabika School of Psychiatric Clinical Officers and Butabika School of Psychiatric Nursing. 

Departmental Institutions under Programme 11 consist of: Uganda Cooperative Colleges, Agricultural Colleges, Fisheries Training Institute, Vocational Training Institutions, Psychiatric Training Institute, Uganda Wildlife Training Institute, Forestry College, Survey Training School and Metrology School.

Now I proceed to financial year 2004/2005 and the capitation grant budget analysis going with these institutions.  National Health Training Colleges, a total of 1,762 students is registered as enrolment for the National Health Service Training Colleges.  Government is supposed to sponsor 40 per cent of this enrolment except for Health Tutors’ Colleges, which benefit only 30 per cent, translating into a total of 701 students who are fully funded by Government under what I termed Window one.  

The budgetary requirement for window one is UShs 0.9 billion for a year to cover capitation grants.  This contrasts with the current provision of UShs 0.76 billion in this financial year budget for the same purpose, resulting in a shortfall of UShs 0.14 billion.  

For the period July/October 2004, UShs 0.25 billion has been released out of the required expenditure of UShs 0.41 billion for Window one, translating into a deficit of UShs 0.16 billion, or a release performance of 62 per cent out of the total required expenditure.  This has grossly affected the operations of the Heath Training Colleges. The most affected being Butabika School of Psychiatric Nursing where the performance was 27 per cent, Mulago Paramedicals where the release amounted to only 43 per cent and Nurses and Midwifery Training School where the release was only 57 per cent of the total expenditure required.  The applied unit cost is UShs 1,288,223 per student except for the Public Health Nurses, where the unit cost is UShs 2,500,000 per student per year. 

It should also be noted that both the budget and the release are insufficient for the National Health Training Colleges.  For the Departmental Training Institutions, the number of students who are fully sponsored by Government at Window one is 828 out of a total enrolment of 2,427; and the Window one under the Departmental Training Institutions ranged from 30 to 50 per cent.  

The total required cost under Window one with varying unit costs but ranging from UShs 500,000 to UShs 600,530 is UShs 454,700,869 compared to the available budget of UShs 787,000,680.  

On the other hand, the required expenditure for the period July/October 2004 was UShs0.202 billion, while the release for the same period was UShs 0.329 billion. 

The budget for the Departmental Training Institutions is inadequate since they operate within a constrained ceiling covering Window 1 at 30 to 50 per cent of the total enrolment capacity.  At the same time, the releases for the past period July/October 2004 were as per the constrained budget. 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, my ministry has already proposed the following to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

1. That for this financial year 2004/2005, whatever was budgeted to these institutions should be released to them 100 per cent.  This will enable the institutions to operate smoothly for the rest of the financial Year.

2. That with effect from financial year 2005/2006, all these institutions, which I have been outlining above, should be incorporated in the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). In my Ministry’s view, this is where these institutions actually belong; education is critical for poverty alleviation -(Applause)- Education cannot be delivered without the teachers.  The BTVET Institutions to produce critically needed people in technical and specialized fields, technicians, mid-level agricultural and forestry officers, nurses, midwives and other health workers.  All these are essential technical staff, who are central to efforts to alleviate poverty.  I propose that with effect from financial year 2005/06, the funding of these educational institutions be ring-fenced and protected under Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF).  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still considering the matter.

The second part of this statement deals with the students’ riot at Makerere University on 16 November 2004.  The objective of part (b) of this statement is to appraise you, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament of the background, causes, character and effect of a riot that was staged by some Makerere University students on the 16 November 2004; and two, to brief you, Madam Speaker and Parliament, on the actions so far taken by Government and Makerere University administration. 

Background:

Makerere University has a total of 34,351 students of whom 14,139 are female; 9,300 students are Government, the rest are privately sponsored.  5,300 Government sponsored students reside in the Halls of residence on Campus. Most of the privately sponsored students are resident outside the University in hostels like Kikoni, Kavule, and Katanga.  The rest reside with either their relatives or parents.  Lumumba Hall, which is the largest on Campus, and where the riot originated, accommodates 640 students.  

Since the 8 April 2004 when the academic staff went on strike over alleged poor remuneration and were joined by the student community, the university has been peaceful.  Indeed, teaching, learning and all the related university activities had been going on smoothly until the 16 November 2004, when rioting students disrupted lectures and caused mayhem in the neighbourhood of Makerere University.

Causes of the Riot:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, on Friday, 12 November 2004, one Edgar Mukundane, a non-resident second year student attached to Lumumba Hall, who was also Secretary of Campus Affairs, was knocked down by a speeding vehicle, registration No. UG 0003W, along Bombo road near Shell Petrol station in Wandegeya.  This accident occurred at around 12:00 midnight.  Mr Edgar Mukundane was rushed to Mulago Hospital where he was hospitalised and until Sunday, 14 November 2004, when he unfortunately died.  

Upon learning about the death of their colleague, the students of Lumumba Hall lit a fire for vigil.  The body of the late Mukundane was transported and buried at his parents’ home in Ibanda, Mbarara District.  

The University Management transported mourners, embalmed the body, bought a coffin, made a contribution of Ushs150,000, and also met the cost of transporting the body of the deceased to the burial grounds.  

Unfortunately, on Sunday afternoon, 14 November 2004, again another speeding Public Service vehicle, Toyota Hiace, registration No. UAF 964A, knocked down three female students named hereunder: Rose Kawaragi, Norah Namuli and Lubowa Hawa.  The students were rushed and admitted to Mulago Hospital.  The last two have discharged while Rose Kawaragi is still admitted with hip problems.  The two incidents referred to above are feared to have triggered the riot.  

In the morning of Tuesday, 16 November 2004, the students mobilized themselves initially to match to the Office of the Mayor of Kampala City, blaming Kampala City Council for failure to construct humps on Sir Apollo Kaggwa road and Bombo road to control over-speeding.  Later, the students put up barricades along Mary Stuart road, matched to other Halls of residence to mobilize support and disrupted lectures.  

At this time students’ leadership and University Management tried to talk to the students, but they were already rowdy and violent.  The riotous students, spilt into two groups. One of the groups went to Sir Apollo Kaggwa road where they erected road barriers, lit a fire on the road and smashed vehicle windscreens.  They also looted properties from the nearby shops including those in Nakulabye and Kasubi.  Another group went to Bombo road.   

Some students later grabbed two coffins, one from Bombo-Gayaza road and the other from Kikoni.  The University notified the Police, but were engaged in confrontation with the students along Sir Apollo Kaggwa road, Nakulabye, Kasubi View and Bombo road.  The confrontation lasted from 9.00 a.m. up to 8.00 p.m.  The police later recovered the two coffins from Lumumba Hall.

Persons involved in the riot:

The riot was organized and mobilized by residents of Lumumba Hall.  The students in the rest of the halls of residence, except those from Mary Stuart Hall, refused to join them.

A total of 168 students were suspected to have been involved in the riot.  Some were detained at Wandegeya and Central Police Stations.  These students were screened, 118 of them were charged with rioting after making a proclamation contrary to Section 70 of the Penal Code on 17 November 2004.  

They were later released on cash bail of UShs 150,000 and they were required to appear in court on the 8 December 2004.

The particulars from Court records indicate that out of a total 118 suspects arrested for participating in the riot, 23 of the suspects, that is, 27.14 per cent, were not Makerere University students.  This statistic is not, in any way, to imply that Makerere University students had a right to participate in the riot.  This statistic is to underline the fact that a substantial number of persons whose genuine link with Makerere University is not clear actually participated in the riot.  

Nature and effect of the riot:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the riot lasted for most of the day and had the following regrettable consequences:

1. The riot was violent and caused a loss of life;
 
2. Police used rubber and live bullets to disperse the students, causing injury to many people; 

3. Murungi Amina, an adult female from Kikoni appears to have been hit by a flying object and later died in Mulago Hospital;

4. Business in Nakulabye, Kasubi and Sir Apollo Kaggwa road was disrupted;

5. There was looting of properties along Sir Apollo Kaggwa road and Bombo road.  The looting spree was also joined by passers-by and the communities around the university;

6. Three other students and six civilians were injured and admitted to Mulago Hospital;

7. Three Police Officers were also seriously injured;

8. A vehicle, registration No. UAD 767T, Toyota, at the Faculty of Technology and many others had their windscreens smashed;

9. 64 chairs were looted from St. Francis Chapel;
   
10. Passengers were robbed of their properties;

11. Nearby shops were ransacked and telephone booths, especially those near the Main University Library were vandalized and;

12. University operations were significantly disrupted for the day of the riot in the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences, Law, Agriculture, Science, Technology and in the Main Library.

In the morning of 17 November 2004, there was an attempt by the students to re-group and match to Wandegeya Police Station and the Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters, but the Police was able to halt the move.

Observations on the conduct of students:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, there is no evidence that the students had exhausted all peaceful avenues of dealing with their grievances before they rioted.  I cannot comment any more on this matter since there are pending criminal proceedings in a competent court of law.

There is, however, evidence that there was delay in communicating what was happening among students to the University Administration.  For example, the vehicle knocked the late Mukundane on Friday night, the 12 November 2004, and yet the University Administration was informed after he had died on Tuesday, 16 November 2004, the following week.  

Actions already taken:

Some actions have already been taken, Madam Speaker, hon. members:  The drivers of motor vehicles, registration No. UG 0003W and UAF 964A, which were involved in the material accidents, have already been charged with our appropriate criminal offences at Buganda Road Court.

Government is, through my ministry, the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications, and the Ministry of Local Government, expediting the construction of humps on the roads next to Makerere University.

Madam Speaker, Appendix IV to this statement indicates action taken by the Prime Minister on the 22 November 2004, directing the Ministry of Works to spearhead the construction of humps.  The Minister of Works has written to his Permanent Secretary and the Engineer in Chief, instructing them to put up the humps.

Actions to be taken: 

Makerere University Administration has indicated to Government that: It will put emphasis on the students’ Code of Conduct; it will recirculate University regulations, relating to students’ discipline and the students’ grievance procedures.  It is attached to this statement as Appendix 5.

The University will strengthen the students’ counselling programme with particular emphasis on established grievance procedures, peaceful resolution of differences and self-protection.

The University has also indicated that appropriate organs of University will identify University students who participated in the riot and punish them in accordance with University regulations in an effort to stamp out hooliganism.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I thank you for your kind patience.

5.55
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The deceased was from my constituent.  He was coming from Ibanda South, and it is unfortunate that he cannot be here to explain the circumstances under which he died, and it is unfortunate that the deceased cannot be here to explain the circumstances under which he died, and it is also quite unfortunate that his friends and relatives do not have a chance to come here and explain to this august House exactly how this boy died.  It is also quite unfortunate to read in the minister’s statement that the university administration was informed a week after this accident, this is about four days, but here it reads the “following week.”  

Madam Speaker, I have been interacting with these students and they have told me exactly what happened, and when they informed the university administration.  It was actually the morning of 13th of November and the university administration did not even react; they just kept quiet.  After his death, that is when they remembered that actually they would have done something.  But the boy is gone; we cannot reverse the clock.  But when I read such a statement, I doubt whether the Minister of Education did thorough investigation to know exactly how Mukundane died.  

Madam Speaker, Mukundane was a son of a peasant, the people whom we say that they have the power.  I do not think that the university would have released UShs 150,000 if a son of the minister had died.  

MRS BINTU: Thank you very much, honourable member from Ibanda. I would like to inform you that the deceased, as it has been stated, was a non-resident.  I suppose if he was a private student, the tuition fee that he had been paying was UShs 500,000 or 600,000, so actually 150,000/= cannot even pay for a semester.  Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, maybe the honourable member of Parliament, hon. Byabagambi would wish to ask the question, does the university have a policy framework to regulate such happenings when they happen, so that even the question UShs 150,000 may not arise if there is a policy framework, or guideline.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The minister will answer that question, and I want to thank the member for giving the information.  Madam Speaker, when this boy died, it took them two days to get this UShs 150,000.  This is a boy whose father sells matooke and pays school fees. He was coming from the Library going back home to sleep.  Here comes a Government vehicle being driven by a drunkard - he was drunk at midnight - what was the Government vehicle doing at midnight?  We know very well that there is a circular that all Government vehicles are supposed to be packed by six O’clock, and this was a Junior Officer. Anyway, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the university for UShs 150,000. I paid for the transportation of the mourners and they have indicated in the statement that they transported the mourners.  

Madam Speaker, I want also to comment on technical institutions. I do not know why this Government, the Government I love, is acting like a fire brigade.  It is only when the Parliament raises an issue that they start fumbling to work.  We have just been talking about cotton; they are also fumbling to start working. When the issue concerns a certain rich person somewhere the funds are quickly looked for and things are done.  These are the sons and daughters of the peasants down there who are struggling to get education, and the minister is telling us how they are not protected under the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF).  Well, I do not know; he is the Cabinet Minister, a policy maker and then he says it is not protected under the PAF, who is supposed to put it there –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My clarification would have been more pertinent if the Minister of Finance was around in this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is there.

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, now that the Minister of Finance  - I could not recognise him from behind.  One of the things I have observed is that the process of budgeting is progressively losing meaning in Uganda.  One of the comprehensive processes that is undertaken, involving all the stakeholders in this country, is budgeting.  But when it comes to budget execution, the whole process is rendered irrelevant and the Ministry of Finance acts as it wishes.  Honourable minister, do you still think and hope, given what have put in the statement, that is in the 2005/2006 budget, this item will be ring-faced?  Do you still consider budgeting process any relevant issue?  Would it not suffice the Ministry of Finance just to release money as and when it wishes?  I want to seek clarification. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, to conclude, I will talk about student teachers.  The student teachers they sent to schools to study the habits of children became a burden to the head teachers.  The head teachers were feeding them, transporting them and giving them some little money on the side; and these funds are UPE funds, which they were using.  They were sent there purposely to use UPE funds; and the funds, which we budgeted for these students, must have gone somewhere else.  Really, we need to be serious, otherwise even the Government I support I am seeing it losing credulity because of such things, and because of some few people somewhere diverting the money.  We must be very serious –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why are you conversing amongst yourselves? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Now that we are going for multipartism, we must check these things, otherwise we are going to lose credibility.

Madam Speaker, as hon. Dombo said, what is the use of sitting here, spend taxpayers’ money that we are passing a budget, spending all our time in committees going through the policy statements, and when it comes to implementation somebody takes control; he does what he wants -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just on that page 9, under departmental training, which involves institutions like fisheries, psychiatric institutions, meteorological school and cooperatives, Parliament budgeted for UShs 454,000,700,869 billion, but the actual amount of money released was UShs787,000.  So, this is a big mockery because it is almost 2000 per cent cut. Where the minister is expecting UShs four billion, the Ministry of Finance releases UShs 700,000. The minister has just been lamenting this afternoon.  We should really come up strongly to help him do his job.  Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Lastly, Madam Speaker, when I see the proposals of the minister here, as hon. Odonga Otto has said, it is just lamentation.  I think the minister does not have even the capacity to make things work and change.  Really, it is a shame!  I think I should end here, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.08
MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But please be brief - three minutes.

MR KIDEGA: Madam Speaker, I will try to be brief.  I would like to bring the attention of the minister to page 8. He was talking about the institutions that have been greatly affected by the budgetary cut.  Madam Speaker, you remember last week on Thursday we were in Gulu and the Chairman, LC V was addressing us and explaining the need for psychiatric services in that part of the country.  Honourable members, if there has ever been a time when a country needs psychiatric services, it is now.  I would wish the Minister of Education, within the cut that has been levied upon the various institutions; he should try to elevate the situation of Butabika school of psychiatric training.  There are so many people in this country who need psychiatric services and they cannot access them.  We live with some of them, and that is why you see unusual behaviour in the society today.

So, I would like to plead with the minister that these technicians are really needed by the society.  Unfortunately, the clients of these people do not have a spokesperson amongst themselves; those who experience the problem in most cases are not there to speak for the trauma, the problem they are going through.  So, I would like to plead very indepthly that the minister should consider alleviating the situation of Butabika Nurses’ Training School –(Interruption)  

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Dan Kidega.  The information I wanted to give is, after working with the Ministry of Education for the last three months I have discovered that the problem is mainly on the technicians, the so-called technical people who work under the minister.  I have discovered that the Minister of Education almost has nothing to say there; they control him entirely.

I will give you one example.  In September, the President of Uganda struck a very wonderful deal in the United States and that meant that Uganda, through the Ministry of Education, was going to get US$250 million in computer education in terms of equipment.  The President struck the deal, we went to Seattle, worked it out finally with, Mr Bill Gates.  You know what?  The technicians have stopped this minister to sign the Memorandum of Understanding that was going to see our institutions get US$250 million.  The donors said, “Okay, if you are not serious about this money we are going to give you to help your institutions, we are going to give the chance to Ghana” and Ghana has taken it.  So, that is the piece of information, among other information I have.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, whereas I appreciate the concern of my colleague, he seems to be mixing two things.  Honourable Alintuma Nsambu should know that the financial matters, budgeting, is controlled by Ministry of Finance.  We have had an experience whereby Ministry of Health was given equipment from Netherlands when Dr Makumbi was the minister.  It is over seven years down the road, that equipment has never been accessed to this country when we have many of these Health Institutions without equipment, macroeconomic factors and what have you.  So, I do not think what you are rising is a point of Ministry of Education, whereas that one could be a minor factor, but we seem to be mixing issues.  

MR KIDEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Alintuma Nsambu for the information.  I think the minister is a better beneficiary of this information, but it is sad to know that those are the managers who are managing this country at that technical level.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of Ministry of Finance taking everything at their own discretion when Parliament sits here to do work and they do not implement.  I think there must be something Parliament must do.  We cannot sit here as if we are performing rituals year in, year out and things are being done the opposite way.  Parliament must take a very strong position on how budget is implemented in this country.

Turning to the issue of the students, Madam Speaker, where the students are living in the names of hostels must be a big interest to the University Administration.  I do not know, maybe the minister could help us to know whether the University Administration inspects the private hostels where students are living.  Some of these hostels are in very pathetic conditions; the administration of those hostels is literally not there.  Some of those rooms have been turned into lodges.  So, I think it is very important that the administration of the University takes interest in the conditions of the hostels.  

For example, I would be comfortable if the administration of the university could give a skeletal administrative kind of arrangement for every single hostel that, “For us to have students in there, the following structure of administration must be in place to regulate a certain amount of discipline.”  I speak with a very passionate feeling on this issue because it is my constituents who are living there, and they are being exploited by owners of hostels–(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I thank hon. Kidega for giving way.  I would like to inform this House that whereas the issue of accommodation for students is general, when it comes to the female students it is even worse because since time immemorial, female students have only had two Halls of residence and one which is mixed as you know; and as you know in our community women are more vulnerable.  So, I thought maybe I would highlight this point so that hon. Kidega could give it more fire since this is one particular category of people that suffers.  In fact, when you look at the girls, the people who were involved in the next accident which was mentioned, I think they were all ladies; and this goes to show what I am saying because they were traversing at odd hours and this issue should be given due attention.  I thank you.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you, hon. Dora Byamukama.  Last but not least –(Interruption)

MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE: Thank you very much, hon. Kidega.  Madam Speaker, the issue of a big population overflowing in Makerere will not be solved unless we look at another solution.  The children are not looked after; our children are going down morally.  We offered a place in Eastern Uganda where the facilities are just wasted, and if you could only expand the institute of the university in eastern Uganda. We have offered Busitema as a university and we would actually –(Interjections)- there are many Halls that would be utilized other than crowding our children here in Makerere and losing them morally.  What kind of education are we offering our children?  We really need to look into this issue very seriously.  Thank you very much.

MR KIDEGA:  Thank you, honourable member, for that information.  There is also Gulu University, by the way, some students could be offloaded there.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, students world over have a pattern of behaviour that the Government must understand and appreciate.  Student behaviour is the same world over; they have a tendency of disagreeing with whatever kind of establishment right from the administration of the institutions where they live to the Government.  If you have been a student leader, then you will appreciate what I am saying.  It is not based on the fact that they have a certain agenda against Government or against a certain establishment, but it is a pattern of behaviour of students.  So, when Government is responding to students, it must not go with high-handedness.  How do you go with live bullets?  Honourable members, let us put ourselves in the position of the parents of these late students.  There is a huge amount of poverty in the population, you have spent money to educate your child and he returns in a coffin! 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, you will recall a very extensive debate when we had a similar riot and the Police shot and killed two students, and this House resolved that the Police under no circumstances should use live bullets.  It appears these honourable members of the frontbench just did not take note of this.  Can you imagine, if it was your son or daughter shot by the Police, the Police who is maintained by the taxpayer, as if the taxpayer pays the Police to go and shoot openly at students, how do you feel?  Madam Speaker, I think at the end of this debate we must re-state our motion on this question of using live bullets.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kidega, please wind up.  You have used 12 minutes.  Please, in future, honourable members, if you want to yield the Floor you should say “yes” or “no” because now you have taken 12 minutes.

MR KIDEGA: Finally, I would like to volunteer advice to the Minister of Education in this country.  There have been a lot of problems among the students.  Nabumali High School, which was built centuries ago, was burnt; students have destroyed so many other institutions.  I think there is a fundamental problem that must be looked at.  The Student Movement in this country is literally dead.  Unless we rejuvenate Student leadership and Student Movement in this country, there will be chaos among the students.  

I have discussed this with the honourable minister informally, we are yet to proceed to have further discussions with the Attorney General on how we can revitalize the Student Movement in this country; and when the Student Movement is weak, the leadership of a country is also weakened.  There are testimonies of Student leadership in Government today.  So, when we deprive students to have a strong movement, we are depriving a Government for the future.  I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

6.21
MS KIRASO BIRUNGI (Woman Representative, Kabarole District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Because of the three minutes, I will restrict myself to part (a) of the minister’s statement and begin by informing my colleagues that, before Government brings to Parliament the preliminary indicative budget allocations as provided for in the budget Act by the 1st of April in each financial year, there is an inter-ministerial meeting at which meeting these ministers you see seated on the frontbench, sit, discuss and agree on the budget ceilings.  I thought that one should be on record.  

Why I want to put that on record, Madam Speaker, is because ministers have time and again sat in Cabinet, agreed on figures, come behind Parliament to complain on their behalf on the Floor of Parliament.  If I was a minister and I am not being given enough budget provision to execute the duties for which I am charged to do, I will resign- (Applause)- If you cannot resign and you accept UShs 50 to do a job of a UShs100, then do not come to Parliament to complain.  

Madam Speaker, this is very serious and I wish there were more ministers here because this is a practice, which we are tired of as backbenchers.  The ministers want to look good in front of the appointing authority, and then they want to come here and get our sympathy, especially when matters are as sentimental as education.  Madam Speaker, this annoys me.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable member, I have just said that unless I have said it is information, you do not yield, please.

MS KIRASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker So, going back to the submission from the honourable Minister of Education, where in the laws of Uganda - I am talking about the laws, not the practice - where do we have budgets, which are protected and those which are not protected from budget cuts; and yet, honourable members, the Budget Act provides that for any budget cut from one activity to another within a sector or from one sector to another, there should be consultation and an agreement from the parties involved.  If that agreement is not there, then I cannot sit there and say, “I am in charge of a sector,” and then the budget cut is taking place under your nose.  For me I would not even blame for one second the Ministry of Finance because the Ministry of Finance is also constrained.  

By the way, I would like to inform this House that it was an initiative of the Ministry of Finance to bring the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, which we later passed into an Act, for there not to be any transfers or budget cuts or supplementary expenditures without prior approval of Parliament.  It was their initiative, why, because there have been a lot of political manipulation of the budget.  The Ministry of Finance itself is being arm-twisted.  When we sit there and we say, “Ministry of Finance had done that, Ministry of Finance has done this; the Ministry of Finance is also being directed.  Honourable members, I would like you to look at – well, first of all, I want the minister to tell me who decides which is protected and which is not, which activity should be under PAF and which one should not be under PAF?  If it is not Cabinet then who is it? 

Number two; recently there was a PEAP review, the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which is the guiding principle that is the principle on which the budget is based.  So, when the PEAP Review took place, the first body, which gave a go-ahead that now the PEAP has been reviewed and it is okay, is Cabinet; it is not Parliament.  The PEAP Review has not yet come here to Parliament.  Hon. Members, when you look at the budget cuts or the releases of up to 59 per cent in only one sector, I would like us to work backward. At the end of each financial year, if we go by this, because there is no sector, you who serve on Sessional Committees that has ever come to say that they got 100 per cent disbursement of their budget.  Where does that money go?  Can somebody tell us?  We get information that the budget has been executed up to 90 per cent or 95 per cent.  But the cuts, the short falls, are up to between 50 and 60 per cent in each sector.  Where is Uganda’s money going?  That is the question everybody should ask himself or herself.  

There is Government spending outside appropriation made by this Parliament; there is no doubt about that and it is not a secret.  Parliament can pass appropriation, can pass budget but we do not execute the budget, it is the Government, which does that; and, Madam Speaker, Parliament has not yet built the capacity for budget monitoring.  I will say that confidently because I know it is true.  I chair the Budget Committee, I chair the committee where all chairpersons of Sessional Committees sit, they will come here and talk; poor chairpersons, they will talk what information has been given to them except a few committees, which manage to go outside the station, but we are still lacking in budget monitoring.

Finally, the monthly releases to me would not be a problem if ministries or sectors were assured that every month what is meant for them would come.  But then the Accounting Officers are meant to commit these ministries.  They go and make contractual obligations, they contract people to do works for these ministries and at the end of the month money does not come and yet there is a Commitment Control System in place, which is actually a hoax.  Madam Speaker, I would like to promise this House that I have asked the Budget Office to look more closely into this and give a feedback, especially on the first part, which I will circulate at a later time.  Even we do not debate it, Madam Speaker, I think people should be informed what we were told in the beginning, what we were told in the middle and what we are being told at the end.  I thank you.

6. 30
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  As an Elephant and as a Member of Parliament of Jonam County, I join all of you to condole the great loss of Elephant Edgar Mukundane.  On the night of Sunday, 14th November, this gallant Elephant passed away.  The theme of this year’s budget is Public Expenditure Control.  We are having up to 13 per cent budget deficit, and one of the areas, which has been heavily suggested during this year’s budget is to control public expenditure; and our friend, Edgar Mukundane, was knocked by a Government vehicle, registration No. UG 0003W belonging to Ministry of Works, and this is how we are controlling Government expenditure, at midnight.  

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the previous financial year the deficit financing had actually come down to 11.5 per cent, and the last financial year it moved up to 13 per cent; and I believe that there are other many ills that are possibly taking place, which are likely to increase on this deficit, and yet as the minister is telling us he is already having a problem of being given what was allocated to him because of budgetary constraints.  

The second thing that I would like to talk about, Madam Speaker is the issue that out of 118 suspects who were involved in this riot, 23 of them, and that is 27.14 per cent were not university students.  This is extremely dangerous, and if not checked could potentially be injurious to the nation.  A number of times when there are riots in institutions of learning, there are actually also instigated by non-students for various ulterior motives; and since this has been given to us as information, I would like Parliament and Government to take this very seriously and to ensure that in future such are checked to avoid unwarranted eventualities.

The third thing that I would like to talk about is the fact that the confrontation lasted from 9.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m.; and if it is true, Madam Speaker, that live bullets were involved and they become even more lethal at night and these are only students, although 27 per cent is said to have been non-students, I believe they were not armed; if this confrontation can take that long, then we have got to check on how prepared we are in handling riots by students who are unarmed. 

Finally, Madam Speaker is on the issue, which has already been very ably talked about by my sister, hon. Kiraso Beatrice.  The Minister responsible for Education is saying, on page 11, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still considering the matter, in other words, equating the Minister responsible for Finance to be a super minister. I believe that there is collective Cabinet responsibility; I believe, Madam Speaker, that Parliament has the obligation to pass the budget and whatever budget has been appropriated, the line ministries should be in a position to actually benefit from whatever is due to them despite the limited envelope.  So, if this process is not checked, then the process of budgeting, bringing this to Parliament, a process which takes us that long, would become fruitless.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just wanted to remind Members, you know the resolution we took on what should be used during riots is not very old; we took it when we were dealing with MUBS.  We had a very strong resolution here on what should be used to deal with riots.  So, please keep that in mind. 

6.35
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, my sympathies go to the families that lost their dear ones in the accidents on Sir Apollo Kagwa road.  But, Madam Speaker, connected to this are the accidents that have been taking place in the country, and I note from press reports that the Nabumali High School strike is attributed mainly to foreign students.  Much as it is in the interest of this country that we have as many foreign students as possible because the private sector in Education is growing, we need a policy from the ministry to regulate the admission of foreign students in our schools. 

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to mislead the House that foreign students orchestrated the riot at Nabumali High School, when that was absolutely not true?  We cannot isolate ourselves; the tradition of Uganda has been in place where people have had to come and have an education for a long time.  In East Africa, Uganda was the only place with a university and we did not have these problems.  The problems have been with the management and the disciplinary level, which exists in the country at the moment; and the morals, the military culture, which is now in the country.  That is where we should be looking for a problem.  Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I cannot rule him out of order because I have not received the report from Nabumali High School.  I do not know whether it is militarism or whatever, which has caused the problem.  So, I am not in position to rule on that point.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I do not want to put a lot of emphasis on that, but in a private school attended by my children, it is a recent development and a concern for parents where there are so many foreign students and they have been acting otherwise. That apart, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am aware that we are all moving in a spirit of the East African Community and the Customs Union.  Is the hon. Member in order to continue referring to students from the community and the rest of the Africa region, where we are under the Africa Union, as foreign and when we are doing business with the world over?  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know, until we have an East African identity, people belong somewhere.  So, if they are not born on this soil, they belong to another country until we have that document which says “East African.”

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I now want to address issues raised regarding Teacher Education  -(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable to see it on record that we should come up with a policy, which does not allow foreign students to study in this country when we have our own sons and daughters studying outside.  The case of the strike in Nabumali High School, I do not think it is on record that it was a foreign student who caused that strike; and when the report talks of outside students to have participated in a riot in Makerere University, it does not mean that they were foreign students.  There are many students who could have participated in the riot, not necessarily that they were foreign students.  Therefore, my colleague, I do not feel comfortable to see it on record that we should come up with a policy.  We have cordially enjoyed students coming to study in our country here and also our own sons and daughters are studying in Kenya, in Tanzania, India and so forth.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to give is that I have myself been a foreign student in more than one country.  On arrival, you are taken through certain procedures to integrate you into the foreign system such that you get yourself into the system and you live like the people that have lived in that country before. 

Now, I want to address myself to issues raised in the area of teacher education.  Madam Speaker, I have been associated with teacher education for quite sometime as the lead consultant for Summative Evaluation of the Teacher Development and Management Systems, and I note remarkable improvement in students’ performance at Grade II final examinations since the scraping of cost sharing in teacher education in primary teachers’ colleges.  But we need to study, was this a result of better applicants due to raised entry requirements or is it because we had better applicants because cost sharing had been removed?  Because if we see from the inception of the budgeting process, there is already a deficit in Capitation Grant that is being offered by Ministry of Finance to a tune of U Shs 3.5 billion, then automatically you know that these colleges are going to run below their capacity.  

We have noted over time that student teachers can no longer go to upcountry schools to do their teaching practice and the children in those schools are being denied this opportunity.  The teaching practices were reduced from the original eight weeks to six weeks, and originally from three terms to only two terms; and all this is affecting the final product of the teacher.  So, is it not time, Madam Speaker, that the ministry reviewed this policy and re-introduced cost sharing if only it would help the colleges run efficiently?  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to comment particularly on the incidents that took place at Makerere University on Friday, 12 November 2004 and the students’ riot that followed thereafter.

I would like to observe, Madam Speaker, that in 15 years this is not the first riot that has taken place in Makerere University.  I recall that while I was a fourth year student of Lumumba Hall in 1990, we had together with other colleagues, many of them sitting in this House, peaceful demonstrations on campus.  The manner in which Government reacted to these peaceful students is deplorable.  Many of us bear scars of that 10 December 1990, and it is unfortunate that so many years down the road nearly the same things are happening.  

I would like to ask Government, why, even after a resolution of Parliament, Police is still using live bullets to quell riots in universities yet I know that that the police force has been equipped, the Riot Police has been trained to quell using more mild methods for such similar students’ riots?  It is very sad that a lady from Kikoni fell a victim of this riot.  I think this is very unfortunate that it affects even the community outside of Makerere University.  

I would like an answer, I believe from the Leader of Government Business, who is also the Chancellor of Makerere University, on this matter.  Why are we using such an amount of force to stop students’ riots?  In any case, from the Minister’s statement, this riot ran for nearly the whole day.  It would have taken such amount of force if the students themselves were armed with guns, which I highly doubt in this case, unless somebody would like to come to the Floor of the House to tell this House that students were actually armed with guns.

I also would like to express my disappointment with the manner in which, despite the increasing population in Makerere University, the entire campus is planned.  When you look at Makerere University as it is, it still remains that institution that had less than 10,000 students in number.  It looks like the same Makerere that we knew and it is the same that people who came before us knew, and yet we are now talking of more than 34,000 students, many of them not residing within campus.  Madam speaker, this is a serious matter.  

There needs to have adequate planning, not in terms of infrastructure within the university, but also looking at the surrounding of the University.  Why, for example, is that part of Bombo road still a public road, I mean, within Wandegeya; with residential hostels across the road on the other side; with students attending the lectures throughout the night; with the library that we know is limited in terms of space, students have to read in turns and so we should expect – it is not a surprise that this young man was actually crushed at midnight, desperate in pursuit of knowledge he finds himself walking out of the University Campus at midnight, and then there are these reckless drivers, Government vehicles being driven.  I do not know, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, are you really in charge?  If you write circulars and drivers do not respect these circulars, I get tempted to ask the question, are you really in charge?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, do you want to respond?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am due to speak and I was restraining myself from speaking, but let me assert that I am in charge.  First of all, those who talk about universities should have the following qualifications; one, they must understand them well and love them well.  Two conditions; love them well and understand them well.  

First of all, more buildings are being built. Secondly, I have written to the Vice Chancellor to ensure that the in-take remains static until there is adequate space.  I want also to add that following the unfortunate death of those students, I did ask the Minister in charge of Works, Housing and Communication and the Town Clerk of Kampala City Council, to have humps; and as I speak, those are being installed. 

But let me also make one point, that when you are a chancellor you do not actually run the University -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, the point hon. Amuriat was making was in relation to a Government vehicle being driven at midnight in contravention to a Government circular.  At that point, that is where he asked the Prime Minister if he is in charge of his Government business.  So, is the hon. Prime Minister in order to digress and tell us about loving Universities and nurturing them and understanding them when we are actually talking about driving Government vehicles beyond the stipulated hours, and these are vehicles we see everywhere, in bars, in discos and what have you?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Members, the Prime Minister is here in two capacities.  He is here as the Chancellor of the University and as a Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.  So, I think he was first telling us about his work as a Chancellor and then proceeding to the other charge of the entire government.

 PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Madam speaker.  If we had a million people like you, this country would do very well- (Laughter)- Then two small points; one, you do not actually run the University because the Vice Chancellor is supposed to run the system, then if there is a problem they appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports, then they appeal to me.  You see what I mean?  So, I try to avoid a situation where I turn into a supervisor chancellor. 

With regard to the issue of people using vehicles at the wrong time, this is a matter for the Minister of Public Service, really.  He is supposed to take charge and from time to time, people err – to err is human.  For example, we are supposed to start on time, how many of you keep time?  To err is human.  I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I really do not know when in this country we shall stop reacting to situations in order to correct certain problems.  It hurts for it to take a student to die before humps were installed to control speed on those streets of the University.  I think this is very sad, and I would like to be convinced that Government is on top of things.  

I also would like to ask, you know, this incident claimed a life of a woman, one Murungi according to the report; and according to reports, it is suggested that she actually died of a gunshot.  What is Government doing to compensate this family?  Because unless Government can prove that this poor lady was actually involved in the riot, Government should be able to take full responsibility.  I would like to hear something from the Leader of Government Business on this.  This woman must have had a family, she must have had dependents, the poor husband is now a widower and going through untold suffering.  I want to be informed, what has been done to help the family or even to compensate the family of this late lady?

I would like to comment on the recklessness of these taxi drivers, the Passenger Service Vehicle (PSV) drivers.  All of you who may have opportunity to drive along the streets will realize the difficulty that other drivers are put into by the recklessness of passenger service vehicle drivers.  I would like to implore the Minister in charge of transport to try and see how these people could be restrained in as far as recklessness and in as far as lack of abiding by the law is concerned.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education has come to this House this afternoon to lament; he has sung a long song of lamentation.  I do not know what the intention of the first part of this report is because as part of his proposals, which I believe maybe are recommendations, he is like crying out through this House to the Ministry of Finance to release 100 per cent.  These are really matters that should have been concluded in the Budget.  What does the Minister of Education require of this House in as far as the release of funds to his ministry from the Ministry of Finance is concerned?  For us, I know, we have carried out our part, we have appropriated as it is required by law, the rest of it - you know, if you come shedding tears, I would probably advise you maybe to throw in the towel because a rightful thinking person, when things do not move, should be able to sense that “I think things have become hard and maybe it is time for me to leave.”  

Hon. Agard Didi, how long does it take the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take decisions?  It is now months since we began talking about shortage of money, money not released to these institutions and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still thinking; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still considering the matter.  This is a ministry with the largest number of ministers, and I am surprised that it takes this long for decisions to be reached.  I would like to demand an explanation.  Education is the backbone of this country, why should we be deceived about UPE yet our children cannot advance, and I would like to demand on behalf of the people of Kumi an explanation for this.  Otherwise, we could conclude that we are in a total mess and probably have reached a stalemate.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.57
MS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  The matter before this House is a very important one, not only as far as teacher education is concerned or training institutions are concerned, but also as far releasing of funds to the entire Education Sector in this country is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that the releases for the months of October and November for the primary schools in this country came three days before the term was closed; and today there are many primary schools in this country, which have not received the capitation grant for the month of October and November, and yet primary education falls under Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF), I am made to understand, and the Minister here says that PAF funds are protected.  I have also learnt that the capitation grants sent to primary schools in the last quarter were cut.  There is a known formula of the amount of funds, which a child is supposed to receive per month, and when this is computed, then you would know how much is supposed to be sent to each school in this country.  But the money, which has been sent, has been less than what was expected in these schools.  

So, Madam Speaker, when you look at this you really wonder whether the Minister is in charge of the education sector in this country.  But it is very unfortunate more so when you think about the money, which has been sent in the holidays, because you are giving this money to head teachers and they are going to be with this money for two months.  You will not be surprised if at the end, when the first term opens in 2005, there will be no money in Primary School accounts because they have been having this money for two months and they have to look for something to use the money for.  So, there is really need to think seriously about this issue and here we can avoid such occurrences.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the need to assist needy students, but I am wondering why Government takes on new commitments when there are no adequate funds to meet old commitments.  Why should we take on students bursary schemes if there are no funds?

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way to seek the following clarification at this juncture of our debate.  We have been talking as it has been stated that the Minister came here to lament, fully indicating there is no money in his ministry because allocations have a shortfall.  Can the Minister of Finance clarify to this House whether there is money in Ministry of Finance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he will respond after.

MS SINABULYA: Madam Speaker, I was emphasizing the point of Government taking on new commitments when there are no adequate funds even to fulfil old commitments.  What happened was an embarrassment to this country and to Government, the failure of National Teachers Colleges to open.  It was more of an embarrassment than it would have been if Government had not given bursaries to sub-counties.  So, I think Government should think seriously about the commitments it takes before it can embark on those commitments.

Madam Speaker, I also want to be educated more on these powers of the Ministry of Finance to decide what percentage to give to which Ministry, because now the Minister was proposing that for this financial year they should release 100 per cent.  Now, where does the Ministry of Finance get these powers of releasing 100 per cent or 50 per cent?  I want to be educated about that.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on Makerere University, I am raising a point of concern.  It is unfortunate, it seems Makerere University is more bent on the drive to recruit private students for economic gains, and this has compromised the standard of discipline at the University and in future it threatens to compromise the academic standard.  This is not the first time a riot is taking place in Makerere, riots have been taking place in Makerere.  But now when you look at this particular riot, students even going out to loot, this is indiscipline; and it is because of the large numbers of students who have been recruited under Government, so the University Administration has no control.  

I am worried that the Chancellor may not be in charge.  The Chancellor may not be in charge, but I beg that the University takes this issue seriously such that we do not compromise academic standards and discipline to the expense of economic gains.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.04
MS TIPERU NUSURA (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to join my colleagues to send a word of condolence to the families that were affected because of the strike. I would also want to stand here and be counted among those who condemn crime, especially an act of strike in school and more so a university.  Makerere University is recognized and anybody who is a product of Makerere University is respected worldwide.  However, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- until now because people do not know really what is happening today.  Even now, I have met people and when they hear that you are a product of Makerere University, you are highly respected and highly regarded.

Madam Speaker, I am more perturbed about the nature and effect of the riot; somebody dies, a neighbourhood is affected, business is at a standstill.  People who were not even students took advantage of the situation to gain from the strike; this therefore puts me in a disturbing situation.  I am perturbed as to whether really the Prime Minister or Government is in charge of the University.  When we were told that the Prime Minister was going to become a Chancellor, we thought that he would link the University more directly to Government than ever before.  I do not know the situation now, but since there is such a situation then we may say it is worse.

Madam Speaker, the Students Guild is on record for having complained over three years ago about the need for humps on Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road.  Government is aware that the population of Makerere University has increased; I am only happy that the population of the female students has also increased considerably.  Government is aware about the availability of businesses surrounding the University, the presence of over 50 Hostels within the University, but the School Administration, more so, the Guild has complained.  They went to Kampala City Council and Kampala City Council told them that this was a highway.  I, therefore, want to ask the Minister, at what point does Government consider an area a pressure point so as to put humps to avoid such occurrences?  

Madam Speaker, my second emphasis is on the recommendation about the need to circulate the Code of Conduct to all the students.  I am happy about that action; that action is very good.  I do recall when I joined Makerere University, all of us were given booklets, but I think one of the most prominent rules was the issue about coming before midnight.  Any body who comes past midnight was not allowed through the University Gates because many of the students actually tend to go out and –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT:  Thank you very much, my sister, for giving way.  I would like to inform hon. Tiperu that actually in some faculties now, there are night lectures.  In fact, I think it is in the Department of Computer Science where people begin studying at midnight and go back home at dawn.  So, I think somehow maybe if the policy in some of these departments is regulated, it could help.  But of course they have their point.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much for your information.  Madam Speaker, it is true that the students were given these booklets, and when you look at what is happening today, some of the rules need to be changed depending on what is current, as my colleague has explained.  However, I just wanted to acknowledge that this recommendation is good because the students will know what is good from what is bad.  My problem is, that what is happening in the University today might be much bigger than we see.  

You have heard about schools getting burnt, hon. Dan Kidega had talked about this, and most of the culprits who participated in the burning of Secondary Schools have not been punished yet.  We have not heard of anybody being severely punished, and two years later these same students are now in the Universities.   I am only worried that apart from the demonstration whereby the students match on the streets, next you may hear one of the buildings in Makerere getting burnt.  

So, our Prime Minister, please take that as a matter of seriousness that there is a population in a university that has been indisciplined in the Secondary Schools and they are there and they can do anything.  There is even an allegation that University Guild Elections are soon and some want to show that they are good leaders, and that is why they are not following the right procedures on how to present their grievances.

Madam Speaker, I also want to add onto the issue of the Students Guild; hon. Dan Kidega talked about it.  If you make a research by interviewing some of the students about how they feel in their schools, most of the students are complaining that the Guild Councils have actually died, they are not effective; they do not know where to put their grievances.  The head boys you have, most are handpicked by the School Administration, so when they feel that the people who are leading them are not respected, they end up doing things that may not be lawful.  So, please, Government, I beg that the Students’ Guild be revamped because it is the only way out for most of the students to look at their leaders, love them and go and present their problems.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by asking the Minister, what is the financial position of Makerere University today?  We were told that lecturers’ allowances were increased, however, today most are still complaining, most faculties are also complaining; students’ allowances have not been given.  Students are fed on Ushs1070 per day that includes breakfast, lunch and supper.  Really, you can see how these people are suffering.  If you look at the Minister’s report, the Minister did indicate that the strike started from 9.00 a.m. to almost in the evening.  Just ask yourself, what could really make somebody sit the whole day if there are no other pressing issues other than the accident that had occurred.  I therefore want to stop here, but request the Minister really to give us the financial position of Makerere University and explain to us whether there can be no other strike other than that because the pressure that is on the University is actually high.  I thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I have stood up on a point of guidance.  Madam Speaker, I agree that the ministers responsible for this report are available and the Prime Minister is in charge.  But when you look at the report, the report is actually cross cutting and so many ministries are actually affected.  I want to draw a good example.  

On Thursday, the Chairman for Gulu, Col. Walter Ochora, raised an issue, which actually is relevant to the debate going on, that for the last two months the technical staff have not been receiving the salaries.  I would love to see the Minister of Local Government around.  I do not know whether they are supposed to be here when an issue on the Order Paper is concerning them. Madam Speaker, you were appealing at the beginning of this Session that we need to plan, we need to be vigilant, members need to be available such that we can complete the work.  But are we going to complete the work with the presence of the backbenchers only, yet the frontbench, with all the privileges, they cannot be here?  Madam Speaker, this thing does not go well with the backbenchers.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will address that point.  But for now, really what I can say is that the members of the frontbench are expected to be here to attend Parliamentary Sessions, and it is true that Col Walter Ochora complained to us that the people in Gulu are not receiving salaries.  So, in addition to the other problems they have, they also do not have salaries and we have not yet found a solution.  So, Prime Minister, I would appeal to you to take charge and ensure that your team is here.  At least one Minister from the ministry should be here if the others are busy. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I accept that they should be there totally, and my disgust is total when people do not turn up when they are supposed to be there.  But I also want to appeal to backbenchers to be here because they are also very thin on the ground; backbenchers, you should be here; you are very few.

7.16
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  A lot has been said on part (a) regarding the budget cuts.  I have only one comment to make by sending my sympathies to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget because I see her doing a lot of work trying to put this Budget in place, but no sooner does he finish that than the Minister of Finance does whatever he wants to do.  It is also indicative that perhaps the Minister of Finance has no respect for Parliament because we always pass this Budget in good faith and as soon as we pass it, the Minister does whatever he wants to do. So, Madam Speaker, I do not know but I think we need to take some strong steps towards this Minister of Finance to respect what Parliament passes in the budget.  

I want to turn to this question of the strike in Makerere University.  The crossing points of these students are known; along Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road and along Makerere Road.  I am wondering, why could the Minister of Works not think of constructing overhead bridges for these students to cross, especially where we have many hostels?  Instead of putting humps, I think they should have put overhead bridges as they did in Nakawa and some other places to protect the lives of these students.  

I now want to turn to the point of looting.  It is a shame if University students can participate in looting.  First of all, I have a feeling that what is happening is just a tip of the iceberg because in the first place, if a university student can go out to loot food items, it is an indication that our students are not properly fed in the University.  It could also be an indication that the whole population in Uganda is underfed because surely, how can people go out to loot food items?  This is a very serious matter and I Minister of Education should look into it, to see how our children are being fed in the University.  Is it not the case that they are underfed so that if they have an opportunity to go out and loot, they will go out and loot food items?

Madam Speaker, I have also got a feeling that in this country we have a problem of total moral decadence. Our morals have really gone down.  We also have a problem of unemployment in this country because if you get outsiders participating in a riot, that means we have a lot of idle people who will take advantage of any riot, participate in it and be able to loot.  So, as a nation we have to look ahead, how do we also solve the problem of unemployment because this problem is beginning in Makerere University, but one day it may turn into a nationwide problem?  We may get a small strike starting off somewhere and then all these idlers will take part, it will be spread all over the country and we shall really be in problems.  

In fact, if you are not careful such strikes can even end up in having a Government toppled.  It happened when I was in Madagascar in 1972.  The strike started in the university, these idlers joined in, even disgruntled soldiers joined in, and at the end of about five days the Government in Madagascar had been overthrown.  So, we have to be very careful, Madam Speaker, we are sitting on a time bomb.  We also have to look into the problem of unemployment in this country.  

Madam Speaker, we also need to re-state what is contained in this law on Children Rights.  People are really misunderstanding the rights of children.  Only last Sunday I was attending a Muslim function to pray for a dead person, and all the Sheikhs were complaining that Government had misinterpreted the law on Children Rights Because children think they should not be blamed, children think they have got to take the laws in their hands, behave the way they want to behave, dress indecently, and that is why we are even having a problem of controlling the AIDS scourge.  Because you can imagine, what happens to the female students who live outside the University, leaving the campus at midnight and then they have to cross all those areas to go to their Hostels when we have all these hungry men around?  Don’t you think our children stand the risk of being raped by these people?  So, we really have a problem, it is a combination of so many problems.  I think, Madam Speaker, we need to sit down and clean our house.  There is definitely a problem in our house; things are not going the right way.

Madam Speaker, I also want to briefly comment on the problem of reckless driving on our roads.  Be it midnight, be it during daytime, there is a lot of reckless driving on our roads, and I think Government has to come in and do something about it.  You have been hearing of the carnage on our roads, so many lives are being lost because people are driving recklessly.  With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Butamira.

7.22
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for that beautiful name.  I happen to be a member of Kyambogo University Council and this report has drawn my attention to a number of things.  One of them is really the future of National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs) and Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs) because these are affiliated to Kyambogo University, including Uganda Technical Colleges (UTCs).  There is worry in our constituency that the future of NTCs and Primary Teachers’ Colleges is bleak if we do not have adequate funds to run them, and I think it is therefore justified that the Minister of Education, instead of coming here to lament on this situation, that there should be a proactive approach as to what we should do about these National Teachers’ Colleges and Primary Teachers’ College.  

One of the problems, which has arisen, is whether we actually need Grade V teachers.  Should we continue to train so many teachers who are no longer marketable; because if we have so many Universities, I think we have almost have 20 universities and they are training graduate teachers, what do we do as a country because we should not stick to anything that we think is no longer useful.  Therefore, I want to say that –(Interruption)

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the plight of these student teachers that go to teach in Primary Schools as he has been saying.  We train these teachers to teach in both Government schools and privately owned schools.  But at the moment privately owned schools are closing because the UPE Fund, which we used to give to them by the Government, was abolished two years ago.  So, most of these schools are closing; there is a problem now.  We educate the teachers, they cannot teach in the schools because the schools are closing, there is a vicious cycle, an unnameable position, which I would like the Minister to assist us.  At what point can we enter this cycle?  I thank you. 

DR NABWISO: Thank you very much, hon. Member.  I think the point is made that we need to overhaul teacher education system in this country.  If we continue at this level, we shall find ourselves in more problems.

Madam Speaker, one question has arisen, can we consider another alternative for training teachers, because if we do not have money to support Residential Teacher Training Colleges, whether NTCs or PTCs, can we as a Government go on a different mode of training teachers?  Fortunately, my boss, the Prime Minister, was in Adult Education at Makerere; I took over from him in Jinja, so he knows what I am talking about.  There are these other alternatives of training teachers if Government paid sufficient attention to this; this is the mode of Distance Education.  If we cannot maintain these National Teachers’ Colleges and PTCs in residential training, let us consider another alternative, that is, if we seriously need more Grade V teachers and Primary School teachers.  

At Kyambogo University, I think this problem should also be ironed out.  As of now, we do not have a Chancellor at the University of Kyambogo.  There is a Chancellor in Makerere University and Mbarara University.  There are two Public Universities, Gulu University and Kyambogo University, which do not have Chancellors.  This matter should be expedited.  I know that Kyambogo University has selected some two names, which have been submitted through the Ministry of Education to the President, now it is very important that these matters are not delayed.

Madam Speaker, when a student qualifies, gets his or her degree and it takes two years or one and half years for that person to graduate from an institution, we are breaking the Law; in fact we are lucky that these fellows have not taken us to Court because a student is entitled to taking an institution to Court if it refuses to give him or her papers on time.  This delays a promotion of the people that we have trained, it delays people to go into the job market and search for jobs because we have delayed to give them their qualifications –(Interruption)

Lastly, I want to mention that I had the opportunity to visit the School of Hygiene in Mbale, the School of Fisheries in Entebbe and the Tourism school in Jinja.  The impression I got out after visiting these places is that they are in a pathetic situation, and I am wondering whether it was wise to transfer these institutions from their mother institutions in Ministries to Ministry of Education.  This is another matter where we need to re-focus.  

If the Ministry of Education is not given adequate funds to run these institutions then we will have a problem, and the Ministry of Education may not in fact have well qualified technocrats to give guidance and to supervise these institutions.  I think we seem to be moving in circles and this is affecting the overall quality of education in this country.  It is said that the quality of life of a people depends on the quality of education the people receive from their country.  We cannot expect to improve quality of life of Ugandans if the quality of education, which they are receiving, leaves a lot to be desired. So, instead of allowing Prof. Khiddu Makubuya to go into lamentations because we already have a Book called the ‘Book of Lamentations’ in the Bible, can we ask him to change focus so that we can now have proactive efforts from his Ministry?  I thank you.

7.30
MS ALASO ASIANUT (Woman Representative Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to point out three serious omissions in the Report by the hon. Minister.  I call them serious omissions, unless the Minister finally tells me he deliberately left them out.  The first one is to do with the riot at Makerere University.  On page 13, the Minister talks about the nature and the effects.  On the 16 November 2004, the day the riot took place; one of the things that was going on in this country was the UACE Examination.  On that day, the students of A’ level were doing History Paper 6, Sub-Maths and Maths.  Schools like Caltec Academy, Makerere High School and all those around Makerere University were seriously affected.  Actually in Caltec Academy a canister of tear-gas was thrown into the Hall; it opened into the Hall where the students were doing the exam.  So, the candidate class ran out in tears and for 30 minutes the exam was not going on.  Finally when UNEB went to Caltec Academy, they gave them ten minutes compensation.  

The parents are very concerned about this; and when the hon. Minister leaves it out, he does not even mention it as one of the things that happened, and yet for the parents and the students this was a very serious consequence of this riot, it gives me the impression that at the end of the day even the way UNEB is going to treat the marking process for those students will not take into consideration that very big anomaly.  I want the hon. Minister to assure me that he takes the concerns of the parents, and indeed the students who were affected by that tear-gas getting into the Hall; that he takes those concerns very seriously and that UNEB will do due diligence while they are handling those students.

The second omission – actually this is not an omission, it is a wrongdoing, Madam Speaker – it is to do with child study.  Child study professionally is not done for convenience.  You do not wake up in the morning and say, “Because we do not have money, you fellows go for child study.”  That is not it; at least I am a teacher; that is not what was done to us.  Child study is a very basic process in the training of teachers, and when teachers have just come in at the beginning of term, they have spent one month or so in the school and you are telling them, “There is no money, run immediately and do child study,” I think that is very wrong; it is unprofessional to do that.  

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I am also a seasoned teacher and I also did child study.  A child study by student teachers in a Grade III Teacher Training College is conducted when the teaching or the college practice is going on.  So, the teacher identifies pupils he or she is teaching in a class, she has to monitor these children’s learning process and social behaviour right up to the home of the child.  This is to help the student teacher to see how these children are developing and how they are learning so that he or she lays the strategies of how he or she will proceed in his or her future teaching.  So, it is not just student teachers as a convenient alternative because the Ministry of Finance has refused to finance.  It is a very serious omission.  That is the information I wanted to give.

MS ALASO: Thank you, my colleague.  About child study, I think this was a fire brigade approach; it is wrong, Madam Speaker.  First of all, it inconvenienced the head teachers that received the student teachers.  They were not prepared to receive them, that was not the time for child study.  It inconvenienced the student teachers because they did not have the required materials, which they normally come with when they are ready to go for child study.  I think that child study should not be treated by the Ministry as simply one thing that you throw around when you are in a crisis; it is wrong.  It is not about doing child study per se, even the timing, the whole preparation is very crucial.

Finally, the other thing that I call a wrongdoing that has happened and that has been presented to us, Madam Speaker, is the contradiction that the Minister has put on page 6, it has to do with the vocational, technical and other training institutions.  I recall that when we discussed the Policy Statement on Education, I did stand up here and I pointed out to the Minister that we have put up Community Polytechnics but the materials for them to carry on; the training materials, the consumables, the apparatus, the equipment are lacking; and I remember I was informed that I should be one of the happiest people because at least in Soroti District I have been given our community as a polytechnic, that is, Diyoliyo Community Polytechnic.  

Madam Speaker, now the Minister tells us in paragraph two that BTVET institutions do not have a budgetary shortfall in that the Ministry has tried to fit them in the budget by limiting Government sponsorship to less than 50 per cent.  Where is the problem?  We were told at that time, and indeed in this paragraph, that the Community Polytechnics are expected to mobilize private students to give them the financial back-up that they require; and at that time our concern was that the students who go to these polytechnics are poor students, a majority of them are orphans and they cannot even proceed with secondary education owing to lack of school fees.  We did raise these concerns on the Floor of this House.  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg to interrupt hon. Alaso, but the clarification I wanted to get from maybe the Minister of Finance - of course following what you are saying, if you can clarify it, it would be very good – in that the Minister seems to be saying he does not have money, but he has got the will to train more nurses, more technicians, who are supposed to be the engine or the trigger for the development of the country.  

The Minister is talking about money.  Could I be clarified whether the Minister of Finance and his team are really awake to the fact that the currency is merely a medium and what we need are the services, which means the nurses, the teachers, the technicians and the goods, which are manufactured because the economy is supposed to be first measured in terms of the goods and services available then the currency is printed to be used a medium of exchange. 

Now, I am getting surprised how the Minister of Finance says there is no currency to circulate so that these institutions run, yet actually these goods are required.  Is it that these goods have to be imported, the services have to be imported for the economy to grind to a standstill, yet actually the people want to do their work; teachers want to teach, the doctors want to cure people, and there are goods and services in the market.  What is actually going wrong?  It seems there is something -(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I do not think it is fair for the hon. Member to kidnap our time when you have a list allocating and the poor lady still has burning issues.  So, that is the procedure, but thank God he has finished.

MS ALASO: Thank you.  Madam Speaker, I was talking about vocational institutions, particularly the Community Polytechnics, and I was raising the contradictions that have come systematically from the time we discussed the policy statements and the budgets, where we seem to have a crisis in our hands.  

I want to draw your attention to the statement by the Minister where he says that, “Currently Government is sponsoring not less than 50 per cent;” and then in the same paragraph he goes ahead to say, “But the Polytechnics have failed to raise private students.”  Now, the private students were supposed to be the fallback position to cover the other difference, which the Government would not sponsor.  Now, if you look at this thing logically, that means the Polytechnics are supposed to be run on a 50 per cent provision by Government; and then he goes ahead to state that, “of what Government had committed itself to, only 59 per cent,” meaning 59 per cent of the 50 per cent; that is the little mathematics I know, which is about 29.5 per cent.  That is what the Community Polytechnics are surviving on.  

It is no surprise, therefore, Madam Speaker, that if you go to a community polytechnic like Oliyo you can appreciate the struggle; the equipment is not there, the Principal is just gambling.  The Committee on Local Government went to Kotido and we visited that community polytechnic - I forget its name - the structures are there, but the administration of Kotido told us they have failed to raise the private students.  Would the hon. Minister now consider revising our initial attitude to the funding of Community Polytechnics?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I want to thank you for the work you have done today, but we shall take 45 more minutes tomorrow to conclude this matter.  I have noted the members who have stood up so we are still on this side, we shall start with you, hon. Ekanya.  We are going to start at 2.00 p.m., I will be here at 2.00 O’clock exactly so that we can pick up some time -(Interjections)- but, hon. Prime Minister, surely the Minister of Education will be here at 2.00 O’Clock.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, you have a made a request that we handle very important matters concerning cotton –(Interjections)- no, but we are all interested in this matter.  For example, there have been a number of points made here, which must be fully clarified, and also it is important for my colleagues to be here.  Tomorrow I am going to chair Cabinet, I am going to move like fire and ensure that they are all here by 2.30 p.m. sharp.  I am going to ensure that they are here, and as you did request that it will not be possible to have Cabinet next Wednesday - she did ask, some of you came late; not this one, but the next one.  So, the agenda is very tall.  So, we request you to start at 2.30 p.m.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the way we look at this report of the Minister of Finance, the problem basically is not Minister of Finance. We would need the Prime Minister, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, the Chairperson of Finance and the Minister of Finance to meet tomorrow morning and come and tell us what answer they have.  The problem is Minister of Finance refusing to release money; it is not the Minister of Education.  So, the Budget Committee and Minister of Finance should give us an answer tomorrow.  That is my guidance, Madam Speaker. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I have heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister telling us that you promised a report on Wednesday, yet if I got you correctly, you advised this House that, “Tomorrow, the Business Committee is going to sit and decide whether we are going on recess on Thursday this week or Friday.”  So, when the Prime Minister plans for Wednesday next week, then this country will be at a loss.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us meet at 2.30 p.m. on the dot.  The House is adjourned until 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 December 2004 at 2.30 p.m.)





