Wednesday, 13th December, 2000

Parliament met at 11.29 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ben Wacha): Mr. Speaker, permit me to lay on the Table the 1999 annual report of the Uganda Law Reform Commission.  

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NPART STATUTE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will give you permission to deposit your mobile telephones outside. Could you please deposit them outside! 

With regard to the item, which has just been called out by the clerk, we had reached a stage where we were supposed to pronounce ourselves on the motion. We could not proceed to do so because we did not have the necessary quorum. We are now going to ascertain whether we have a quorum now, so that we can proceed to deal with this matter. If there are any Members of Parliament who are still in the lobby and elsewhere, I suggest that they come in before we ascertain whether we have a quorum or not.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I seek guidance from you, Mr. Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just a moment please. Up to this point we do not have a quorum. We are only 91 in the House.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you arising from what the electronic media has been saying from yesterday evening to this morning. They have been saying that with effect from today, the House would be taking a headcount on the presence or absence of members. Could you guide the House on that procedure, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you leave that issue until I take the decision?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, I also want to make some comments on the issue of starting time in the House and maybe you could guide me. The Order Paper normally indicates the time when we are supposed to start and some of us come here on time. All those who are present come on time, but right now it is 11.30 a.m. and we have not started. I propose that we start on time whether people are there or not. What is to be done should be done. If we are adjourning, we should adjourn on time –(Interjections)- Yes, the time is fixed for that purpose and I propose that we adjourn at that time.  

THE SPEAKER: Your point is taken. We can now proceed with item four. Let me remind you that the last time we adjourned, when considering this particular item, debate had already been concluded and what was left was to put the question, namely that the Non Performing Assets Recovery Trust (Amendment) Bill, 2000 be read a Second Time. That was what was left. So, I intend to put the question right away because we have now realised the necessary quorum.    

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NPART STATUTE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 1 agreed to

Clause 2 agreed to

Clause 3 agreed to

Clause 4 agreed to

Clause 5

THE VICECHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: (MR. Abura Kene): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to move an amendment to insert a new clause 5 immediately after clause 4. I would like to amend section 11 of the principal Statute by inserting, immediately after subsection (1), the following new subsection: “In the case of Uganda Development Bank, the reference in subsection (1) to the commencement of this Statute shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of the Non-Performing Asset Recovery Trust (Amendment) Act, 2000”. 

The justification for this amendment is to harmonise the commencement of the Act with the Amendment to the Act.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Chairman, I accept the amendment.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I support the amendment, I would like clarification from the Minister, taking into account the fact that the timeframe is so short. Would it not be better to have extended this period beyond what we have at the moment? The bulk of debt in UDB is so much that within this timeframe, there may not be enough time to recover the bank debts

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this being a new clause, we will take it as having been read the First Time. You can now make your contributions on the basis of the amendment proposed by the chairman.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, it is based on the new amendment that I am seeking this clarification from the Minister. I thank you.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The request by the hon. Member on the Floor is logical. But we had already asked this House to extend the period of this Statute for two years. Let us go ahead and see if we can accomplish this within the remaining time. If not, I think we shall come back to the House. That was our intention. So, I still concur with the amendment by the chairman.

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I totally fail to understand this amendment. By this Amendment to the Act, we are assigning the debts in UDB to NPART, and we are doing that at the signing of this Bill and then within the Bill, we are saying that this was already in NPART. That sounds funny, because assigning the Bill to NPART from the inception of NPART does not edit the period when NPART will handle these debts.

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The idea of introducing a new Amendment is to allow the commencement of the new Statute to go together with the new amended Bill. What we are saying is that, after amending the Bill, if we leave it open, it will look as if we want to start as far back as when NPART was started or extended.  But now with this new Amendment, we are saying that NPART will enter into the new system.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5, agreed to

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, the other clause 5 was the amended one. We have not yet pronounced ourselves on the old clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the problem? I have not understood!

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, we have pronounced ourselves on the new clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: That will be rearranged by the draftsman. The problem here is that the new Amendment is dealing with the clause which came earlier than the one being dealt with by the Amendment in clause 5. The draftsmen will rearrange it.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am sorry, but section 5 of this Bill is different from what we pronounced ourselves on. Section 5 reads in the Bill reads as follows: “Section 15 of the Principle Statute is amended in subsection (2) by substituting for paragraph (b) the following – 
(b) four other persons appointed by the Minister”.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, is that what we have pronounced ourselves on?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: No, we have not pronounced ourselves on this.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (Amendment) Bill, 2000” and passed it with one extra amendment. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.                 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NPART STATUTE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (Amendment) Bill, 2000” be read for a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY BILL, 2000

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we adjourned yesterday we had dealt with this Bill and 14 hon. Members had contributed, apart from the Mover and the Chairperson. If I do not see any other request for contribution, I will put the question. I recognise the hon. Dick Nyai

MR. DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one great problem with this Bill. Whereas the coming to Parliament of this Bill has been long delayed, there is something that is still mingling in my mind. The Bill deals with the administration of land and titles, whereas Ministry of Works deals with construction of buildings. The major crux of this Bill is for the administration of land and how it is applied, and I believe the best people to know this are in the Ministry of Lands. So, I wish to get clarification from the Minster or from the Leader of Government Business as to why this Bill is being moved by the Ministry of Works, and the administration of the law will also be in their hands rather than that of Lands. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: And you are making this submission in spite of the fact that there is a department of Housing in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications?

MR. NYAI: Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am aware that there is a department of Housing in Ministry of Works. But I am talking about land, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, the clarification is very simple. Initially the Ministries of Land, Housing and Physical Planning were one Ministry, but during the re-structuring, they separated these Ministries. But here, the main division is between Housing and Lands. And when you have a condominium law, the two Ministries do take part. 

The regulating and monitoring of this Bill is done by the Ministry of Housing, the registration of the titles and the registration of the land is done by the Ministry of Lands as usual. But in most countries in the world, the condominium law is supervised by the department of Housing. You will find this anywhere in the world, including the very highly developed countries. So, it does not stop the Ministry of Lands from giving titles and supervising the method in which the land is used. As long as that is known, it does not matter. But in some countries the Ministry of Lands is also the Ministry of Housing, so they work together. 

In this particular country, we have separated the two, but at the end of the day, it is the same Government. The Prime Minister could have moved this Bill. As you will remember, at one time when we were moving the statute on land, the Minister then was in another office and he moved it. So, the Government decides whether they want a particular Bill to be moved. But in this particular case, it deals with housing and therefore not the Ministry of Works.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I have been reminded that the last time we had this Bill contributions were going on. The chairman and the Minister may wish to get an opportunity to wind up. Let us start with the chairman.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Katwiremu Yorokamu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the Members who have contributed to this debate and have raised very important issues, which no doubt will help us in our decisions as we come to the Committee Stage of this Bill. I will respond to a number of issues raised by Members. I will let the Minister respond to certain specific ones. 

Hon. Margaret Zziwa raised the issue of the concept of build, operate and transfer. This is not a new concept. Members will recall that when we presented our report on the budget here, on page 29 we read that the Government was already thinking of using the build, operate, transfer concept in constructing the headquarters of the Ministry of Works and other offices for Government. So, it is not a new concept, and we hope that Government will take it up.  

She also raised the issue of selling of blocks of flats on Buganda road. I think the Minister will respond to this one. She raised the issue of valuation of the flats once they are available for sale. This Bill does not deal with valuation, but we did suggest, in our opening remarks, that these are some of the issues that could be dealt with in the regulations. But certainly, the feeling of the Committee was that the method that was used for pool houses, which involves valuation by the Government valuer and sitting tenants having the first priority, would be utilised in this case.

Hon. Toskin accused the Committee of delaying. I wish to put in a defence for the Committee. This Bill was read for the First Time on 15th February this year, and our report, as you will see on the cover, was ready by April 2000, basically two months after. After that the Committee is not responsible for determining when their business comes to the Order Paper. So, we can only be clobbered for the two months, but beyond that we cannot take the blame.  

Hon. Toskin also raised the issue of management of common facilities. This is fully provided for in the Bill, and as we progress through the Bill, you will see that there is a huge section that caters for the common management of facilities within condominium properties.  

Hon. Wambede raised the issue of shelter being a basic need. This House has already pronounced itself on that by adopting the Committee's report on the budget. On page 26 and 28 of that report, we did comment on this issue, and I just want to quickly remind Members to read what we wrote in this report. Government should also take this seriously. We did say, in that report, that Government should put housing as one of its priority programmes to give it the necessary impact that it deserves. And we also said that Government should treat shelter as a basic need. So, we hope that Government will take this seriously and re-echo what hon. Wambede was raising. 

He also raised the issue of valuation, and I have already referred to that. He raised the issue of when this Bill should be implemented. We have dealt with this in our amendment to clause 2 in the Bill, which deals with when the Bill should be effected. We have suggested an amendment to this clause, and we have said that as soon as this Bill is enacted into law, it should take effect. In the original Bill it had been provided that the Act comes into force on a date to be appointed by the Minister by statutory instrument. The Committee came out strongly against that. Since this Bill has taken a long time to come and people have been anxious for its implementation, the Committee does recommend that it should take effect as soon as possible.  

He also raised the issue of consideration of the sitting tenants. I wish to remind Members that this Bill does not deal with that. These are implementation or administrative details, but I am sure the Ministry and those who are concerned have heard the sentiments of the House, that sitting tenants should be considered and given priority and that the values should be determined in a fair manner.  

Hon. Kakungulu underscored the need to expand vertically rather than horizontally. He said that it would save us a bit of land because land is becoming scarce. I could not agree more! Certainly, if the land that National Housing and Construction Corporation used for putting up Naalya estate had been used for flats, it would have accommodated more people. This law is now going to enable the utilisation of land in this respect. We shall have more. We shall accommodate more people on the same piece of land thus saving land, which is becoming very expensive.  

Hon. Mulassanyi was worried about the current agreements which people are making as they get goodwill for their flats. I think this would help. I think these agreements are very difficult to sustain in courts of law, so this law should be able to come to the rescue of those who have been making such agreements. However, on the issue of National Housing and Construction Corporation going out to other towns like Kabale and Rubanda trading centre, I think that is purely business. You have to analyse whether you can make profitable business if you go to Rubanda trading centre and put up flats or houses. I leave that to those who run National Housing and Construction Corporation. They can see whether it is viable.
  
Hon. Mayanja Mohammed was also concerned about utilisation of land, which I have just mentioned. He was worried about the divestiture of National Housing and Construction Corporation. The Minister in charge of Privatisation did respond to that, so I do not need to labour on it. 

He also raised the issue of Government settling the debts it owes to National Housing and Construction Corporation.  I certainly concur with him, and I wish to re-echo the recommendation we made in our budget statement. We did say that we were informed that the Corporation was operating profitably, but its returns on investment, one percent, were low due to the heavy cost of maintaining rental stock. So, the Corporation is awaiting the passing of the condominium law to enable the sale of flats to take place. 

The Corporation is encumbered with huge assets, which are not making any money, and therefore, their returns on investment are definitely very low. But one of the causes of its inefficiency or lack of profit making is because Government owes them up to three billion shillings up to now. We want to appeal to Government to make a definite effort to pay this debt. It makes management look inefficient, when in fact it is Government which sometimes causes inefficiency in these corporations.  

The issue of construction materials is not directly related to this Bill. But I take the sentiments for the need to reduce the cost of construction materials.

Hon. Kabasharira raised about seven issues and I think the Minister will respond to most of them. She raised the issue of open spaces. If these open spaces are taken away then what will happen to recreation facilities. She also said that some of the National Housing and Construction Corporation flats have been mortgaged, so, even if this law comes into place, how will it help those who are in these flats which are mortgaged. I am informed that the balance on the mortgage is about 150,000 dollars, and that this can easily be cleared. Even when it has been cleared, as to whether those flats will be sold or not is a decision that National Housing and Construction Corporation will have to take. But the mortgage apparently can be cleared.  

I will leave the issue of the Buganda road flats for the Minister to clarify as to whether the sitting tenants in those flats will now get an opportunity to purchase. Some of these people are civil servants, and the civil servants who had bungalows did get the opportunity. The question is, how about the civil servants who are in these flats, are they going to lose the opportunity?

Another issue raised was the issue of National Housing and Construction Corporation maintaining the outside and leaving the inside to be maintained by the tenants. I would imagine that when the valuations are being done, this should be taken into account. So, I do not think that sitting tenants should be at a disadvantage. She also raised the issue of valuation, and I have already commented on that. As to the issue of the Minister for Works, the Minister responded to that. If it was not satisfactory, the Minister can respond to that again.

Hon. Mallinga raised the issue of providing low-income houses in this law and enabling more housing units to be constructed on the same piece of land. I should think that the general trend is that we shall get housing which is cheaper and will hopefully go down to the trend of low-income housing.

Hon. Rwabita underscored the need for sensitisation. In my opening remarks I did emphasise that. He raised the issue of improved maintenance with ownership. There is no doubt that when people own something, they look after it better than if it belongs to somebody else. I am sure that this will definitely improve both the general cleanliness of the town and also the general cleanliness of the properties, as hon. Etiang was saying.  

Hon. Tom Bagalana asked why Government is selling houses and yet Government has no accommodation for its civil servants. The Minister should maybe comment on that, but I did not think that it was terribly related to the Condominium Bill we are dealing with.  

Hon. Paul Etiang raised the issue that those who own property are better taxpayers. I think the taxpayers should be happy about that. He also said that property owners tend to be more patriotic. He also raised the issue of valuation, and in his view, valuation would depend on demand and supply. I would want to think that way if it is a profit-making company or an NGO that is involved. If it is a profit making company, there will definitely be supply and demand. But the Committee felt that, much as it is a profit making company, we should get fair valuation.  As to whether the Government valuer is the best person to give us a fair value, I think that is also debatable these days.  

Hon. Butime just had comments. He said that this is a fundamental law. Yes, it is a new concept in Uganda in which tenants will be able to own and buy houses, especially civil servants who did not benefit from the sale of bungalows. I should also add that I think this will, to some extent, democratise ownership of property in this town. Rather than sell the whole of Bugolobi flats to one big property dealer, it is better to spread it to so many people and you have so many beneficiaries.  

Hon. Okumu Ringa had a philosophical point about the philosophy of Adam Smith. He did not raise any query. Hon. Dick Nyai said the Bill should be in the Ministry of Lands rather than Housing. The Minister has responded to that. But from the Committee’s point of view, this is a Government Bill and it was read for the first time here and sponsored by the Ministry of Works. And in our report, we have said that the Ministry, which sponsored this Bill in the House, should be in charge of implementing it.  

I wish to thank Members who have contributed to this Bill, and I hope that we shall have very fruitful deliberations at the Committee Stage and complete this Bill as soon as possible. I hope that when this Bill is passed into law, it will definitely assist those who have been in these condominium properties but unable to have individual ownership. I hope it will also stimulate the private sector into developing these condominium properties. The Bill also allows for somebody to do partial development. If you intend to build ten storeys, you can have five this year and two the next year, another two later on, and so on. This should allow development and be able to accommodate more people on the same piece of land.  I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, let me start by thanking all of you for contributing so well and giving us advice on the Condominium Property Bill. Some Members approached me and said they did not have their Bills with them, I would like to apologise for this. I wish I had known. We would have tried to get you some copies. 

The Ministry is very grateful that the debate has been healthy. I am sure the passing of the Bill by this august House is going to be a fundamental landmark in the development of the human settlement sector. The passing and subsequent implementation of this Bill is very much in harmony with the aspiration of the habitat family.  This will increase home ownership, more intensive utilisation of infrastructure and services, and increase the potential revenue base for investors in the sector.  

A number of issues have been raised by the hon. Members, and with your permission I wish to make some brief responses. The Istanbul Declaration and the Habitat Agenda constitutes a reaffirmation of the commitment of better standards of living and increased freedoms for all human kinds as well as the improvement of quality of life within human settlements and the progressive realisation of human rights to adequate housing. It also reaffirms that human beings are at the centre of sustainable development as well as the inter-dependence of urban and rural development. Uganda’s performance in the human settlement sector is in line with these aspirations and we have already taken major steps to ensure the achievement of these noble objectives.  

My Ministry has directly intervened in improving the living condition in high densely low-income settlements, known as slums, in urban areas. Long before this became a major recommendation of habitat at the city summit in Istanbul in 1996, we implemented the Namuwongo housing project beginning in 1989 with the support of UNDP, Habitat, and Shelter Afrique. We have Masese women project in Jinja, set up with the support of DANIDA in 1990. The Olly housing project in Arua was set up in 1992 by DANIDA and the Government of Uganda. Maluku housing project in Mbale was set up in 1994 in partnership with DANIDA. And we are currently developing programmes to replicate these projects in other major urban centres in the country. 

In all these projects, the emphasis is not only on housing development, but also on the improvement of household income through the implementation of income generating activities so that the beneficiaries are able to repay their housing loans and also improve on their well being. 

Some Members have expressed concern on the National Housing and Construction Corporation’s inability to cater for the poor in urban areas. I wish to inform the House that each urban authority has a welfare department, which should effectively handle this aspect. National Housing and Construction Corporation, though owned by Government, is expected to generate its own revenue to finance its programmes, as it is not dependent on Government subsidies anymore. This means that it must operate as a profit making entity until such a time when it has generated adequate resources to participate in social housing.  

Some Members were also concerned about the public pool houses. I wish to assure the hon. Members that this will not be the case, as we are currently in a process of identifying those core houses that are required to ensure uninterrupted delivery of essential services to our people. 

There was also concern about the neglect of rural housing, where the majority of our people come from. This is not the case, as the Ministry already supports several rural housing programmes. There is one at Kakumya, Masaka District, which is used as a demonstration to other rural communities.  The Ministry has drawn up home improvement programmes, which will form the basis of improvement of rural housing in the country. Kampala has already established an investment committee composed of all utility companies, to co-ordinate their programme with those of the investors, to ensure availability of such utilities. And they cost the investors and subsequent consumers.  

I would like to end by saying that the hon. Members’ contributions and advice will be taken seriously, and where we can improve on this Bill, we will do so. I would like again to thank the chairman and the hon. Members of the Committee and of this House very much for having co-operated in this quest to get the Condominium Bill out.  

And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the Business Committee for having given us the opportunity to present this Bill.  I would like to end by affirming to one particular question on Kampala City Council. I was asked by the Mayor to actually affirm to you that illegal buildings and properties in Kampala City in the next few years will be -(Interruption)

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, before the Minister gave his reply, a specific issue was raised in connection with sitting tenants. I wish the Minister could clarify on that. We have a case where, on Buganda Road flats, the tenants there have written to Members of Parliament on the issue of State House taking over their tenancy and the flats are to be sold off. I wish the Minister could clarify on that, because that looks like a very specific issue, which should not just be generally handled.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had given information on this issue, but since it has come up again, I will try to answer. There are two answers to that. First of all, most of the tenants of the Buganda Road flats were initially tenants of Public Service.  When the Government allowed National Housing and Construction Corporation to take over those flats, the members who were in those flats became tenants of National Housing and Construction Corporation. And when National Housing and Construction Corporation got those flats, they needed money to put up the Houses in Naalya and they used the flats as security. 

Yesterday I affirmed that when the loan is retired, and it will be retired very soon, the sitting tenants will get the first opportunity to buy those flats and any other block of flats that have been used as security. When it comes to the time of selling, the sitting tenants will get the first opportunity. I want to assure you that this is a policy and it will remain as such (Interruption)  

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Minister. In view of the fact that most of the public servants living in houses belonging to National Housing and Construction Corporation, especially Ministers, got an option to buy these houses, it is just fitting that your Ministry finds money, clears the debts on the Buganda Road flats, so that those low-income earners can also share the cake. Are you going to do this?

MR. BABU: Mr. Speaker, I think we should not confuse low-income earning with the Buganda Road flats. I said that Government has intervened and I gave you the examples of where they have intervened. The people who occupy Buganda Road flats were clearly informed that these houses belong to National Housing and Construction Corporation, and it is a profit-making body. The people who are in there will be given the first option to purchase them, and they will be given chances to borrow money from Housing Finance over a period of time to buy these flats. They can pay for them over about 15 years. So, this is the kind of arrangement we have, but it must be clear to you that National Housing and Construction Corporation are sellers and they will not finance anybody. You have to go and get the finances from another institution. But for the low-income housing, Government must intervene and they are already intervening.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Condominium Property Bill, 2000 be read a second time.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will suspend the proceedings at this point until 2.30 p.m. when we shall proceed. We should be here on time, taking advice from the hon. Obiga Kania.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 12.26)

(On resumption at 2.32 p. m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we suspended proceedings, we were supposed to go to Committee Stage, and we had hoped that we would start right away, but I do not think that we can do so because we do not have quorum. So, I will again suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes. When I come back, we shall start with a roll call.

(Proceedings suspended for 15 minutes due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption at 3.00 p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall start by taking a roll call. First of all, I have a list of people who have sought permission from the Speaker, either because they are on duty elsewhere or they are attending to some other matter and they will be coming a little bit late. These are the people who have sought permission and leave was granted to them: 
- Her Excellency the Vice President - she is upcountry. 
The Rt. hon. Prime Minister - he is out of the country.
Hon. Steven Kavuma is out of the country. 
Hon. Beatrice Kiraso is out of the country. 
Hon. Mudoola is out of the country. 
Hon Steven Mallinga –(Interjections)- he was supposed to be on a trip outside the country. 
Hon. Mwebesa Ntegamahe is out of the country. 
The rest are hon. Nyeko Penmogi, hon. Matovu Byatike, hon. Chebet Maikut, hon. Timothy Mutesasira, hon. Wandera Ogalo, hon. William Omaria, hon. George Gobba, hon. Wilson Otage, hon. Charles Bakabulindi, hon. Lydia Balemezi, hon. Kule Muranga, and hon. Lukyamuzi. 

Others are hon. Okello Okello –(Interjection)- he sought permission to be away for some time, and I am happy that he is back, hon. Mavenjina, hon. Amanya Mushega and hon. Kweronda Ruhemba –(Interjection)- according to his note he is meeting somebody within the premises of Parliament.  

Now, we shall proceed to read out of the names of the people who have signed. I am told 200 Members signed and we would like to establish whether they are all here. Well, you can rise up and indicate your presence.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QOURUM

MR. TIM LWANGA: Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I am also present.

THE SPEAKER: Remain standing. We want to take your record. We shall start to my right. Hon. Tim Lwanga is now in the House. Hon. Lokawua, I did get a note from you that you were admitted somewhere. You are welcome.

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I was amongst the very first people to come to this House this morning. 

THE SPEAKER: We note that you are present. Also present now are the hon. Akika, hon. Joyce Mpanga, hon. Amanya Mushega, hon. Mutagamba, hon. Byaruhanga Philip, not the other one -(Laughter)- hon. Mugwanya, hon. Sarah Kiyingi, hon. Wandyaka. The rest who are now present are hon. Otim Omara, hon. Lubega, hon. Okorimoe, hon. Abura Kene, hon. Karugaba, hon. Kabasharira, hon. Ben Wacha, the hon. Member for Kisoro, hon. Salaamu Musumba and hon. Mao.

MR. MAO: Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, a roll call must be based on a master roll, where all those who are expected to be present have their names written.  Therefore, to base a roll call on signatures, which shift from day to day, in my opinion, would not achieve the purpose we may be trying to achieve. I propose that if we intend to continue with roll calling, then we should have all the names of MPs listed and you sign against your name. It would then be clear who is not here and who is here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, I have introduced this and I know what I am about to do.

MR. MAO: I value your judgement, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I certainly will take your advice tomorrow.

MR. MAO:  Well, consider my contribution as a footnote.

THE SPEAKER: But for the time being, we will handle it the way we have started and tomorrow we will take on what you are saying.  Can we proceed!

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Speaker, I was here in the morning and there were a number of people who actually attended in the morning, but whom I do not see this afternoon. Now, what is going to be done about those people? They were here in the morning, some of them contributed, but now if it is reflected that they were not around and yet the Hansard will reflect that they contributed, how will we reconcile that? How will we reconcile that vis-à-vis people who have not come at all or who have signed and gone away?  How are we going to reconcile that?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mutyaba, we have the book where hon. Members sign when they come in, and we have what you referred to as a master roll or the list of Members of Parliament. We shall get all those documents, go through them, and reconcile if we need to take a decision. We may or we may not. So, we will have all the documentation and we will take the appropriate decision.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to register my very active presence in the House and apologise, but I was having very serious Movement consultations in the lobby. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am not in any way against the method being used to get Members here, but I have not yet figured out the purpose or what will be achieved by this roll-call. I am not against it, but announcing over radio and television that tomorrow there will a head count, I think, reflects very badly on the House. In my opinion, we should address the actual problem. What is the problem? We are about 280, how can we fail to raise 100 people. I think this is a matter, which should be addressed. Let us not handle the symptoms. We shall continue doing this every day and I can assure you, matters will not improve. 

In my opinion, we should not fail to have a quorum here, not this Parliament. First of all, we have 61 Ministers, if you want we have 52 women, and you can go ahead and say another 50 for ISO and ESO operatives, and 25 for hard-core sycophants. We should have at least 180 Members at any time. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This House is supposed to be a very respectable House. Members of Parliament are honourable Members. Is it in order for, let me call him the hon. Member for Chwa, to say that we are ISO and ESO operatives? Can he substantiate?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know exactly what he called you or what his complaints are. What did he refer to Members of Parliament as?

MR. LWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, all I am saying is that a Member of Parliament stands up and virtually calls us names, sycophants, ISO and ESO operatives. Is that what we are?  To me that is an insult!	

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the hon. Member, like many of you, was expressing how disgusted he is because of this problem. I think he was really lamenting that we should not really reduce ourselves to the category of people he was describing when we are hon. Members.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I want to apologise for being late, but I was busy chasing something very important for this House. I am now around. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the hon. Okello Okello has really voiced what many of us feel about this problem. Over 200 Members of Parliament consistently and persistently failing to raise a quorum of 93 is a big shame. It is really a big shame! 

Let me take this opportunity, now that we have large numbers, to see what many of us feel about it. Hon. Mao raised the question of addressing the real causes of quorum. Indeed, these causes have been addressed and discussions are going on, but in spite of that, there is no improvement. A lot of whipping is being undertaken, but there is no improvement. Perhaps the problem is with each individual Member of Parliament. It is with us! We are here primarily to represent our constituencies, primarily to legislate. You cannot legislate in your offices. You cannot! You have to legislate in this Chamber or, at the very nearest or furthest, in the Committee rooms. You cannot tell me that you can legislate when you are operating from your offices. That is the problem. 

The problem is with each one of us. It is not with our constituents, it is not with anybody else, it is with us. And if you do not improve, the Speaker has no way of whipping you because that is not his job. The Speaker is supposed to be here to guide a debate where there are people. The only way you can ensure that there are people here is to come and attend to Parliamentary Proceedings. That is the only way I can advise you. It is advise, but if you do not take it, you will know how it will reflect on you and how some people will think exactly the same way as hon. Okello Okello thinks about you. Can we now move to the next item please?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONDOMINIUM BILL, 2000

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Katwiremu): Because this Bill has taken a long time to come, and because of the anxiety people have expressed, the Committee feels that this law should come into force as soon as it is assented to. Therefore, we propose that we delete that clause. And that would mean that as soon as the Bill is assented to, it will come into force.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we have an amendment to the definition of the word “developer”, which appears on page 7 of the Bill. We want to insert the word “develops” before the word “sells.” So, it would read: “a developer means a person who, whether alone or in conjunction with another person, develops, sells or offers for sale to the public, units of the proposed units that have not been previously sold to the public.”

The justification is that the definition without the word “develops” limits the role of the developer to selling, but not to developing the condominium property.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we have no objection. It only improves what is in the Bill.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in the original provision in the Bill, the definition of Minister reads as follows: “ ‘Minister’ means the Minister to whom the functions of the Minister under this Act have for the time being been assigned by the President.”  

The Committee felt that this definition seemed to divert from the usual definition of the word ‘Minister’. So, we thought that we would be clearer if we specifically defined which Minister should be responsible. So, we propose an amendment to read: “ ‘Minister’ means the Cabinet Minister responsible for Housing.”  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know about this. I want to get my mind cleared so that I can also move with you. You are talking about the usual definition of a Minister. I seem to recollect that this definition in the Bill is the definition that is usual and which we sometimes find in the Interpretation Act or Decree. A Minister is defined as the Minister to whom the President has assigned the functions under this Act, in this case.  I think this definition is lifted from one of those usual definitions. Did you interact with the draftsman? And did you also look at Article 113 and 114 of the Constitution?   

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just want to render support to you, because we have a Minister of Housing now, but the word “housing” could actually be removed from any Ministry. It could maybe become habitation. So, if you specifically put ‘housing’, you are actually limiting the ambit of the Act. The provision as it is is perfect. It is perfect and I think we should not change it.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, first of all I tend to agree with your interpretation that the definition of the Minister should stay as it is. But by implication, I notice that the Bill is being presented by the Minister of Housing whereas the implementation of this whole Bill will be by Ministry of Lands, for example, through the Registrar of Titles and so on. So, perhaps if we left it like this, later on Cabinet, in its wisdom, may have to take it back to where it actually belongs and not leave it with Housing.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, Minister and chairman, what do you say?  

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, as you see, we presented it and that is our position. But we considered the other position, which was being given to us by the Committee, and we did not see any harm at the time. It looked okay. But the second one seems to be the one which had gone through the technical people and which we had presented to you. So, if that is a good presentation to the Committee, I would not really mind. The presentation we gave in the Bill was the stand of Government.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, the creation of portfolios or the naming of portfolios is the prerogative of the President. There is no use saying somebody in charge of housing when tomorrow it might go by another name but still have the authority to look after the Condominium Bill. So, what is in the Bill is the best and it should be kept as it is.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we have no strong objection to the proposal, the only concern was that in other Bills this definition has been a little more specific. But if this satisfies the Ministry, we have no strong objections with that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, are you withdrawing the amendment?

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

DR. BYARUHANGA PHILIP: Mr. Chairman, I really want to be clarified on this Condominium Bill. We have got two aspects on the implementation, we have got housing and we have got lands under which these people who are building upwards will directly be affected in terms of ownership. So, implementation is really going to be in two aspects as of now, lands and housing. So, however much we try to relate this to Article 113, where the prerogative of assigning portfolio lays with the President, we do not envisage this housing and lands being together in any way. So, how do we handle this as of now? That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, we are dealing with the definition of the word ‘Minister’. The Constitution has its own definition, and this definition in the Constitution has been reflected sometimes in the Interpretation Decree or in the interpretation law, and so on.  Now here, a new definition is being introduced.  That is what we are really dealing with. 

The suggestion by the Committee is that, rather than have it the way it is in the Bill, reference should be made to the Cabinet Minister responsible for Housing. But the argument is that this is more restrictive than what is obtaining in the Bill. This is the idea. 
So, chairperson, what do we do with your amendment? Do we vote on it?

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the reason the Committee had come out to be more specific is because we thought this was a bit amorphous. But if the advice is that this is a bit safer and clearer, then the Committee has no objection. We withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed with the other amendments.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we thought that the definition of “management agreement” on page 8 was redundant. This is because what it sets out to do is covered in clause 21 (4). 

THE CHAIRMAN: Are we dealing with the definition section?

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it defined elsewhere?

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes. When you go to clause 21 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Those are functions?

MR. KATWIREMU: We are saying that the definition for ‘management agreement’ is redundant. It is not necessary at all because it is trying to define the moveable and immovable property of the corporation associated with the units and the common property associated with the units.  

Now clause 21, under a corporation, which is already defined, covers that element. So, once you have got the definition of ‘corporation’ and you have the functions of the corporation, all that is already covered. So, this is redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairperson, the definition section is there to help the reader know what a particular expression means and what it stands for in a particular provision. That is why we have ‘management agreement’ now. If there is no use for the expression ‘management agreement’ anywhere in this Bill, then I would agree with you that this definition would be redundant, but if this it is used elsewhere, then you may have to think twice. Hon. Minister where does this word ‘management agreement’ appear elsewhere in the agreement?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, it does appear, especially when you are getting agents who are going to look after the properties or estates. This is the agreement that you have between the people in the condominium and the person who is going to look after the place or the person who is going to repair the place. So, these are the agreements. There is another one for repairs also. These are the different agreements we are trying to define.  

I think the best way would be for us to go to clause 21 and look at the definition at the time.

MR.MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister is absolutely right. When we are looking at definitions in the first section, there is no reason for us to jump over to clause 21. If we get to clause 21 and find that the matter it is dealing with has already been taken care of in the definition, then we can amend or substitute clause 21. Otherwise, we are going to create a problem if we look at clauses, which we should rightly look at, and then move over and look at clauses, which we have not yet reached. So, the Minister is absolutely right.

THE CHAIRMAN: Go to clause 44. Hon. Minister, the marginal note at clause 44 is “management agreements”.  Sub-clause (1) says: “A corporation may terminate a developer’s management agreement at any time after the majority of the units are owned by persons other than a developer.”  

This presupposes that a management agreement must have been entered into, I think with the corporation. So, somebody will want to know what a management agreement is, and that is why it is being defined on page 8.  It says:  “management agreement means an agreement entered into by a corporation governing the management of…” Now, the Committee is saying that you do not need that definition of management agreement. Hon. Minister, is that correct? 

MR. KATWIREMU: The rationale, Mr. Chairman, was that the definition of a management agreement means an agreement entered into by a corporation. Now that element of the management agreement is covered under a corporation. So, we thought this was actually not necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but what is covered under the corporation are the functions. Those are functions of the corporation!  

MR. KATWIREMU: In clause 21, the functions of a corporation are to manage the common property, to keep the common property in a state of good repair, and so on. The definition here is almost repeating the same thing.  So, we thought this one was actually not necessary. It is already covered.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am sorry I do not want to appear as if I am debating this matter, but I am trying to tell you that the moment you talk about a management agreement in the body of the Bill, you need to define it. That is all I am saying. Hon. Minister, it is your Bill. You do not want a management agreement to be defined and yet you have a whole marginal note talking about a management agreement in clause 44! I am very doubtful that that definition can be referred to as being redundant.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I just want to give some professional advice to the chairman of the Committee. Definitely, in a Bill of this nature, it is imperative that when you talk about an important element of the transaction, which is the management agreement, it must be defined. Definitely, it must appear in the definitions. And in any case, it does not really do you any harm. You may think that it is superfluous, but it does no harm to leave it there. However, in this case it is not superfluous, because a person who is reading the Act will want to know what a management agreement is. What does it entail? And he can only find that in the definition section.  

CAPT. BABU FRANCIS: Mr. Chairman, I just want to make it very clear that clause 44 refers to the developers’ management agreement, which is also different. So, I want to refer you to that, so that we do not mix the two. If you look at page 8, right at the top, there is reference to a developers’ management agreement, which means a management agreement entered into by the corporation at the time when the majority of the units are owned by the developers. When the corporation has been formed and they appoint an agent to run the estate, there is also a management agreement. That is a different one from the one in clause 44.  

There are several agreements that can be got into. The one we are talking about is the one, which is entered into by the corporation and the agent who is going to look after the place. That is a management contract. So, we need the definition for a management contract.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I do not know why you are not taking in professional advice!

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, the definition is okay as it is except that there is one little thing, which I thought the hon. Minister hinted, and that is defining with whom the agreement is being entered into. Where it is now it simply says, “management agreement means an agreement entered into by a corporation governing the management of…” And then one of the functions of the corporation is to manage those properties. Now, with whom are they entering this management agreement? That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE CHAIRMAN: When the corporation enters into an agreement, I think it presupposes that there is another party. You do not need to say they entered into an agreement with so and so. It presupposes that there is another party.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, we really need a definition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Right. If we need the definition, I will put the issue to a vote. We will vote on whether we need it or not.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I am confused, and I am confused because I do not see the difference between the corporation defined under the developer and a corporation under management. So, probably we actually need a definition of the corporation.  

THE CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with the definition of management agreement. Let us confine ourselves to that.  Hon. Ongom, you were one time the chairperson.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, the Committee thought that this was redundant because of the definition of a developer’s management agreement, which we thought covers it all.   Actually, a developer’s management agreement is also an agreement with whoever is going to buy. So, we thought the next one would really be redundant. And we also actually amended the marginal note at clause 44 to read “developer’s agreement” rather than “management agreement” as it is in the Bill.  

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Members of the Committee to distinguish between a developer’s management agreement and a management agreement. On page 8, you can see that it is a fixed duration. It comes into play when the majority of units are owned by a developer. That is particular. If the developer disposes of those, it is no longer a developer’s management agreement. So, this developer’s management agreement is different from a management agreement, and we need both definitions.  Thank you, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Chairman says the definition of ‘management agreement’ is redundant. I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, immediately after the definition of “parcel” on page 9, we would like to insert a definition for “planning authority”, because later on we did introduce the idea of a planning authority. For example, clause 21(j) says, “to comply with any notice or order duly served on it by any competent District Council or public utility authority…” 

We thought that this provision of a district council is not encompassing. So, we thought we would use a local authority or planning authority for that particular area. We thought we should introduce a definition for a planning authority at this stage.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where does it appear in the body of the Bill? The need to define comes about because the expression is used somewhere in the body of the Bill. 

MR.KATWIREMU: Eventually we introduced it, and I was trying to show you where we have introduced it.

THE CHAIRMAN: If that is the case, can we go there, and after you have successfully introduced it, then we define it. Is that agreed?

MR.KATWIREMU: Yes, we have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we skip that one.  Proceed!

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, when the chairman of the Committee is talking about the planning authority, is he talking about physical planning or economic planning?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I have advised that when the Committee successfully introduces this element of a planning authority, then we will define it. So, you wait until we get there, then you can make a contribution along those lines.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, still on definitions, I would like to seek clarification on the interpretation of “owner”. In this interpretation clause, “owner” is defined as follows: 
“‘owner’ means a person who is registered as the owner of- 
freehold estate in a unit; or 
mailo estate in a unit; or 
the leasehold estate in a unit where the parcel on which the unit is located is held under a lease.”  

Now, in the Land Act we also have other forms of land tenure systems. Why have we not included them here to make it consistent? 

THE CHAIRMAN: He is saying that there are other systems of land tenure under the Land Act, why have you not included all of them here? There is also the communal system, were you own a parcel of land somewhere in the countryside.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I think the forms of ownership here are the ones that would give you a title. I think that is mainly why they are here and the others are not.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, one could probably get around the problem by saying, “‘owner’ includes a person…” so that if another case comes up, say on customary ownership, then it will be covered.  Instead of saying, “owner” means this and nothing else, we can use the word ‘includes’ and leave it like that. If came up with another case of property being on customary land, which is not an estate, which has not been mentioned here, then that owner would be covered. Otherwise, you have to thoroughly express every type of estate where you think these people are going to apply.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I do not agree with the Minister. If you say, ‘owner includes’, then you are going to create a problem of interpretation on who the owner is. I suggest that we maybe add (d) to say  “or any other land tenure established under the land law”. You will then go back to the land law and see which tenures are there, it could be customary, it would be communal, and then you would apply them. But if you say, ‘include’, then it becomes quite contentious, because anyone could come and say ‘I am the owner’ and then you have to go to court to determine whether he is actually the owner under this or any other law. Whereas, if you restrict it to this and any other land tenure created under the land law, then you have a point of reference.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa’s worry is that this is rather restricted. It ignores other forms of land tenure ownership.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: On that basis, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, can I first explain before he moves an amendment? The question as to whether customary land tenure system should be included here was actually considered in the Committee. We found it really unnecessary, because we did not think that anybody would really go and develop somewhere on a piece of land where he does not have a lease. It is a bit unthinkable that anybody can risk that kind of money on customary land.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I disagree with that argument. We are not legislating for our time. We are legislating for posterity. And now that we have a law regulating land use, I would like to propose an amendment. I propose that we add (d), under the interpretation of owner, to read, “any person holding a land tenure system under the Land Act”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mutyaba was thinking along the same lines, but let us hear what he says.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I said that we add (d) and we say, “or any other land tenure established under the Land Act, 1998”.

MR. ONGOM: In that case, Mr. Chairman, there would be no need to list a, b, c because all these are under the same Act. 

MR. MUTYABA: No, it says “or any other…”.

MR. ONGOM: But then there is no any other apart from the customary tenure under the Land Act. There is no other! 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ongom, I think there are more than three main tenure systems under the Land Act.

MR. ONGOM: I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. But when you say “(d) and any other…” you should know that there is only one other left, which is the customary system.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then what you want to do is to list it.

MR. ONGOM: Why should I list it? We can just refer to those tenure systems under the Land Act generally, rather than listing them.

THE CHIARMAN: Can you move your amendment so that we discuss it?  

MR. KATWIREMU: We have four types of land tenures under the Constitution and under the Land Act. This was actually borrowed from the Constitution. So, since we have three mentioned here, the only one, which was left out, was the customary. There is no other system, unless we just create our own. There are four specifically recognised by the Constitution, and the only one missing is the customary system. So, maybe we could add (d) to refer to customary, so that we are not ambiguous. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I want you to look at the whole thing together. 

MR. MUTYABA: The amendment is as follows: “‘owner’ means a person who is registered as the owner of- (d) any other land tenure established under the Land Act, 1998” I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman there is no any other - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us not get involved in the technique of drafting. If you are satisfied that the ownership under customary tenure should be included, we say so. The niceties of drafting should be left to somebody else.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What disturbs me about hon. Mutyaba's proposed amendment is that he is being vague. The Constitution, under Article 237, has defined the tenures. Why doesn’t he be specific and mention the other tenure that is left as provided for in the Constitution, instead of referring to the Land Act, which was transplanted from Article 237? He should as well come out and mention customary, because it is the only other tenure. But this business of saying 'any other' as if we are going to create another system outside the Constitution, I think, will not be proper. I thank you.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, on further examination of this provision, I do not think that we can still have customary tenure, which is registered. If it is registered it becomes the lethal. It becomes something else. You cannot register customary tenure.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LANDS) (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Chairman, I do not want to contradict my Colleague, but let us refresh our minds. There are four tenures recognised under Article 237 of the Constitution, freehold, Mailo, leasehold and customary tenure. In fact, it is customary tenure, which is the strongest tenure, because it is held in perpetuity. It is more superior than a lease. It is registered under the Land Act, and recently this House passed the regulations under which the registrars are registering customary tenure. They are issuing certificates of ownership to individuals or even to a community. They can even acquire leases on customary land. A lease is a short-term tenure - (Interruption)

THE CHIARMAN: Hon. Members, let us proceed this way, those of you who have strong ideas on leases should get together and synchronise, and we proceed with the next amendment. We stand this over and the hon. Okumu-Ringa, the chairman, the hon. Mutyaba, the Minister of Lands and the hon. Obiga Kania can you sit together and agree.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we would have no problem with adding the customary system, but we were constrained by the word ‘registered’. I suggest that the team, which is going to meet, resolves that issue. 

At the bottom of page 10, ‘tribunal’ is defined as follows: “‘Tribunal’ means a land tribunal established under the Land Act, 1998”. 

We propose to delete the definition of “tribunal” and wherever it appears we should insert the word ‘court’. This is because the tribunals had not been established, and more fundamentally, their functions were limited to land disputes. In this Bill the disputes go beyond land disputes, so we thought we should change that. 

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, from a practical point of view, it would appear like that, but you and me know that under the law, whatever is attached on the land becomes part of it. Actually, when a building is put on that land, it becomes part of the land. So, the land law applies also to condominiums. In which case, the land law must apply to disputes under the condominium law. Therefore, “tribunal” should remain rather than “court”.  

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Chairman, first of all, it is not true that the function of land tribunals is only limited to determining land disputes. Sections 75, 76, 82,83 indicate that land tribunals handle compensation, transfer disputes, and a lot of property dealings.   

Secondly, the previous week this Parliament passed the Amendment to the Land Act, specifically addressing the land tribunals. In one of the provisions passed, and which was moved by the Committee, Parliament said that until land tribunals are established the LC courts and the magistrates’ courts should continue handling new cases. Therefore, the interpretation of tribunals here is limiting. The broader court, which includes tribunals, to me appears acceptable. 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: In short you are saying the amendment is justified. 
 
MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: It is to delete “tribunal”, which is restrictive at the time we are passing this law, and it brings in “court”, which has a broader definition and also includes tribunals. I request my Colleague to accept the amendment.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we have no objection to this amendment. We discussed it at great length and it gave us a wider scope.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Because we stood over some of the definitions in that clause, we are not going to pronounce ourselves on it as yet. We shall proceed. 

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, I have noticed something, we have already passed the provision to use court instead of tribunal. We shall therefore have a problem of defining court twice. There is reference to a court on page seven, and there it is interpreted as a court of competent jurisdiction. Therefore, this other court, which is determining disputes, should be a court including land tribunals, or the definitions should be merged.

THE CHAIRMAN: That would be better approach. 

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the definition of “court” that we had in mind is this broader one, a court of competent jurisdiction. We do not have to mention different courts.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, while this House passed an Amendment, which re-instated the jurisdiction of the magistrates’ courts, it is still very clear that tribunals will have jurisdiction under the Land Act. And definitely, the jurisdiction of the magistrates’ courts is transitional. So, I want to agree with the Minister that the word “court” in this case should also include tribunals established under the Land Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: What you are saying is that we have to go back to page 7 and broaden the definition of court. 

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with that, but I also want to caution that actually even on our law books we still have housing committees and at the end of it, they also have tribunals. So, if the definition is going to include those two, then I have no problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: Include which two?

MR. BABU: You see, Sir, whilst we are including land tribunals here, I want somebody to know that even in the 60s there was a housing tribunal. Now, the definition should encompass all tribunals that can hear these cases.  Thank you very much.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, the reason we are actually including tribunals here is because, strictly speaking, under the law a building is part of the land, so, it is land. So, it is imperative that we have to do that because there is no other way. The Minister is saying that there are also housing committees. We are not bound to include housing committees, but we are bound, because of the nature of the property we are dealing with, to include land tribunals. Those buildings, which are going to be condominiums, are actually part of the land. They are real estate.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, we could say, “court means a court of competent jurisdiction and includes tribunals under the Land Act, 1998”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek some simple clarification on that clause. It mentions registration of condominium plans restricted to only one building.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Which clause are you referring to? 

MR. WAMBEDE: Clause 4(1) on page 11. It says: “A proprietor or developer of an existing or planned building may divide the building into two or more units by registering with the Registrar a condominium plan in accordance with this Act.”  

When I read this together with clause 20, which is ahead, you find that they only mention one condominium plan, which is restrictive to only one building. I may have a number of buildings on that same plot of land, do I also have to register each individual building or can I register them as one condominium property? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, if you have two blocks of flats and you want to have individual ownership of each unit in those two blocks, I think you will have to first of all register them as two different buildings because they are located on two different pieces of land. After that you can deal with one at a time. Of course if they are joined, then that is a different matter. But if they are separate, then they will be two separate buildings.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are talking about parcels of land, and then you are talking about a building standing on its own parcel. I will put the question to that clause.

Clause 4, agreed to

Clause 5, agreed to

Clause 6, agreed to

Clause 7

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, for purposes of clarity, especially on the change of use, the Committee thought that we should introduce a new clause before 7(1). The numbering there is a bit confusing, but we want to insert a clause and then the numbering can be sorted out later. The new clause would read as follows: “7(1) An owner of a unit who wishes to change its use shall first get the consent of the Corporation and the approval of planning and local authorities. 

(2) Any modifications to the plan of the condominium property made necessary by the change of use in sub-section (1) shall be submitted to the registrar as annex to the original condominium plan.”  

This really is a way of getting approval for change of use, which has also been going on in the present law.

MR. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have a small problem with this.  I found out that this would be very comfortable in the regulations rather in the main body of the law, because this falls under the management of the estate and most of that is going to fall under the regulations. They also will fall under the other law. Whenever you have any changes, or you want to do anything, you have to apply to the rating authority, in this case the urban authorities. So, if the chairman accepts, I would like us to take this up in the regulations rather than in the main body of the law.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr Chairman, I am opposed to this amendment.  This country, and particularly this city, has suffered greatly from lack of planned development, which entails zoning areas as residential, commercial, offices and so on. I want to envisage a situation where you have a residential block of flats, which is purely for residential users, but one of the condominium owners comes along and he wants to create an office or something else, different from the existing user. You are going to have problems! For example, one residential user may be consuming more water or more electricity or something like that. So, in the circumstances, to avoid confusion in the management of these condominiums, I oppose this amendment and allow for no change of user in condominiums.

MR MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with the amendment by the chairman. In fact, this is a very important factor, basing on what hon. Bageine has said.  This is a very important factor in the success of the condominium law. The fact that users cannot just change the use of the property as they wish is so important that it should appear in the main Act rather than the regulations, because regulations can easily be changed. It must be there, because the owner will not change the user unless the planning authority has accepted. Before the planning authority accepts, they will take into account things like their zonal planning or whether it is for residential or commercial purposes. 

So, once you have put a condition that the approval or the permission of the planning authority and the corporation, which is the management, must be first obtained, then you can rest comfortably sure that the planning authority will not just agree to the change of the user. So, rather than saying that there is no change at all, we have to put our trust in the planning authority and agree that if they decide to change the user, they will do that within their jurisdiction. So, I suggest that we accept the amendment by the chairman and put it in the Act rather than in the regulations.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, for the second part, which is the approval of the planning and local authority, even if you put it in the main body, there is another law. The only powers we have here are on the corporation, and the corporation is going to have by-laws. They will require certain things done in a certain way. That is why I suggested that this amendment is fine, but let it be in the regulations because the management of the corporation is under the regulations.  

Secondly, we are actually getting the second bit from another law, because there is a law governing planning of urban areas. No matter what you do, you still have to go to it. That is why I propose, since this is the only corporation, let it go to the regulations and let it be part of that. Thank you very much.
    
THE CHAIRMAN: We are talking about planning. Is this the planning authority you wanted to introduce somewhere? So, we will have the same problem with this amendment. You remember you were introducing planning somewhere.

MR. MUTYABA: All along, when we are talking about planning in the context of land use, we are talking about physical planning. That is what we are referring to. Perhaps at a later stage we should really introduce the physical part of it, so that it is not ambiguous. Here it is land use that we are actually dealing with, therefore, it should be clearly stated that this is physical planning that we are talking about.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the Committee wishes to differ slightly from what the Minister is proposing. It is very important that before you begin tampering with these condominium properties, someone must approve the way you are going to do it. With the by-laws he is talking about, you could have a problem of enforcement and by the time you get into the legal wrangles, people would have more or less mutilated what was supposed to be a nicely arranged property. We thought it was so important that somebody, who is in charge of planning, must really have an approval stamp on these proposals before they are accepted.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you happy, hon. Minister?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we should not split hairs. I accept.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to

Clause 8

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, before we go to clause 8, is it not necessary, since you have touched on the issue of planning, to now go back to what he was suggesting? He had suggested a definition for planning authorities. He had brought it up at the beginning but you said that when we reach that clause is when he could bring it up. I do not know whether the chairman had forgotten.

THE CHAIRMAN: It depends on where he wants to introduce it in the Bill. That is really what I meant. When we gets there, he would say that he is introducing a planning authority. Can you indicate where that is likely to be?

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, we can even take it up from this stage, because the planning authority we referred to elsewhere is no different from this one. We do not refer to a different planning authority. So, even at this stage, we can introduce the definition of a planning authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: We had stood over the consideration of that definition because you said that you wanted to introduce a provision in the body of the Act dealing with planning, which would introduce the planning authority. We would like to know where about you are introducing it.

MR. KATWIREMU: One of the clauses is this one, Mr. Chairman. The other one is under clause 21(j), which reads, “to comply with any notice or order duly served on it by any competent District Council or public utility authority…” We had a problem with “District Council” because it was restrictive, and we wanted to introduce local authority or planning authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is exactly what I was looking for. I wanted to know where you wanted to introduce your planning authority. We are not there yet, so we cannot define it until we get there.  

Clause 8, agreed to

Clause 9, agreed to

Clause 10

MR. KATWIREMU: This is simply a typographical error. The last line in clause 10(2) reads, “…the areas that are to be leased under of section 6(3)”. We would like to simply delete the word “of”.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to

Clause 11, agreed to

Clause 12, agreed to

Clause 13, agreed to

Clause 14, agreed to

Clause 15, agreed to

Clause 16, agreed to

Clause 17, agreed to

Clause 18, agreed to

Clause 19, agreed to

Clause 20, agreed to

Clause 21

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in clause 21 (1)(j), we propose to delete the word “District Council” and insert “local authority or planning authority”.  I beg to move.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with that amendment but when you put the local authority, you will have done away with the urban authority. So, I would like to request that the word ‘urban’ appears somewhere in the drafting. Otherwise, I have no objection.

MR. WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you guided us, we are coming back to deal with the issue of the planning authority, but if we leave it like this, it may actually refer to the planning authority we are about to discuss or which we are due to handle. So, I wish the chairman could be specific, because, as I said, in as far as the land issue is concerned, we are specifically dealing with physical planning. So, I hope this is actually included, so that we differentiate this from the broader planning issues.

MS.KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the chairman as to whether he would really want to do away with the public utility authority. There might be the water authority requiring certain works to be done, the electricity authority may also require certain work to be done, the telecom utility company may also require certain work to be done. Is it right for us to delete the word ‘utility’?

THE CHAIRMAN: It will be drafted, because he has brought in local authority or planning authority and he is removing District Council. But still, I have a problem, where have you introduced this planning authority? You have got to establish it.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, the planning authority is already established under a different law for town and country planning.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that the one he is referring to?

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, that is the one he is referring to. So, when we go to definitions, we will say we are referring to a planning authority established under the Town and Country Planning Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: That means you are now being specific in your definition, but let us deal with this amendment.

CAPT. BABU: Further to that, Sir, the districts are actually planning authorities, so I think he brought that out to make it very clear. The district, according to the Local Government Act, is a planning authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, we have said that any competent local authority or planning authority will be competent in accordance with a particular law.

MR. KATWIREMU: When we said local authorities, I thought that would even take care of the urban ones, but if you go with “District Council”, you leave out the urban.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, now in sub-clause (1), immediately after paragraph (j), we would like to introduce a new paragraph to read as follows: “(k) to submit new plans to the registrar in case of alterations on the condominium property.” 

This will be in consonance with what we have already dealt with in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in sub-clause (3)(b), immediately after “local authority” we would like to insert “planning authority”. This is just to be uniform with what we have already passed in (j).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 21(6) on page 22, reads as follows: “In addition to the functions specified in subsection (1), the board shall hear appeals from the aggrieved members of the corporation.”  

We propose that we delete the phrase “appeals from the aggrieved members of the corporation” and insert “complaints from aggrieved members of the corporation”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. chairman, why don’t you just replace “appeals” with “complaints”?

MR. KATWIREMU: I take your advice, Mr. Chairman. The justification is that the board shall be hearing complaints and it is the court that hears appeals. The board cannot really hear appeals. That is the difference we are trying to make.

So, I would like to move that in sub-section (6), we replace the word “appeals”, appearing in the second line, with the word “complaints”.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am now persuaded to go along with hon. Mutyaba. We should deal with the definition before we proceed. What do you think, hon. Minister? –(Interjections)- I am now advised that it is not only one provision which has been stood over, there are actually more. So, we will deal with them all together. Let us continue.

Clause 22

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 22(3) on page 23 reads as follows: “A corporation may, by unanimous resolution, be directed to transfer or lease the common property or any part of it, or to grant an easement on the whole or part of the common property.”  

So, we would like to delete “be directed to” and substitute it with “direct the board”. This is because it is a corporation, which directs the board to implement its decisions.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I sympathise, unfortunately I do not agree. The corporations are the owners of the place and they sit and decide. Here, we are directing them to rent out a potion of that property or to give it out for something. A board works on behalf of the corporation, I therefore would like to persuade the chairman to leave the powers to the people who own the place, the corporation. Thank you.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to understand the Minister’s logic. I think I know what he is talking about, but when you say ‘be directed’, I would like to know by whom. I think he should be very specific. If we say, “the corporation by a unanimous resolution be directed…” and we leave it like that, then questions start coming as to who is going to direct the corporation. So, you are saying ‘by the owner’, but does the Minister want to say that the corporation is going to be directed by the owner? But we do not know who is going to direct the corporation.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, following what the Minister explained, I think we should simply say, “a corporation may, by a unanimous resolution, transfer…” because they are the ones taking the decision. So, we delete “be directed to”. There is no need of directing from anybody.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are absolutely right, and I do not know what the chairman and the Minister say.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with the proposal by hon. Shem Bageine.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, we accept it.

THE CHAIRMAN: What happens to your amendment? Are you withdrawing it?

MR. KATWIREMU: I have no problem with withdrawing my amendment because the import of what hon. Shem Bageine is proposing is the same, but I can allow him to make his own presentation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Bageine's amendment seems to make more sense than this other one, which was being proposed. He is saying what you need to do is to allow the corporation, what you described as the owners of the property, to take a decision by a resolution. That is it. They do not direct anybody.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in our case, the corporation would do the same, but it would direct through the board.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I think the chairman of the Committee should withdraw his amendment and then I move my amendment, and then we proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us do this, I will put the question to hon. Bageine's amendment, and if it passes, then yours will fall by the way side.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the effect is that we delete the expression “be directed to”. Have you got any other amendments? 

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, Mr. Chairman. We would like to delete sub-clause (6) and insert the following: “(6) The following shall apply to a transfer or lease executed in accordance with subsection (3)-
    (a) the transfer or lease is valid and effective without execution by any person having an interest in the common property; and
    (b) the receipt by the corporation of the purchase money, rent, premiums or other money payable to the corporation under the terms of the transfer or lease is a sufficient discharge of, and exonerates the persons taking under the transfer or lease from any responsibility for the application of the money expressed to have been so received.”

We thought this was a bit clearer than the clause in the Bill. I beg to move.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to request both the chairman of the Committee and the hon. Minister in charge to throw a bit more light on this because I do not think the meaning comes out clearly. It does not! I think we need further explanation. I can see some technical problems here. I can see people taking advantage of others and having properties transferred without their consent and so on. I would like to have some clarification on this.

MR. KATWIREMU: Well, I do not know whether hon. Shem Bageine does not see any more problems in the existing clause. If he does not, then ours is supposed to be an improvement. What we have done is to just break it into two parts, and that is the main import of the sub-clause. The first one is the transfer or lease, and its validity or its effectiveness is in its execution. The second one is the receipt by the corporation of the purchase money.  

We wanted to separate those two elements. When you read the existing clause, you can see that both of them are tied and it is very difficult to distinguish those two elements. This sub-clause helps distinguish those two elements, and I think hon. Shem Bageine should be better helped by our sub-clause rather than the one in the Bill now. 

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I have a similar problem. I do not know whether hon. Bageine is satisfied. I do not understand how the transfer becomes valid and effective if I have got to execute it. I thought that if I make a transfer, I execute a transfer. But you are telling me that I can make a transfer without executing it. If you really do this, then this is going to be subject to a lot of abuse, because someone else will come and because you have no document of execution, you will be persuaded to enter into a transaction on a property, which has already been transferred. I just want some clarification, because I do not understand how you can effect a transfer without executing it. This definitely does not safeguard the people who are going to be transacting business with the corporations.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is a very technical provision. The transfer or lease is valid and effective without execution by any other person having an interest, not the transferee. He transfers and it becomes valid and effective notwithstanding any other person having any interest in the common property, which is different from the unit. So, this seems to be what they are aiming at. When I want to transfer my unit, it is my unit, it belongs to me and I have a title. Now, because my neighbour has an interest in the common property, it is a no, until I also execute something. You cannot transfer. That is my understanding of the first part of the provision.  

The second part is to do with receipt by the corporation of the purchase money, rent, premiums and the lot, being sufficient discharge, and exonerates the person taking the transfer or lease from any responsibility for the application of the money expressed to have been receipted.  I am still analysing this one, and I am not yet clear on it. But the first part, I think, is to do with three parties, the transferor, the transferee, and any other person having interest in the common property interfering with my transfer.  

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, this issue of transfer relates back to sub-section (3), where it is presumed that there has been a unanimous decision by all the parties. I want to relate this to the fact that, if I agree to sell my property and we do it jointly, it is not I alone. The fact that I have agreed requires me to execute, in order for that transfer to be effective. Why are we giving an exception after having stated under sub-section (3) that there was a unanimous decision? Why do we go on and allow a few of the people to execute, and then the execution will be effective. How will be sure if there is a consideration involved. How are we sure as to how much was agreed upon and by whom? So, if it is execution of transfer of property, it must mean transfer of property in accordance with the law, and everybody involved must execute those instruments in order for a transfer to be effective. 

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, the key words here are “common property”, and I would like to give an example. In a block of flats, the corporation may decide to lease the entire stairway to some company to manage, which is separate from the individual units. Now, because the stairway is the common property, I do not have to get the consent of every person, so long as it is the interest of all of us to have that particular property leased. This is what it means. So, I would like to appeal to Colleagues to retain this provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: Retain it in which format, the original format or the Committee’s format?

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I think the format of the Committee makes it a bit more systematic and easier to understand.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: A further illustration of a common property is the parking yard, the lawn or the open space. It could be rented to somebody for recreational purposes, and it is common property managed by the corporation. The corporation would undertake this transaction on behalf of the owners. In other words, the corporation represents the individual owners of the units.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, do we now understand the meaning of this? I will put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, clause 22(8)(b) says: “in favour of the Registrar”. We propose that this be deleted and we insert the following: “addressed to the Registrar”.  

The justification is that, as it is in the Bill, it implies that the Registrar has a bigger interest in the certificate other than ensuring that it complies with the procedural requirements. So, we thought that by saying, “addressed to the Registrar”, it would reduce the implied interest as is in the Bill. I beg to move.

MR. MUTYABA:  I am sorry, but I do not really know whether the word ‘address’ would give the same import that you want to give here. I thought that ‘in favour’ was a nice word and definitely it should be left as it is. ‘Addressed’ is not conclusive, because you can address anything to the registrar and this does not actually mean that it is correct. So, I do not know why the chairman changed this. I got just part of his reason, but I do not know why he changed it.

MR.KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, subsection (8) reads as follows: “The certificate referred to in subsection (7)- 
    (a) in favour of a purchaser or lessee of the common property, or party to it; and 
    (b) in favour of the Registrar.”  

We did not think that the interests of the purchaser should be to the same degree as the interests the Registrar has in the certificate. So, we are trying to distinguish between those two.

MR. BAGEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I think it is not very clear.  The certificate is in favour of the purchaser, would it not probably have been better to say it is endorsed by the Registrar rather than addressed to him?  Addressed to him for what? You can address anything to him and it never reaches him. But if he has endorsed the certificate as a Registrar of Titles, then it has more import than simply addressing it to him. And certainly, he does not have any interest vested in him as a Registrar in this particular case.

THE CHAIRMAN: Who is the bigger beneficiary of the two? I think it is the person in whose favour the certificate is prepared. And now down here, you are talking about evidential proof. You are saying that this certificate, if it is in favour of a purchaser, or as somebody is saying, if endorsed by the Registrar, is conclusive proof of the facts stated in the certificate. Is that what this is getting at? 

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, if we go back to subsection (7), we see that the obligation of a Registrar is to register. So, the certificate cannot be in his favour and it cannot be addressed to him, but he can endorse it. So, once you have a certificate, which is in favour of the purchaser, and you have the endorsement of the Registrar, then that is conclusive proof. So hon. Bageine is right.

THE CHAIRMAN: Precisely! We are looking at the evidential value of the certificate. So, how do we proceed?

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I can withdraw my amendment, and I would like to adopt hon. Shem Bageine’s. But he can move his amendment.

MR. BAGEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to clause 22(8)(b) to delete “in favour of” and replace it with “endorsed by”. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to

Clause 23, agreed to

Clause 24

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, in clause 24(4), immediately after the word “Register” in the second line, we propose to insert “and the person in favour of whom the charge is effected”. 

So, it will read, “A chargee whose charge is entered on the part of the Register and the person in favour of whom the charge is effected in accordance with section 7(1)…” I beg to move.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I have some difficulty because my understanding of the word ‘chargee’. To me it means the person in favour of whom the charge is effected. Maybe what the chairperson wants to say is the person against whom the charge is effected. There is a charger and a chargee. So, here he is talking about the same chargee notifying himself or herself. It should be, “and the person against whom the charge is effected.”

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, the amendment by the chairman of the Committee is repeating itself. I think the meaning is absolutely clear. The chargee is the person who has an interest or a charge against that property. And it is up to him to give that information. Now, when you bring in a third element, it completely changes the meaning. So, the chargee shall, upon registration of a charge in his favour, notify the corporation in writing about that charge. I do not see any amendment whatsoever. It is absolutely clear.

MR. MUTYABA: I just want to find out from the chairman whether he wanted the person against whom the charge is entered also to notify the corporation. I think the problem is the meaning of the words ‘chargee’ and ‘charger’. But in this case, definitely the chairman is repeating himself.  Mr. chairman, if you could clarify, did you also want the person against whom the charge is entered to notify the corporation? That would mean the owner who takes out a charge.

THE CHAIRMAN: The beneficiary of the charge is the one who should inform the corporation. Here you are saying the person in favour of whom the charge is effected.  This is the chargee himself! So, you are really repeating yourself. You are saying that the same person is talking to himself or herself and telling himself or herself to do certain things. The chargee is the beneficiary of the charge, and therefore he has an interest in notifying.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, that being the case, I withdraw my amendment and we leave it as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I will now put the question to the clause as it is.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25, agreed to

Clause 26, agreed to

Clause 27, agreed to

Clause 28, agreed to

Clause 29

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, I have been notified of an amendment by the Minister, and we would have no objection to it, but we want to maybe hear it first and then we see how we can proceed. We had made different amendments, but we have no problem with the Minister’s amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the Minister’s amendment?  I think he should move it first. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we are requesting to delete (2)(a) up to (g) and replace it with 29(2). We have given you a copy. It says, “A managing agent appointed under this subsection shall be any person as prescribed under the regulation to be made under this Act”.  

We got a lot of complaints that if we put these expertise in here, the people who live in the condominiums would find it very expensive to hire some of these. And if we prescribe them under the regulation, it would not be as expensive, and people would be able to choose who can run the management of these agencies from among these people. So, we prefer to put them under the regulations rather than in the main body of the law. I beg to move.

MR. KATWIREMU: Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, we have no objection to that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am bothered about the drafting, but anyway, the Committee had attempted to amend clause 29 (2) (g) and (h). They had proceeded to amend paragraph by paragraph, but now the Minister is proposing, and the Committee seems to accept, that instead of listing all those categories, all you need to do is make this amendment. Definitely, the amendment has to be refined, but the idea is that instead of listing those categories, you simply say that it will be the persons who will have been prescribed under the regulations made under this Act. You can even stop at ‘made’. That is enough. You get the idea?

MR. KATWIREMU: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

MR.WAMBEDE: Mr. Chairman, I want to know the import of that amendment by the Minister. I am the owner and you are telling me you should not appoint any other person of my choice, and I should go by this! It would seem that you are imposing certain restrictions on me by restricting my choice. Why don’t you leave it open for me to find whoever can manage the property for me, other than you prescribing for me?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, all that this law is doing is to lay down guidelines for the people who live in a communal setting like this so that they are able to cooperate with each other. And in this particular case, we are also guiding them on how they can manage these estates. So, we are giving them a concept, and by doing that, we put it in the regulations for them to have a reference so that when the corporation agrees that they need an agent to manage the estate, then they know where it is. You can go and find that within the regulations. The only thing that we are doing is to remove it from the main body of the law and put it in the regulations. That is all we are doing here.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, having agreed to that amendment, I would like to seek clarification on sub-section (5), which gives the Minister powers to exempt a board from appointing an agent for whatever reasons. This is not very clear to me. Again, this is an intricate matter because if we are giving guidelines, we should not begin giving exemptions to others not to have an agent. I can see fighting taking place amongst the condominium owners, unless they can directly have that kind of agency with them. So, I would like to get some clarification on sub-clause (5).

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, actually this was put in here because of the repeated complaints by the people. They said if they are staying in flats or a set of apartments, why should they be forced to have this. And if the feeling is very strong with the people staying in the community, they could appeal to the Minister, who could eventually find a way to sort out this problem by giving them exemption. But this would be in special cases and if we retained this in the body of the law. Right now, I think the best thing to do is to make it fall by the way side, since we have gone to the regulations.

MR. KATWIREMU: The amendment by the Minister stops at sub-clause (2) of clause 29. We have an amendment on sub- clause (5), which may help the hon. Member who was raising a query.  

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Chairman, I do not see the definition of a managing agent here. Who is a managing agent and what are his or her functions, before we do away with him or her?  

THE CHAIRMAN: That is also my discovery. I was interested in knowing who this managing agent is. May be it is defined in the section itself.
 
CAPT. BABU FRANCIS: Mr. Chairman, we thought that it actually not be understood directly, and therefore, there was a proposal that it should be included within the definition section. I think it is supposed to have been moved. In fact, this is where the management agreement comes in. Clause 29 refers to the management agreement we talked about earlier on. Now, I think ‘managing agent’, like the hon. Minister has said, should be defined. But this is the person who manages the estate. It will be defined technically.  

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, in view of the amendment by the Minister, I would like to move that subsections (3), (4) and (5) be deleted and everything is transferred to the regulations, because I think they are misplaced here.  

THE CHAIRMAN: But does that answer the question put forward by the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. Who is this animal called a managing agent? We do not know!

MR. BAGEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I think there will be need to define a managing agent. And I think that clause 29, by attempting to classify the people who could carry out the work of a managing agent, was in a way attempting to define a managing agent. But I think there is a need to define a managing agent more specifically within the definition section.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not think we can competently define it here. Let us allow the Minister and the Committee chairperson to look at it. And we also do not see the definition of a management board. What is a management board? A management board is not defined here, unless it is defined in the section that creates it. 

Clause 26(1) says, “There shall be, in respect of every corporation, a management board elected in accordance with the bye-laws”. That is how you establish it –(Interjections)- I am made to understand that it is defined under “board”. It says, “board means a management board elected under section 26.” 

That is fine, but we still need one for the managing agent. The honourable Member was attempting to move an amendment, saying that in light of the Minister’s amendment in sub-clause (2), we do not need sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5). Are you moving a formal amendment? 

MR. BAGEINE: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 29(3), (4) and (5) be deleted. 

MR. KATWIREMU: I wish to approve that amendment, Mr. Chairman. Sub-section (2) of clause 29 is only detailing who the managing agent should be. And by the fact that this has gone to the regulations, it does not take away the need for sub-section (3), which says, “A managing agent shall perform such functions as may be delegated to him or her by the corporation”.  

The managing agent will still be there, it is just that the composition is not going to be spelt out in this law. It is going to be spelt out in the regulations. So, there is still need for a managing agent.  

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with (3) and (4). I do have a problem with (5). If we are going to define the managing agent after reading 29(1) very carefully, then the agent will have to be protected even as a person, and (3) and (4) actually do protect the agent. So, my view is that (3) and (4) should be left and then (5), which refers to the Minister – and some people are not very happy with the powers given to him - could fall by way side or be deleted. I thank you.

MR. BAGEINE: Mr. Chairman, I concede on (3) and (4) on second thoughts, but I still move that subsection (5) be deleted.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I will put the question on sub-clause (5).

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I wish to thank you for your determination, but I think it is a convenient time for us to rise.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Condominium Property Bill, 2000” up to clause 29.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 14th December, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)


