Tuesday, 10 December 2002

Parliament  met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, soon after the commencement of the second meeting of the second session of Parliament, while giving a communication to the House, I expressed concern about a number of accusations that Mr Ofwono Opondo of the Movement Secretariat was making against Members of Parliament and some committees of Parliament.  

I advised that if Mr Ofwono Opondo had complaints against any member or members of any committee of Parliament, he should come and report to the Office of the Speaker for necessary action; since Parliament has organs that can deal with the kind of accusations that were being made.

I have been informed that last week, Mr Ofwono Opondo appeared before the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, the one responsible for the Movement Secretariat. I understand he made accusations against four Members of Parliament who are also members of committees of Parliament. Three belong to the Public Service and Local Government, and the fourth is a member of the Committee on Economy.  

Now that Mr Ofwono Opondo has appeared before a committee of Parliament, it means the accusations have been formally made against the four Members of Parliament. We must investigate these accusations.

However, the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee’s mandate does not include investigating accusations of that kind. It is the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee, which is charged with the mandate to investigate such accusations. This is because there is concern about the discipline of members.

With the above premises, the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs is directed to hand over the details of the accusations to the Chairperson of the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee. This should expeditiously take necessary steps to investigate the accusations in accordance with our rules, and the rules of natural justice.

It should be appreciated that these accusations are causing concern to the four Members of Parliament, and the country as a whole. It is not clear whether they were made in good faith or not, but I appeal to you and others interested in this matter to remain calm.

I want to take this opportunity to again thank the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee for enabling these formal accusations to be made to Parliament.

Honourable members, you will recall that some time ago, we passed a resolution here to make contributions, in monetary terms, to assist our brothers and sisters who are internally displaced in war-torn northern Uganda. We raised a sum of Shs 30.4 million, and Parliament decided to set up a special committee that should decide on the best way to utilise that money.  

I wish to announce to you that a special committee, chaired by the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, held a preliminary meeting this morning and came up with a number of steps to take on the matter of utilisation of the funds. These will be announced later.

However, among other matters raised in the meeting was the issue of Members of Parliament donating clothes for distribution to the displaced persons. I wish to formally announce that hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, Member of Parliament for Mityana North, Mubende District, was nominated in this meeting to head the sub-committee responsible for co-ordinating the collection of your donations. Other members of the committee are hon. Jane Akwero Odwong, hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Bright Rwamirama. 

This committee is tasked with ensuring that all those who have contributions to make will have done so by Tuesday, 17 December 2002. I therefore seek your co-operation and generous contribution.  

Perhaps you need to know the other members I nominated for the special committee. I did this after consulting the chairpersons of the Lango and Acholi Parliamentary Groups, and I selected the following: Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Margaret Ateng, hon. Jane Odwong of Kitgum, hon. Santa Okot, and hon. Nyeko, who is the secretary of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. I also included hon. Aporu, the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness, hon. Dora Byamukama, hon. Bright Rwamirama and hon. Kiwanda. So, that is the committee, honourable members.  

Hon. Sebaggala, I want to welcome you back from Saudi Arabia.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTIFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on this matter of Mr Ofwono Opondo. On one occasion when I was not here, the Rt hon. Prime Minister did indicate that I would come to make a statement on this matter, to Parliament. But as you have said, before I could do so, Parliament did make a move on this particular matter. 

The committee on discipline started hearings on this issue, and the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs summoned Mr Ofwono Opondo to a meeting regarding the accusations he made. I was not able to accompany Mr Ofwono Opondo to this particular meeting, with the permission of the Speaker. However, I did send one of my other colleagues, the director, to accompany Mr Ofwono Opondo to this meeting. 

For the avoidance of doubt, Mr Speaker, just as you have guided, I think we should allow these mechanisms we have set in place to work. All of us should also be available and be as helpful as possible so that this matter can be brought to a firm and conclusive end.  

I would like to reiterate that I am available to the committees as and when they think I would be helpful. I know how painful it is to have accusations like these against the four of our colleagues levelled against you. I am also aware that there is very widespread concern countrywide about this matter. 

I have, on my own initiative, met you Mr Speaker, and we have discussed this matter very widely and quietly. I have already met some of our colleagues who are accused: hon. Lt. Kinobe and hon. Capt. Guma. I have had extensive meetings with the chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, hon. Nsaba Buturo, and I have also had discussions with the IGG; and of course extensive discussions with Mr Ofwono Opondo.  

At the Secretariat, consultations are also going on, on this very important matter. But it is my judgement that given the mechanisms we have already set up, it would be inappropriate for me to give any further details on this matter. I remain available to help the committees, and if we arrive at a different position at the Secretariat, Mr Speaker, I will be available to give these details to the House. So, we remain co-operative as we investigate this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NSABA BUTURO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, the committee that I have the privilege to chair came to the conclusion that we should submit our report to you. Now that you have ruled on the matter, we will pass it on to the relevant committee.  

However, I have got something brief to talk about. A year ago, I moved a motion on Kampala City Council, and I think the Local Government Committee was asked to investigate the same. The situation of Kampala City is not good.  We have got cholera now, and the infrastructure is not good at all. I want to know the extent to which the committee has gone regarding the matters we raised. When is it reporting to the House?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government is not here. Hon. Nsaba Buturo, we shall find out when the chairperson, hon. Beatrice Byenkya –(Interruption)

MR KAWANDA: I am a member of that committee.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, you want to report?

MR KAWANDA: I just want to give information that the committee is still pursuing the matter. This morning we had a meeting with the chairperson of Kampala Central, and the Assistant Principal Town Clerk. We are trying to pursue the matter and write a report, which will be brought to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I am extremely grateful for your communication about the accusations against this great august body. However, it should not only stop there. It has taken us many years to build this institution. This is a very important institution for this country. I do not think this only stops at the recent accusations.  

I had the pleasure of addressing Members of the Parliamentary Reporters Association. I told them that the pains we have taken to build this institution in the last six years have been tremendous. Therefore, this institution must be respected in all we do. The things we must do should reflect a certain respect for this institution. 

I also told the reporters that some of the information they report erodes the achievements we have made. I therefore requested, and I still request, that whilst they are investigating these small accusations that have been made, they should do a little bit more. We need better public relations for this House. We need people to come out very clearly, those who make these accusations. Therefore, whilst this is now taking us into investigations via our committees, I think we should embark on a process, with our Members of the Parliamentary Reporters Association, to make sure that what they report out of this House also builds this House. The onus is on the fourth estate to build an institution known as Parliament.  

I therefore request that whilst these committees are investigating, they should not only look at the accusations that have been made. They should also look at the way these are being reported to the public, because that is what is causing concern to our people. They listen to radios, they read the newspapers and when it is not reported correctly, then that is bad. It is sometimes magnified. It is this magnification that some of us would like to request our reporters to make sure that they sieve out, especially when they are reporting about this institution. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister without Portfolio, and National Political Commissar. He is the head of the Movement Secretariat.  

Mr Ofwono Opondo is a public officer whose emoluments are passed as part of the budget by this august House. Insinuations in his accusations are definitely discouraging. They are not in the interest of promoting a good image of this august House, nor of the nation. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have said that the man came and officially reported to Parliament, through its committee. I have also directed the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to hand over the matter to the appropriate committee. Why do you really not leave this matter? You have now started saying you doubt this or the other, why do you not leave it to the committee, which will give us a report?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, that was just a preamble to my -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the preamble is causing us a problem.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring you greetings from Saudi Arabia. 

Last week, a group of people from the Muslim Community in Pallisa came to Parliament. The issue that brought them here was their concern over the increasing tension in that area. The tension was brought about by one Mulinde, who converted from Islam to Christianity. When he went to Pallisa he started slaughtering animals. This forced the Muslim community of Pallisa District to come and meet their Member of Parliament, hon. Mallinga, to address that grievance. They warned that the situation might even get out of hand. 

Last Sunday, the situation exploded and the police were forced to come in to arrest the situation. Many people were arrested and some got injuries. The situation is far from over. Today I received calls, as the Parliamentary Imam, to the effect that the situation is getting out of hand. I told them that I would bring up this issue on the Floor so that we can see what to do. 

We would not like to see the Nigerian scenario in our country. Mr Speaker, I beg for your clarification. And perhaps hon. Mallinga is around to give us more information as to the situation pertaining in Pallisa District.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. It is true, as the honourable member has said, that representatives of the Muslim community in Pallisa came here last week, to see me. They were concerned that there is a preacher who converted from Islam to Christianity, called Umar. 

He went to Pallisa and preached, among other things, that Muslims should not have the privilege of slaughtering animals in public markets. He also used abusive language against Islam as a religion. 

At that time it was the period of fasting, called Ramadhan, so I talked to the representative, together with hon. Katuntu, that they should stay calm. We know that it has always been a tradition that in public markets it is the Muslims who have always slaughtered animals. 

We did not understand why this preacher was talking the way he was, and why he was allowed to go all over Uganda. He has been to Jinja, Masaka, and he was recently in Iganga. And everywhere he goes he causes tension among the Muslims 

Two days ago, some Christians went and slaughtered a cow in Pallisa municipality and they started selling the meat. This was with the knowledge of the RDC and the police. I was extremely shocked at the way this situation has been handled in Pallisa. 

I talked to the RDC last night, I also talked to the DPC but I did not get satisfactory answers. First; why was this man allowed to go to Pallisa and preach the way he preached, using abusive language against Muslims? If he wanted to preach Christianity, then he should have preached straightforward Christianity and attracted people to his sect! He should not have used abusive language against any other religion.

Secondly, how was this man allowed to preach something, which would create discord among the population of Pallisa? He said that anybody should have the privilege of being able to slaughter a cow and sell it anywhere in the municipality. Two; he said they should start slaughtering pigs and sell them together with the meat from the cows they slaughter. I think this was provocative. It was provocative to the Muslim –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand on a point of clarification. I do bear with the concern of the honourable members, and of course I can see the big burden that this Parliament has in making regulations and laws. However, this issue of who should be concerned with slaughtering, which market should be allowed to slaughter pigs or cows, is it an issue for this Parliament to handle? Is it Parliament to set up the regulations for that? Can the districts or the localities not have their particular regulations? 

I understand we have a lot of things to legislate on. If we are going to the extent of discussing who is supposed to be a slaughter man in which particular constituency, and who is supposed to identify which market to do what, then I think we shall be going beyond our duties! I am seeking your guidance.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What does the Parliamentary Imam want this Parliament to do? To order that only the Muslims should slaughter animals; what do you want us to do? (Laughter).

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I am surprised because the Nigerian scenario is still very fresh in our minds. The issue of Muslims in Pallisa District is not a small issue. The issue is escalating and can even explode to other areas. This is an issue that this House must handle, otherwise it could explode and then we face bigger problems It is a national concern!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there must be laws controlling this issue. We have said that it was going to cause tension in the area. Instead of starting this debate, which I see may not lead us anywhere, I advise that the Minister in charge of Trade -(Interjections)- because trade deals with meat for sale, and the Minister of Internal Affairs, should take up this matter so that we do not have tension. 

From the utterances coming from honourable members, I think this matter should not continue. The matter was brought up by hon. Sebaggala and hon. Dr Mallinga. I think the Ministers of Trade and Internal Affairs should look into this so that a solution is found. Otherwise, I can see that the debate is going to degenerate into something different.

MR UMAR LULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first of all congratulate you upon celebrating Idd on Thursday. 

On a matter of procedure, Thursday happened to be a public holiday but there was a workshop that was organised by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, which took place at Ridar Hotel in Seeta. This was to review the Summit, which took place in South Africa about two or three months ago, on sustainable development. Knowing very well that this was a public holiday, the ministry went ahead to conduct this workshop. I am seeking the legality of its proceedings.  

Secondly, on Saturday last week, it was reported in Bukedde newspaper, which is a sister paper to The New Vision, that about 530 he-goats of the boor type from South Africa cannot mount the local goats in Masaka. I am raising this because my sub-counties of Lwabenge, Bukulula and Lukaya trading centres are also affected. Therefore, Mr Speaker, since I see –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should draft a formal question to the minister for an answer.

MR LULE: Lastly, Mr Speaker, again on Saturday, I heard over the radio that a committee had been set up by Parliament. The way it was reported, this committee was called the “Bills Committee”. They said it is under the chairmanship of hon. Kiwanda, and it is composed of hon. Adolf Mwesige, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Kasamba Mathias and another member. 

I do not know whether this was actually misrepresented or misreported on the radio. Was it supposed to be handled the way it was by these people? I am seeking clarification on that also.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for having raised this. The committee he is talking about has nothing to do with parliamentary work. It is just an in-house discussion, which members came out with. 

We normally meet under the YPA programme. We came up with an initiative that we should often meet and discuss certain bills and Acts, so that we interpret them and by the time we come to the House, members have a better understanding of such bills. That is all that the committee does.

THE SPEAKER: It has nothing to do with official committees of Parliament. It is an internal matter of the YPA.

LT JIMMY KINOBE (Katikamu North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As one of the people affected by the allegations, I want to thank you for the wise ruling that this matter be properly investigated to clear or condemn whoever is involved in what is termed “disturbing allegations”, by Mr Ofwono Opondo.

As you are aware, Mr Ofwono Opondo decided to launch his accusations in a public court. The public has listened to the charges, tried us and even passed judgement over many of us. We are aware that next week we are likely to go on recess. The season coming after that time is a season of jubilation. I am wondering whether the affected members are going to live with that problem throughout the Christmas season. Are the investigations going to be expedited so that by the time we go on recess the truth will have come out?  

We have gone through a very difficult time, and I want to thank members of this House and members of the public who have actually come out to defend us even before we appear before them. 

So, my point of clarification is, how are we going to enable the committee that is going to take on this work to expedite this, before we go on recess? If we are guilty we should be condemned and if not we should be cleared. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: In my statement I said that the committee should expeditiously handle the matter. I believe the committee is capable of starting on this matter soon. It will depend, of course, on the witnesses. But be assured that this matter will be expeditiously dealt with.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year, around November, I put a question to the Minister in charge of Environment. That question was about the fumes being let out into the atmosphere from BAT. Today we had a chance of witnessing the signing ceremony of the Kalangala ship construction deal, down at the yard of the Ministry of Works headquarters. When we were seated there, most of the members I was with were about to run away because of those fumes. And they can be my witnesses.  

Mr Speaker, a year has passed. I have not received any answer as far as this question is concerned. I want to know, because everyday I see on the Order Paper questions of hon. Nabwiso and the rest, but I have never seen mine. Should I wait until the end of next year? I want a clarification from you.

THE SPEAKER: The clerks should follow up this matter.

MR LULE: Mr Speaker, I raised an issue on the matter of a workshop that took place in Seeta; and goats failing to mount local ones. The minister is around. Why can she not respond? This is a matter of public importance. It can happen anywhere else. We need an answer to that.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LANDS) (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister responsible for water is not the competent one to pronounce himself on the matter of public holidays. That is my consideration. I request that the question be put to the appropriate minister.

THE SPEAKER: Can you assist us? Who is this appropriate minister? Okay, honourable member, you have heard that he cannot answer it. Instead the Minister of Public Service is the one to deal with holidays, but we shall follow it up.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS, ON THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1998,1999,2000 AND 2001, SUBMITTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 52(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION.

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, which have been submitted annually to Parliament, for the years 1998, 1999, 2000/2001.  

Mr Speaker, it is also gratifying to note that today is the International Human Rights Day and I am pleased to be presenting the Human Rights Report on the Human Rights Day.  

Under Article 52(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Human Rights Commission is required to submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of the human rights situation in the country. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission submitted its reports for 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001 to Parliament. Parliament, during the 6th Parliament, debated the first report, of 1997. Due to the busy political schedule at the end of the 6th Parliament, the reports of 1998 and 1999 were not debated. 

This report, therefore, covers a summary of the key issues in the Annual Reports of 1998, 1999,2000/2001, which the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered in accordance with Rule 123 of our Rules of Procedure.  

The Committee held discussions with: 

• The Uganda Human Rights Commission itself 
• The Chief Justice of the Courts of Judicature 
• The Minister of State for Security, and institutions related to security 
• The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
• The Amnesty Commission 
• The East African Media Institute 
• The Uganda Law Society 
• The Foundation for Human Rights Initiative 
• DENIVA 
• The National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) 
• The Minister of State in charge of Pensions 
• The Minister of State for Regional Co-operation 
• The Minister of State for Internal Affairs – who was accompanied by senior officers of the Police and Prisons Department.

Mr Speaker, although serious issues were raised against other institutions, the committee was disappointed and considered it an abscondment from duty of the following ministers who were invited but failed to turn up to honour the summons of the committee: 

• The Minister of Defence
• The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development
• The Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that these ministers who failed to appear before the committee, and whose departments were implicated, should give the House their response to queries raised against them immediately - (Applause).

There were a number of key issues, which were raised in the report of the Human Rights Commission, and their responses received, and recommendations given by the committee.

The committee noted that government funding to the commission remained inadequate. For instance, this financial year, out of what was budgeted, only 52 percent was provided for the non-wage and 10 percent for capital development. In that respect the committee recommends that the budget of the commission be increased to facilitate its activities. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission should also be facilitated to carry out civic education on a continuous basis.  

Mr Speaker, on illegal arrests and detentions, it was reported that police more often than not effects arrests and charges suspects before investigations are carried out. The committee was informed that investigations are delayed because of inadequate number of trained investigators due to lack of funds, equipment and vehicles. It is recommended that police should effect arrests only after preliminary investigations have been done.  

On torture, it was observed that the police, security agencies and prisons officials continued to use torture as a way of investigation and interrogation, and in the case of prisons, to attain compliance with Prisons’ Regulations.  In central and local government prisons for instance, beating by warders and prefects, known as Katikiros, is a common practice. 

The committee was informed that in ISO, torture was a practice of individuals, not the institution, and that such individuals are normally dismissed once the allegations against them have been investigated and proved.  

In the Prisons Department, the committee was informed that warders who torture the inmates had been dismissed. The department had organised seminars to sensitise staff and prisoners about the dangers of torture.  

In Police Departments, the Human Rights Training Manual had been developed, and community policing - to make the public aware of their rights - had been started.

The committee strongly condemns torture, which is against the Constitution and the International Human Rights Convention. It should be noted that under Article 44, freedom from torture is a non-derogable right. The committee strongly recommends that all security agents should desist from the use of torture and should have clear and effective ways of identifying and disciplining individuals who violate human rights.

Conditions in police cells, jails and other places of detention were characterised by over-crowding, insufficient medical care, inadequate meals, poor bedding facilities, lack of uniforms, poor ventilation and sanitation. For example, in Mpigi Police Station, 35 suspects were held in a dark filthy cell measuring 3-5ft. And they used a bucket to ease themselves, because they had no toilet! Kakiika Prisons in Mbarara, which has a capacity to hold 117 prisoners, is currently holding an average of 812 inmates. 

The overcrowding in police cells was mainly due to the failure by the police to have suspects released or charged before the elapse of the 48 hours, as provided for in the Constitution, and of course partly due to poor funding.

There are a number of reasons the police gave for overcrowding in the cells. One of them was that it takes time for deportees to be deported to their home countries. It takes time for the DPP to sanction charge sheets and to establish a prima facie case. It also takes time for investigations to be completed. Some cases are complicated, requiring X-ray, in case of drugs. In some cases suspects may be arrested in different parts of the country and their cases require the attention and the opinion of experts. In serious cases, before police can release a suspect on police bond, there is need to have substantive sureties.  Because of those problems, the police was unable to meet the 48-hour rule.  

Safe Houses:

Mr Speaker, on “safe houses”, during the reporting period, arrests by security organs did not conform to legal procedures, especially where suspects were detained in places not authorised by law. The committee was informed by the Minister for Security that “safe houses” were mainly used in 1997 and 1998, due to the widespread wave of terrorism. These were phased out when some personnel were trained to handle cases of terrorism. Currently Kigo Prison, which is a gazetted prison, is handling suspects of terrorism. 

Remand Homes:

The committee was informed that there are only three remand homes and one rehabilitation centre in the country. In these the conditions are still unsatisfactory. For example, there is poor diet, lack of bedding, absence of recreational or educational facilities and of perimeter fencing, exposure of juveniles to security risks. For example, in January 1998, armed thugs attacked Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre, killing a guard and an inmate, injuring two inmates and freeing the rest. There was no explanation for this anomaly from the relevant ministry.  

The committee recommends that there should be established a Family and Children’s Court in the districts to promote the juvenile justice system. The existing remand homes and rehabilitation centres should also be rehabilitated.  

Hard Labour in Prisons:
 
Many prisoners, including those on remand, were subjected to long periods of hard labour in the fields. They work from 7.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m., without lunch and breakfast. The illegal and exploitative practice of hiring out prison labour for private individuals is also common. 

It was observed that the working hours specified in the prison regulations is too long, and the committee recommended that: 

• The hours should be reduced to comply with the Constitution 
• There should be more funding to afford meals for prisoners, and 
• Hiring out of prisoners should be abolished, since it is unconstitutional.

On the right to liberty, we noted that contrary to Article 23(4) of the Constitution, police continue to detain suspects for over 48 hours without charging them in court. Other suspects were subjected to long remand periods in prison, of up to seven years pending conclusion of their trials. The constitutional provision for bail, of 120 days for minor offences and 360 days for capital offences not committed to the High Court, was not being adhered to.  

The committee was informed that there are 126 inmates who have spent more than 360 days on remand yet they have never been committed to the High Court for trial. It was recommended that those on remand who have stayed in prison for longer than the period specified in the Constitution, should be set free. 

Delayed Administration of Justice: 

The delayed trials at all levels continue to be a matter of grave concern, both to litigants and the general public. In one case, which was investigated by the commission, one Kabananuka Gorreti was arrested in 1995 and her case was withdrawn for lack of evidence in 2000. She spent five years in jail. 

The committee was informed that delayed trials were due to inadequate staffing of the courts, and a number of judges in the High Court are serving on commissions, tribunals and other institutions like COMESA.  

It was noted that the rate of convictions was low due to either poor investigations or because many innocent people are arrested on mere suspicion. Many prosecutions also fail because security agencies other than the police arrest and fail to provide evidence and witnesses.  

The committee also observed that the delayed administration of justice is because of corruption in the administration of justice.  

The committee recommended that:
 
• Legislation should be put in place to allow bail to committals after a specified period, and to put in place measures to eliminate bottlenecks to speedy trials. 

• More judges should be recruited. 

• Judges should be used minimally for additional tasks.

• There is need for appointing temporary judges to handle the backlog of cases. 

• Holding remands beyond the constitutional period be addressed.

• The jurisdiction of Magistrates’ Courts should be reviewed. This could help to reduce huge case backlog that affects operation of criminal justice agencies.  

The Human Rights Commission experienced difficulty in accessing military detention centres since UPDF insists that this must be after advance notice and prior permission from the Army Commander. Unfortunately, the Minister for Defence did not appear before the committee to explain this issue.  However, the Minister of State for Security and the Director General ISO who appeared before the committee, pledged to guarantee the commission unlimited accesses to detention centres. 

The committee recommended that the Uganda Human Rights Commission should be more assertive in exercising their constitutional mandate. 

The committee also noted that there are a number of laws that are inconsistent with the Constitution, and they are listed in the report. We recommend that these laws should be amended to bring them into conformity with the constitution.

On armed conflict and its effects, we noted that rebel activities in the west and in northern Uganda had resulted in insecurity. A number of people have been displaced as a result. We recommend that assistance should be earmarked for the victims in terms of compensation and assistance, and a mechanism should be set up for rehabilitation and conflict resolution and reconciliation.

On the Karamoja question, we recommend that the disarmament programme be continued, and government should take full charge of security in Karamoja.

On internally displaced people, we recommend that a policy on IDPs should be implemented to address emergencies and problems of internally displaced people.

On workers’ rights, we recommend that a minimum living wage be worked out by government, because the wages of the workers in this country are very low. 

On the right to health, we recommend that more funding should be provided to continue the health programmes, and that there should be better supervision, training and disciplinary action where necessary, on the medical staff. This is because medical problems were so intense.

On children’s rights, we recommend that the enforcement mechanisms for the Children’s Statute be put in place to ensure that children are protected from exploitation. There should be a family and children’s court, which I have already mentioned. UPE should be made compulsory and so many other recommendations as they are in the report.

On social security, we recommend that more funding should be availed to the Ministry of Pensions because when the Minister of Pension appeared, we realised that her biggest problem was lack of funds for paying pension to our senior citizens.

On non-payment of wages, we also recommend that the law on minimum wage should be brought here.

On electoral democracy, we noted that the 2001 elections had several problems, ranging from late enactment of laws on how elections would be conducted, violence, use of money, intimidation of voters and involvement of security agencies in elections. The Electoral Commission was also unable to enforce electoral laws and regulations. 

We recommend that there should be a comprehensive review of electoral laws in order to promote democracy, transparency and fair competition.

On abuse of freedom of religion, we looked at the cases of Kanungu and Bushara in Luwero. We recommend that government should be more alert and should vet registration and monitor the activities of various religions and sects. 

We also recommend that the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the Kanungu deaths should complete its work. The recommendations of the Human Rights Commission on Kanungu should also be implemented.

On international treaties, we noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not complying with international treaty obligations. 

We recommend that the international conventions to which Uganda is a party should be domesticated into our laws. Also, the reports to the UN should be submitted on time.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we recommend that society should develop genuine pressure groups to ensure observance of human rights. 

More investment should be done in training of security organs, especially the investigators, to enable them handle cases faster. 

A human rights desk should be established in every ministry and district local government, to handle human rights issues.  

The merger of local government and central government prisons should be addressed through the Prisons Bill, which is due to be tabled in Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the chairperson and the committee for the very good work done. 

However, there is a small outcry from the people. It is about the new development in the security setting, that is Operation Wembley. I have not heard anything concerning this and I would like to be informed about where it falls. Does Operation Wembley fall under Police or under the President’s Office? We need to be informed about this.

Mr Speaker, the people carrying out this operation, I do not know whether they are the genuine ones -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The report is about the human rights question from 2000 to 2001. Operation Wembley is 2002, that is why it was not covered. Thank you very much.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much. I think the operation came in 2002; that is why I inquired about it. Even if this report does not come up to when the operation started, the minister should also be informed about this. We shall not wait for the other report to come, which will only treat a problem when it has already affected most of our people.

There is a lot of outcry concerning human rights violations. We cannot say that the commission is not doing some good work. It is doing some good work but there are some people who are not authorised to be under these operations. They just nickname themselves “operation”. They say, “We are carrying out Operation Wembley,” and many things have happened under that pretext. I beg the minister concerned to clarify to us on this. He should also give us a remedy so that we inform our constituencies accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Brig. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairman for the serious work and good report that you have submitted. I would also like to speak on behalf of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness; other colleagues will come and speak on their behalf too.

First of all, I want to apologize to the committee and the chairman for not being able to attend. However, I disagree with the chairman and his committee in condemning, or even passing judgement over the ministers who did not turn up by saying “they absconded from their duty.” That, I think, is beyond their power. I do not think they have power to condemn the –(Laughter)- people who did not turn up. Rather, I think they would have asked why. That is because they did not know why these people did not turn up. 

They have usurped the powers of the Chief Justice or whoever, now they are condemning the ministers for absconding! I would rather appeal to the chairman and his committee to ask all those who had -(Interruption)- I have finished, Sir. (Laughter). The committee should have asked those who did not turn up to explain why they did not turn up in the House. 

Also, we promise that we shall try to get other colleagues to come and explain why they did not turn up, and also to answer the allegations against our department. Thank you very much.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for its realistic report. I think the report has been so realistic that I see it as a provocation to government to act. The issues raised are realistic.

In issue number 21, for example, the committee recommended that there should be a comprehensive review of electoral laws in order to promote democracy, transparency and fair competition. It is also suggesting, in a nutshell, that the criteria of government must be revised. You no longer can capitalise on having fought a protracted war to dominate power. You must devise fashionable ways of co-existing in government, while you still command the support of the people.

That observation, Mr Speaker, carries a lot of support from me. And with reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights Charter, Article 20, which I want to quote here, and Article 21, which I beg to quote also, I think we should wake up. We should try to give our people alternative ways and means of making government a contestable matter. As things stand now, government is not vividly contestable. There are still loopholes, which make a few people capitalise on government without effective challenge. In reference to this quotation you are going to receive, what I am talking about makes sense.

Article 20 says: “Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
(2) No one may be compelled to belong to an association.”

I respect the laws of Uganda, because the Constitution says we are now all moving under the Movement. But if you go beyond that dimension, now that Uganda is a member country of the United Nations, one would say that we are still in chains. We are forced to belong to the association, for given reasons; but we are still forced. 

Article 21 of the same Bill of Rights says that:
“Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.”

This is where the partyists still have a case to be explained to them. We are ourselves under a given umbrella called “X”, yet we have our programme. We would like to have a mixed economic arrangement but we have no chance to test our manifestation before the voters, because we are supposed to be under a given, fraudulent Movement System. 

With reference to the observations of the committee, I pray that time has come for us to take some action. I am not happy with the way the Uganda Human Rights Commission has acted on what is expected of it. This is in reference to Article 52(1)(h) of our Constitution.

I continue to be convinced that they are not answering this obligation. I would rather abandon giving them any money in the next budget. There is an obligation you are ignoring here and I am going to read it to you verbatim. If you have no answer to it, I will move that we do not give you any money in the next budget. 

Article 52(1)(h) of our Constitution says that the Uganda Human Rights Commission shall, “monitor the Government’s compliance with international treaty and convention obligations on human rights.” I have already read one convention to you. You have not implemented it, so you have not advised government. The Constitution expects you to advise government to heed to the international protocols and conventions, which Uganda has ratified.

These conventions are as follows: 

• The Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
• The Convention on Civil and Political Rights;
• The Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; and 
• The Convention Against Torture.

You have not done anything about them, and I have been reading all the reports you make. And it is because you fear government, which is an appointing body of you, so you cannot say anything. Maybe we should recommend to the President to appoint better people who will implement the contents of the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, the report has also let me down, apparently. It says that when they investigated detainees who are being tortured, they discovered that it is not institutions torturing prisoners, but individuals. Are the individuals drawn from Owino market? The individuals are part of the establishment; therefore the establishment is responsible for the torture. 

I am going to bring two cases here on which I need government’s response. For example, contrary to what the Constitution says, why do you not gazette detention places like DMI in Kitante? People are detained there day and night, yet that place is not registered, and it is not a gazetted detention place! That is a negation of the Constitution, and you the Executive you are supposed to ensure that you heed the Constitution. You want us to move a motion to get rid of you tomorrow? (Laughter). 

I am going to bring these two people. One is Vincent Matovu, who has been languishing at Kitante for a long time. He is the editor of Mazima Newsletter. He was moved from that detention place to the CPS, where he has been for two weeks. He is still at CPS, but the 48 hours have already elapsed and nobody is taking interest in taking him to court. 

I will bring another case, of the sister to Lt Col. Mande. She is a resident of Mulago. By virtue of being a sister to Mande, who is wanted on charges of treason, the woman was tortured by security personnel in civilian clothes. The matter was reported, both to the Human Rights Commission offices at Buganda road and the Foundation for Human Rights offices in Nsambya. It was also reported to police. The woman is in hiding because she happens to be the sister of a wanted person! 

These are the real offences of Lutwa and Idi Amin. If you happened to be a wife of somebody they needed, you were equally taken to be a wanted person. What is the difference between the two dimensions? Why should hon. Okello Oryem have bothered to seek to send us to the crocodiles because we discussed the President’s speech? What is the difference now? I do not see much difference when I compare them - (Laughter).    
           
Finally I am going to tackle the issue of the police. I am unhappy. We are spending a lot of money on the army but the day-to-day security situation in our country has a notable bearing on the police. Everywhere you go, including remote places in the country, when you are a visitor gone to see your mother, as a Member of Parliament the first thing you ask: “Is police nearby, can I stay on this village without the knowledge of the police?” But see the attention that government is giving to the police: peanuts! 

We have been debating reports like these from time to time. By debating these reports and expressing concern over the peanut attention you are giving to the police, we expect the Executive, in prospective years, to float budgets for the same, so that we approve them. But it seems to us that the Executive does not appreciate the role of the police. If you do not appreciate the role of the police, which role do you want to appreciate? Will you be fighting territorial wars all the time, so that you appreciate only the military? I do not know. Mr Speaker, I have been disturbed by the report because it seems to me the committee -(Interruption)- I am winding up.

THE SPEAKER: Please do.

MR LUKYAMUZI: It seems to me that the report of the committee did not absorb the point, which was expressed by the commission’s report. Namely, the police is not doing its work properly presently because of interference from non-police officers from the alternative security units. Because of this, many people are illegally detained. Many people’s human rights are violated, many people are tortured, and their prosecutions delayed. Who is involving them in this matter? It is government! What are you doing? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report. I am sure it has been a tedious job because they had to go through very many reports. What they have come up with definitely has some issues left out, which are very important and very close to my heart.  

Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank them for emphasizing the torture of prisoners and those who are detained. It is true those who are suspected or convicted are suffering more than they should. Many of them die in the prisons because of the torture, they are quietly buried and nobody follows up the issue.  

Secondly, I would like to comment about the remand homes. Juveniles who have committed crimes are put together with adult criminals. They live with them and observe what other prisoners do. When they come out they become “better criminals” than when they were taken in. So, it is important that we have these remand homes in all the districts so that children cannot be transferred from one district to another for trial.  

Mr Speaker, the important issues, which I feel were left out, are as follows. The report has not mentioned anything about violence against women. I think that out of these many reports they must have mentioned one or two issues regarding violence against women. Women are battered in homes; many are killed even when they are pregnant. Women’s property is confiscated by their husbands, and many come to the commission to express these views, which I thought could have been put clearly here. Recommendations about it should also have been carried. 

If you remember, in the last elections, both parliamentary and presidential, many women were beaten. Some were even killed because they voted for candidates of their choice. I expected something to be mentioned about the violence against women.  

Mr Speaker, another very big section of the population whose rights are continuously and daily violated are the people I represent: people with disabilities. In homes, people with disabilities or children with disabilities are tortured quietly, without people knowing. There is one incident in the eastern region where a woman was kept, because of her mental disability, in a cage for almost 12 years! And she could not learn how to talk because she was not allowed to interact with people and be helped! 

The rights of people with disabilities are violated even when it comes to employment. One has all the qualifications but because they see one’s disability, they say, “You are not fit for the job. Sorry, we did not know that you were disabled.” They are denied the opportunity, and I expected this report to come out very clearly to express our views so that Parliament can pronounce itself on these marginalized groups of people.

Mr Speaker, I therefore recommend that although we have this law on assault, it is not enough to address the issues of women and people with disabilities. Therefore we need special laws put in place to address violence against women and violence against persons with disabilities. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MR KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the other members who have spoken, to thank the committee for having perused through all those booklets, synthesized them, and in the end come out with a report of this nature. I know, as hon. Baba Diri has said, the reports were too many and probably that is why some issues might not have been highlighted.  

Despite all that I have said, I would like to comment on the issue of corruption. It is unfortunate that the issue of corruption should be brought up in a report concerning human rights. Mr Speaker, probably the minister concerned will have to explain to us the relationship between the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the other bodies that are dealing with matters of human rights. 

It has been observed, and it is true, that some bodies that purport to be dealing with human rights issues are busy extorting money from the people they claim to represent and are trying to fight for. By the way, Mr Speaker, I think the line minister for this is the one for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, she is not paying attention. She is busy talking to the hon. Prof. Rugumayo, Minister of Trade and Industry. She is not paying attention and yet this is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just address the Chair. That will be enough.

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, there are bodies that are purporting to be human rights’ activists, which are busy extorting money from wanainchi. I will give an example. There is the Uganda Human Rights Initiative, which is in Mbale, on Republic Street. These people are busy soliciting for money from people whom they claim to be assisting. I thought the Uganda Human Rights Commission and these other bodies should be doing this free of charge. I hope the minister concerned will find out whether this is going on or not. But for us in Mbale, it is a big issue.  

Then, I would like to comment on the rights of prisoners. Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the 21st Century, the age in which we are, it is a pity that you go to prisons in Uganda and you find prisoners walking either half naked or with threads of clothes, similar to something to wear! They walk with buttocks showing. Women walk around with their fronts bare, and this is very dehumanising. 

For example, I stay in Mukono, near a prison. Every morning these people are taken out to go and work in the gardens of people who have hired them. They go at 6.00 and come back around 7.00. We are saying, we should not allow this. This is not one hour from 6.00 –(Interruption)- somebody here is talking to me saying that is only one hour. They go at 6.00 a.m. and come back at 7.00 p.m. They are in the field the whole day; they walk half-naked, and you find them with buveeras -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. He is talking about such an important point, related to human dignity. Even our Constitution, Articles 25(1) and 25(2) demand that:

“(1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude. 

(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour.” 

The prisoners are forced to work beyond the normal hours as slaves, and this is vividly unconstitutional. So, the point you are making is very popular and it should be supported by everybody.

MR WAMBI: I think I do not need to repeat that.

THE SPEAKER: Is it forced labour or excessive labour?

MR WAMBI: To me, this is excessive labour.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am asking the person who gave information. There is a difference between forced labour and excessive labour. You mean when a prisoner is working he has a choice? 

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Between the two types of labour?

MR WAMBI: I think there is a provision in law whereby one can be sentenced to hard labour, light labour and so forth. But as to whether it is forceful, that one I do not know. However, as far as I know, this is a bit excessive.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Article 25(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that; “No one shall be required to perform forced labour.” It proceeds, under (3)(b), to say that: 

“For the purposes of this article, “forced labour” does not include-

(b) any labour required of any person while that person is lawfully detained which, though not required in the consequence of the sentence or order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or the maintenance of the place at which the person is detained.” 

I have observed that many a time prisoners are hired out to work on people’s farms I do not know whether this kind of labour is relevant to their hygiene. So, apart from being excessive labour, it also amounts to forced labour. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, from what members have contributed, it is rather dehumanising that we still continue to use people -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But do you not know that sometimes the prisoners work and earn? Do you not know those details?

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, whatever it is, my statement is that it is rather dehumanising and it does reflect the indignity of human beings to see them in that state.

I would like to go to the next point and this is about the Karamoja situation that was mentioned in the report. I am rather giving advice to the Prime Minister’s Office. Whenever something happens in Karamoja, they say it is the Prime Minister’s Office to handle it. There are a number of meetings that have taken place geared towards the resettlement of the Karimojong, and towards their harmonious living with their neighbours. 

To my surprise, as a representative of the people of Budadiri, and Budadiri is a neighbour to areas of Karamoja, wherever meetings or seminars are organized to discuss matters of Karamoja, the area of Sironko is ignored and yet Sironko is a neighbour to Karamoja. 

Continuously the Karimojong have terrorised, harassed, killed, raped and done all kinds of havoc to the people of Sironko. I believe there is lack of co-ordination somewhere. Anyway, whoever is concerned should know that the process of peace making needs all the people concerned, especially in this area. Next time such meetings for conflict resolution are called, I hope the people concerned will not laugh this off but pay attention so that we resolve that kind of thing.

I move on to the issue of pensioners. This is part and parcel of me because I am a pensioner. I also partly represent pensioners here, to air the views of those concerned. The people concerned -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, can you save me from the wrath of hon. Sabiiti? 

THE SPEAKER: You have the necessary protection from me.

MR WAMBI: Thank you. The pensioners, especially the district local government pensioners, are the most affected. For some time now, these people have not been given their fair share of what they are supposed to receive, and many of them are fairly old. They are beyond 60 years, and they have no means of survival except as senior citizens, on pension. 

They instructed me to request the minister concerned to expedite the money we voted for, especially for the pensioners of the East African Community, and those of local government authorities.  

Last but not least, is the issue of Operation Wembley. Even if it does not fall under this report, any rightful thinking citizens of this country must mention it. They have taken over the issues that they were not supposed to be doing. There are thieves who are now parading all over the place in Mbale, arresting people for debt, and saying they are people of Operation Wembley. 

For instance, there is a retired Lieutenant Siraje Lubwama, who is busy harassing wanainchi because of politics. Some people are hiring him to go and terrorise others. Three weeks ago they brought one of my constituents to Magamaga. They tortured him thoroughly and the man had to pay Shs 2 million to be released. Is that what Operation Wembley is supposed to do? I think this is “Operation Weyambule” or “Operation Take Off Your Clothes Now.” Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee and its chairman for having come up with this report, and for raising these salient issues that concern our people, and which need a lot of our attention.  

Before I go any further, I want to support the argument you are advancing, Mr Speaker, about the prisoners. It is true at times when they go out they are provided better meals, a balanced diet, and they earn some money. As a chaplain to the prisoners, I know this. We have talked to them and they enjoy going out to at least work, get better feeding and earn Shs 1,500 per day. At least for them that is a change of life.  

Coming back to this report, Mr Speaker, I have a number of observations. One, when we talk about the Human Rights Commission, to our simple understanding, the understanding of my people of Mukono County North, they envisage a commission that is a voice to the voiceless. They believe the commission should come up to address some of the social, political, economic and even religious issues that are disturbing our people. 

At times, however, the problem has been that when this commission is operating, a lot of issues come by, but they just go back in their offices and write history, which we are reading today. If I am faced with a problem and something is advanced in two to three years to come, how is it going to help me?  

Operation Wembley was in my area, some people were shot, and others are still on the run. When we report to this commission, they are going to report on this after three or four years. How are my people going to benefit? Are these people a voice of the voiceless? This is our question. 

For us religious leaders, when there is a problem, we come, we pray and we give hope to the people. How is the Human Rights Commission giving hope to the hopeless, to the suffering, those people with no voice? I think action needs to be taken to correct this error. Alleluia! (Amen & Laughter)

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we have heard about this budget of the Human Rights Commission. Definitely they need some extra support if they need to do extra work. If they demanded for more funds and they only received 52 percent, and 10 percent for capital development, I think this is operating way below the budget. They need our support as Parliament. However, if we support them in increasing on their budget and to receive this funding, I think we need to see some extra work being done. If there is a case, let them visit Luzira Prison or elsewhere and do justice there and then. That is when our common man who votes for President Yoweri Museveni will understand that there is administered justice.
 
Thirdly, I will talk of security agencies. It has been rightly reported that at times there is lack of preliminary investigations. We have seen a lot of these security agencies coming in our areas, claiming that they have a list of names of people they are hunting for. At times they come at night. We wonder about this. We the leaders are there, we were elected by the people, we have the local council system, why do these people not come and coordinate with us and we face these people and we administer justice instead of doing it at night?  

Sometimes when one is driving, people who are not dressed in uniform stop one. What does one do? You just drive on! And that is when they begin showering you with bullets. I think we need to see some kind of order put in this arrangement, if we are not to abuse the work of our security agencies. This happened in my constituency, and it pains. I am now hunting for Kayanja to discuss this and know what really happened. 

And now, reports from the press are saying that these people were making bombs! I think security agencies are doing quite a commendable job but they should do some preliminary investigations - if we are to administer justice and if their work has to be thorough and clean.

Lastly, let me talk about Kanungu, Mr Speaker. All Ugandans know what took place in Kanungu, the massacre. We thought action was going to be taken by government and everyone concerned but we see nothing. We have read beautiful books about Kanungu; they are selling, but what next? What has been done? I even fear that some of those people who survived from those churches may have spread elsewhere to begin other sects. You are only zeroing in on that priest but we really need to investigate and continue to see that justice is done. We need to arrest these people, not to just write books and end there.  

That is what is being done now by the Human Rights Commission. I am not satisfied.  Something needs to be done, Mr Speaker, and I call upon government, the Minister of Justice and those in security to see that something is done to actually arrest this situation. It might spread and these people might end up causing even more harm elsewhere to other citizens of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Reverend, please wind up.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: I am winding up. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for me to have caught your eye at long last. 

I would like to thank the committee for the good work they have done. The reports were many: 1998, 1999 and 2000, but I would like to zero in on one human right, which I feel is fundamental for all of us. That is the right to health. 

There is one greatest health hazard, especially for the women of Uganda, which they have been suffering from for so long. I would like, as a person hailing from the East, to let this House know that Female Genital Mutilation is an act violating a fundamental human right for us women from Eastern Uganda. I am very surprised that the Human Rights Commission failed to mention it. I know this is violence against women, but it is up to us and it is up to the Human Rights Commission to come out and speak against what is going on in Eastern Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it presupposes that you have read the commission’s report. We are dealing with a report of the committee on the reports by the commission.  So, when you say it was not mentioned in the commission’s report, be sure about it. I am not saying it was or it was not mentioned, but you should have in mind that we have reports by the commission, and what you have in your hand is a report on those reports, by the committee.

MRS TUMA: Thanks, Mr Speaker. I am trying to remind them that next time they should address it. Genital mutilation is a violation of a woman’s human right. The woman is deprived of the enjoyment of this life forever - (Laughter). It must be known that we are entitled to enjoying life on this earth. Thank you very much.

MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate the concern of my colleague regarding female genital mutilation in Kapchorwa, but there are two aspects to it. 

At first, the people of Kapchorwa did not know that they were doing any harm to their daughters. It is only recently, when we started sensitising them that they have now known the harmful part of it. But before that, they really thought they were doing something very good to their daughters. I think it is now a question of time. Most of the people of Kapchorwa have accepted to end this practice and I think very soon it will end. We are going to carry out data analysis on how strongly the people have rejected this practise. As soon as we get 50 percent support, we shall come here and pass the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tuma, had you finished, or are you continuing?

MRS TUMA: I had finished, Mr Speaker.

CAPT CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I just want to give additional information. As much as hon. Ruth Tuma is concerned about the women, some men who have not been circumcised are also chased through towns, against their will, and their things are cut in the name of culture. So it is also a violation of human rights.  

CAPT. TUNGWAKO TWAREBIREHO (Bunyaruguru, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to begin by thanking the committee for a job well done. I thank the commission for having made all these revelations. All is not well, as all of us can see, from this report. 

I wish to reiterate the stand of the committee and condemn the ministers that failed to appear before the committee when they were invited. We all know that those are the ministries with a high propensity of violating human rights. 

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to address some few concerns. The first is on our labour laws. Our labour laws leave a lot to be desired. The committee has correctly observed that there is no minimum wage. But apart from that, there are so many institutions, so many organisations and individuals employing citizens of this country without any terms and conditions of service. At the end of the day, when one is dismissed, one has no redress because one cannot even prove that one was employed. 

So, in addition to the minimum wage, I urge that the next labour laws should address the issue of conditions and terms of service, wherever each one is being employed.  

Secondly, I want to make one general observation about pensions, especially in respect of my brothers who retired from the army. During my contribution on the policy statement of the Ministry of Defence, I requested that a list be put up in all district headquarters so that we know who were paid. There is no list at any district headquarters. 

To my shock, we are now reading in the report on human rights that actually money for pensioners for the Ministry of Defence was dispatched to the Ministry of Public Service. That there was no law and the money has been returned to the Ministry of Defence! I only want to be clarified and be put at ease by the Minister of Defence. He has to inform us whether this money is still safe in his coffers or whether it has also been used elsewhere like other monies have been. Permit me, Mr Speaker, to also address –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that money meant for military pensions will not revert to the Ministry of Defence. We are working out a modality of managing this money from the Ministry of Public Service. So, you should not worry. It is safe.  

MR TWAREBIREHO: Thank you, honourable minister, for comforting me. 

I want us to address the issue of torture. It has been generally observed that many people who are arrested have been tortured. This torture is not only a violation of human rights but it goes a long way to even make cases, which would otherwise succeed in court, fail. In most cases, which have been handled especially by the army and where culprits or suspects have been tortured, it has been very difficult to adduce evidence in courts of law. So, I urge the armed forces and whoever is concerned to desist from torture as it is not only a violation of human rights but also leads to cases, which would succeed, to fail in courts of law.  

I would also like to talk about our obsolete laws. There are so many obsolete laws, as observed by the committee, so I will not go deep into that. 

Apart from that, we should also know that the executive has always blamed Parliament for not doing its work and yet it is well known that legislation comes to Parliament from the Executive. I would like to urge the Executive to bring as many bills before this August House and see if these laws will not be considered and passed. 

Most importantly, I would like to come to the point of delay of trials, or the backlog before courts of law. As observed by the committee, this is caused by lack of investigations, lack of manpower and sometimes diverting the manpower that is supposed to try these cases to other fields where other Ugandans would be appointed.

I wish to recommend that the jurisdiction of magistrates be increased, especially the Chief Magistrates. For example, you find that in the general court martial, which is basically led by laymen, they even try treason cases yet a Chief Magistrate of 10 years’ standing cannot try defilement, which is even simple to prove.  

I urge the minister concerned to bring these laws here very urgently so that we can pass them, and the violation of human rights reduces. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a human right for an individual to live in a safe and healthy environment. However, yesterday, over many FM radio stations, I heard a warning and a ban from an expert who is also an honourable member of this House, Ken Lukyamuzi, that the use of KO Net mosquito nets are extremely dangerous to the health of our people.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we all know that the Ministry of Health has been informing the whole public that they should sleep under KO treated mosquito nets. I do not know whether it is the stand of the committee that the use of the KO Net is extremely dangerous to the health of our people. If it is the case, then we are expecting a disaster, and it is human rights abuse for the whole ministry to advocate for something, which is disastrous to the health of our people.  The second – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Get information from the Minister of Health.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to express my disappointment and that of the Ministry of Health at the irresponsible statements made by honourable Members of Parliament.  

Hon. Lukyamuzi knows very well that malaria kills a lot of our people; it is a number one killer. If he could make such an allegation over the radio without consulting the responsible professionals, it is very unfortunate. I want to state here that the World Health Organisation cannot clear the use of chemicals, drugs or whatever without ascertaining their safety to the health of human beings. I want to disassociate the Ministry of Health from such utterances. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Justification, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You will be given another opportunity –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Can I not say something?  

THE SPEAKER: This is going to be an attack on one another. Just keep cool; you will get an opportunity.

MR LUKYAMUZI: When?

THE SPEAKER: Some time, please.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, since I have received clarification from the hon. Minister of Health, I will urge the ministry and this House that they should come up with a statement to confirm this to the public. Otherwise, people have started to burn the KO treated mosquito nets. So, the minister should actually come in and make an announcement, and even a newspaper printout.

The second concern I want to raise is about the recent beating of the fishermen. Of recent we have had so many armed operations on the waters of Lake Victoria.  We have the Revenue Protection Service, we have the Lake Victoria Environmental Protection Service, and at times the police. 

Whenever these people meet the fishermen they initially demand for life jackets. If you have the life jackets, then they say they want to see the receipt of the engine on site. If you do not have it, then they say they are going to take the engine away, unless you give them money. Besides that, they start by terrorising people. They first beat you such that you pay whatever money they demand from you.

Mr Speaker, I am not against the Minister of Agriculture’s appeal or plan to modernise agriculture. Being a representative of the people of the waters, I have been constantly encouraging my people to use the proper means of fishing.  But even though some of them are still using the trawlers, instead of educating them, these operatives beat them up to death, and they even shoot at them. Most of them claim to have a directive from the President. 

Whenever they reach an island they disarm the policemen around –(Interruption)   

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWERO (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you very much for giving way, and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I have is that yesterday, a boat - DF007M - with five occupants who were well armed soldiers, went to Mazinga, Gunga Island, and solicited money from people. We got information and we informed the CMI, Operation Wembley, and the Police. And I believe they will be arrested. So, it is not the President who is sending these people. Police is doing something to make sure that these people get arrested. Thank you.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member, for giving way. I would like to support what my friend is saying. These people claim that they are from the President’s Office. It is true. It first happened in Bugiri in the islands of Lolwe. 

When they came, they were saying they were from Operation Wembley, yet they had not even informed the chairman in charge of security; that is the RDC. They went and got over 200 engines and put them at the Police station. They were claiming receipts on spot, which the fishermen did not have. So, what they did was to keep those engines for some time, and later they disappeared. 

When the RDC tried to ring the President’s office, they traced those people and they were indeed Operation Wembley people. They claim they are from the President’s Office and I do not see why the minister cannot believe that they say they are from the President’s Office. If they are not, well, to the people they claim they are.  Thank you very much.

MR NSUBUGA: I think you have heard, honourable members. The truth is that some of them are from the President’s Office. There is even one gentleman I know who is a former honourable member of this House, hon. Ssekiziyivu. He also went to Lolwe Island. I have my brothers fishing there. They impounded all the engines on that island and to claim ones engine, each one was paying Shs 100,000. 

Recently, the islanders were mobilising to come to Parliament, but I have explained to them that coming to Parliament will not help. Mr Speaker, I would however like to assist the fishermen. Otherwise, the way our fishermen are being beaten, the looting –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: I would like to also support the honourable member who is speaking now. Even in Bundibugyo - you can imagine those people have reached as far as that! They terrorised the whole group, which was coming from the landing sites one Saturday. One man was called Capt. Sam. They collected a lot of money, claiming they had been sent to find out about the nets. They have terrorised the whole country, in fact, in the name of the President’s Office.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, these operatives even go ahead and burn fishnets. In case they demand money and you cannot raise the required amount, they burn the nets. They even destroy boats. 

Mr Speaker, I want to inform this august House that of recent the fishermen do not know the size of nets required, because most of them have been using double nets. There is an unconfirmed communication from the Commissioner of Fisheries that doubles are allowed up to 31st December this year. When we met the commissioner he denied it. But the fishermen are saying they even have the letters from him.

My appeal is, let the Ministry of Agriculture come up with a statement. If the doubles are not required, then the fishermen can separate them because these are two nets that are joined together. Rather than sending the operatives to collect money either for the commissioners or for the President, they could do that. These people pay taxes, but there is a lot of suffering for the fishermen. The fishermen have lost a lot of money. Besides that, some have even lost their lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS LOCHIAM MILIGAN (Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to comment on the Karamoja problem, the issue of broken law and order there. I can give you an example of Moroto District. 

Moroto District has only one police barracks, one prison and one court. Putting into consideration the insecurity problem there, these institutions are too few for the problem, which is taking place there.  

Then here, the committee has written that the disarmament programme should be continued and government should take full charge of security in Karamoja. Without the strength or the contribution of police and the courts, there is no way the disarmament process will be successful.
 
For example, when a cattle rustler is caught by the local councils, there is no nearby court or police to take the culprits to. So, moving from one village or sub-county to Moroto Prison or police or court, the rural poor are not able to reach there. So the culprits are left at large. 

I feel that to strengthen these institutions, there is need to decentralise and to have the police and the courts in the district. They should be put nearer to the people. Otherwise, this insecurity will have to continue for a longer time. 

I appeal that the recruitment of the police and the judges should take place so that these people will be transferred to Karamoja region. Otherwise, talking about disarmament without the contribution of these people is not meaningful. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee very much for this good report, especially the part about reminding the government about the laxity on the findings about the inferno in Kanungu.  

The inferno in Kanungu took place on 17 March 2000. It is now coming to three years, and the relatives of the people who perished in the fire have never known what took place, or what government is doing about it.  

Mr Speaker, also related to that is that our name of Kanungu has been tarnished almost beyond repair. Sometimes the people from Kanungu fear to even introduce themselves as coming from Kanungu! When shall our name be cleared that actually we were only being hospitable to these people?

Also related to that is that these people had a chunk of land and up to now we have not tampered with this land in fear of killing evidence. When shall we get to clear this place for other developmental activities or whatever?  

Also in the report, they are talking about the right to health and my concern here is about AIDS, as the committee has brought it out. But I would like to know from the Minister of Health what he is doing about establishing centres in our constituencies where people can go and know their HIV Status. If you were to look at our youth in the constituencies who are intending to marry, they have no places where they can go to know their HIV status before they get married. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for their report. I also thank the Human Rights Commission for fulfilling the constitutional requirement to prepare and submit reports to this House.

One of the strengths of the Movement Government has been its good human rights record. I wish, however, to observe that increasingly this otherwise very good record is being eroded. If things continue this way, it is going to become very easy to compare this government to the past governments. I think this will not be good for government, and even for the peace and stability of this nation.  

Mr Speaker, Operation Wembley has been condemned variously, but I wish to commend it for the excellent job they have done. The fruits of it have, however, come with a lot of pain. In certain circumstances members have reported that people are arbitrarily arrested, detained for more than 30 days in areas that are at times not even gazetted. As if that is not bad enough, people are subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment, despite the fact that Articles 24 and 44 of our Constitution are very clear on this matter.  

I am aware of a case of four workers of Uganda Railways who were picked by Operation Wembley on false grounds. There is an importer in town who imported empty containers. When the containers arrived in Kampala, he claimed that the workers had opened and removed his goods yet the records, all the way from Dar-es-salaam, show that the containers were empty. These workers were picked and tortured, and if you look at their bodies they are just full of marks. When I met them -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, what the speaker is talking about is so touching. It has, however, also occurred in my area in Nateete. Two Tanzanians were trading with two Ugandans, in battery cells. The Tanzanians were demanding for Shs 5 million from the Ugandan traders. After failing to get that money, they brought some artificial pistols and planted them in the bedrooms of the two Tanzanians who used to stay in Kikajjo in Natete. Then they alerted Operation Wembley people who came, took them and shot them from a nearby pit. Up to now there is no explanation as to why they shot the wrong people. So, what you are talking about is real. Something must be done before we just sing about the good of Operation Wembley.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you not see the problem? We people who are not part of the operation go and give false stories to these people and as a result this happens. So would it not also be directed to the population that they do not give wrong information that will endanger other people?

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with you. However, the state operatives for whom we vote money are supposed to be professional people. They are supposed to discern what is worth investigating and what is not. Even where you have false information, there is no guarantee that you must torture people.  

I was talking about the workers of Uganda Railways; they recounted their story to me. They told me that when they were taken to Clement Hill, they were sent into a shower, then asked to roll outside before they started caning them. This is inhuman! The government that we voted for should not be the one to allow this to happen in its backyard. We would like to see government move and do something about this. 

I have thanked the commission and the committee for their good work, but I want to observe that the Uganda Human Rights Commission tends to put emphasis on first generation rights, that is the civil political rights. They put little emphasis on the second-generation rights, which touch on the issues of economic, social and cultural rights.  

Mr Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Article 40, guarantees the right to work under favourable conditions, equal pay for work of equal value, and the right to join and form trade unions. But as the Member of Parliament for Bunyaruguru informed you, our people are working under extremely very difficult and hostile conditions. People are employed and not given employment contracts, and even where their rights have been violated it becomes difficult for them to obtain redress. 

Many employers have also refused to allow workers to form and join trade unions, despite that being a right recognised in the Constitution. Many have even lost their jobs -(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Wandera, for giving way. The information I have is that it is not only the employers who have institutions like factories who do that, but also government. Government has refused the people of Uganda to form trade unions. For example, why has government refused the teachers of this country to form a union?

MR LUKAYMUZI: Mr Speaker, what we are talking about is very important to us today. Worst of all, most of the companies around Kampala and other urban areas, which are under-paying workers and torturing them, happen to be owned by Asian traders. 

Much as government is encouraging investors to come here, they should look into the issue related to the rights of the workers. Workers should not be mistreated because they are working. They should be respected, they should be given the dignity they deserve, and government should be in the forefront. The front bench members should not simply sit there when our workers are being tortured.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much for that information. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the question of forced labour, with respect to prisoners. My colleague, hon. Mukasa, did say that the prisoners like it. I agree with him that prisoners prefer being out of their cells because the conditions there are extremely bad: they are very squeezed and very hot. However, it is also true that they do not enjoy being on peoples’ farms for twelve hours, despite the fact that they are paid Shs 1,500 as he says. 

On top of that, some prison officers hire them out like oxen. I think this is degrading. You go and hire out people, you are given Shs 100,000, and the ten people you hired out get Shs 1,500 each! Is that fair? So, if my brother gets the proper spiritual guidance, I think he will be able to understand this matter. I thank you.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to salute the committee for presenting this long awaited report. I would also like to congratulate the Human Rights Commission for the good work done, and more so, for timing to present it to this House on this day, which is the 10th day of December 2002.  

Mr Speaker, I congratulate the Human Rights Commission because I think they have done a good job. They have presented their reports timely, and the annual reports are available for us to read. We have so many other commissions around but we do not see their reports. I think these are dedicated people; all we need is just to guide them. I really want to congratulate them. 

However, on this day, the day that we have chosen to debate the Human Rights Commission Report, twelve years ago, two students were killed by government agents, using government guns, in cold blood, at Makerere University.  We do not know the circumstances that led to the death of those two students, but what we want to know is what happened. What has the government done to bring about justice in this? Can the people have the report so that we can know its contents? That is my concern, Mr Speaker.

Secondly, I would like to request the Human Rights Commission to address, very seriously, the issue of human rights abuses in war ravaged areas. Human rights are being abused by both sides on the war front. The government soldiers are brutalizing the people at the front line - you know the reports. Sometimes the media does tell us what happens. We also know that the rebels are brutalizing the people. There is no other way these people can speak out, except through the Human Rights Commission. So, I would like to implore the commission to address the issue of human rights abuses at the war front.

I want to be very brief. The commission should address the root cause of human rights abuses. One of them, of course is freedom of association, speech and movement. We know that Article 29 of the Constitution allows us to freely associate, but you find that there is still a lot of pressure being put on freedom of speech. Why? If we know that conflict within our society is what causes war, why can we not address that issue more seriously than we are doing right now?

This issue of people pleading for freedom, pleading and begging government to allow them political space is really backward. That is a God-given freedom. So, can the people of Uganda be assured that they can live a free life with a government that I believe should be sober?

That is a very serious matter, and I am very disappointed that the commission did not address it as a serious focus point. That is the reason we are having wars in this country. It is because people do not feel they are given the freedom to participate in politics, to participate in the welfare of the community and in the development of the country. That is where we need to focus.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have been hearing and probably ignoring the issue of Operation Wembley. I think we should not ignore this matter. Where human rights are being abused in full view of all Members of Parliament, as if there is no government, something must be done about it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I am happy that I am speaking after my good friend, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, because she really went into the fundamentals of the situation.

Let me admit upfront that obviously there are shortcomings on the part of government agencies. There are shortcomings in the army, in the prisons, in the police; that cannot be denied.  It is also true that there are shortcomings in the House, as I will demonstrate, on the part of us, Members of Parliament. There are also shortcomings on the part of our society; the issue of genital mutilation has been articulated well in this House.

At this level it worries one when articulate Members of Parliament, like hon. Lukyamuzi, stand up and say that the other day people were shot and put in a ditch. One would like to hear that a Member of Parliament in Kampala has evidence for this, and that he went to the police or to court; or that he is being obstructed. He is a Member of Parliament; he is not someone from off the street. For him to just say that people were shot by government agencies and put in a ditch, a Member of Parliament, and stop there! (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) Mr Speaker, can I develop my points so that we can have a balanced debate? So, I will not take the information.

I also heard another honourable member saying that in his constituency someone went and took Shs 2 million from someone. This cannot happen in my constituency and I lie low. If I have evidence that a government agency has gone and taken Shs 2 million from someone in my constituency, I must pursue that matter.  

In this House we even have a provision for specific questions to the ministers. If I pursue the matter with the police or with another system and it does not act, I should come out and say, “I have this evidence, I have taken this process and I am not being assisted.” 

The point is that we as Members of Parliament and comrades have to help our people. Where there is an issue and you have evidence, you must pursue it, with your evidence, in the appropriate fora. This could be the police or even this House. It will not help for us to just speak in the House and stop there.

Having said that, Mr Speaker, let us also put this matter of human rights on a scale. The struggle by the National Resistance Movement was centrally about human rights. If anybody would be hurt most by human rights violation, it would be the Movement. That is because our record is very clear.

Hon. Ogwal and hon. Mwesige, the chairman of the committee, did remind us that today is the International Day for Human Rights. Therefore, it is historical that in Uganda we have a national commission to deal with human rights. We have had parliaments many years before, but we waited for the Movement to have a national commission on human rights. In broad daylight we can speak out here and say we have made errors within our country. We must applaud this! We must applaud the fact that we have this institution. We must applaud the fact that the commission is making reports, as hon. Cecilia has just said, and it provides us this opportunity to discuss them. 

So, on the scale of human rights, we must applaud ourselves as nationals of Uganda that we have built institutions that are watching out for any violation of human rights. It provides us with an opportunity to come here and criticize ourselves as nationals of Uganda. We see what we need to do in order to solve procedural matters as far as human rights are concerned.

I think it was a consensus when the government re-submitted the names of the Human Rights Commission. I was not in the committee but virtually all the names that came were passed. Why? Because this Human Rights Commission has definitely performed -(Applause)- not only by bringing reports, but they have established offices countrywide. 

So, we are building. Human rights cannot just fall from heaven. We have to build and insist on them being observed. So, on the scale, I see ourselves moving up steadily.  

On the question of elections, I am surprised that both hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Cecilia Ogwal are complaining that there is less opportunity for people to stand. We have never had it better, Mr Speaker. Right from the village level, opportunities have been provided for people to participate in governance. We are there at LC I and LC II. 

During the UPC days, I can remind you, the district councils were appointed by the Minister of Local Government. You would hear on the radio in the evening, “main points: The Minister of Local Government has appointed the district council for Kasese District” and they would read names. Now we elect these people during the day, by ourselves. So we participate!  

Human rights are relative, let us come here and not think that they are purist. For example, the cardinal right is the right to life. I am surprised people have been quoting other things. It is the right to life, given to you by God. But we sit here in Parliament and say, “No, Kiyonga, if you murder Adolf and it is proved that you murdered him, you are sentenced to death.” Do you see the relativity? You cannot enjoy that life completely unless you also conduct yourself in a certain way. 

We have a Constitution, which has said that Ugandans can choose from many systems We have put a menu. In Article 73, we have said once we have chosen one system, other organizations subscribing to systems not chosen at that time will operate, but with restrictions -(Interruption)

MRS ROSE LOCHIAM: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. Mine is on the Human Rights Commission offices. As we talk now, there are a lot of human rights abuses in Karamoja, but the offices are not there. The mobile one there, which comes over once in a while, operates from Soroti. So, I urge them to open up offices in Karamoja so that they will be able to help us. We really need them.  

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister. We know why they gave this provision in the Constituent Assembly, and I would also like him to know that one of the fundamental reasons the people of Karamoja still support the Movement is the issue of human rights. 

Two; the issue of discipline of the army, they know that very well. However, what the members are raising here, and I think what the commission is also trying to highlight, is that these human rights are being withered. They are withering! They started extremely well in 1986 and they went right up until somewhere. 

Even in Karamoja, within the army that the Karimojong used to respect, during the dress code enforcement, they were tortured without cause. That is when they began to question, “are the human rights, which the Movement brought us, withering now?” That is the information I wanted to give.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, as I said there definitely are omissions. I have been reading newspaper reports and now I hear Members of Parliament say that.  I am definitely, as a human rights activist, going to take more interest in the stories about Operation Wembley. That is for sure. 

The omissions are there but we come from the villages, let us go to the fundamentals of this situation. The other day when hon. Mutumba moved a motion about people evicting our people from their land, people even came here and said the police is just giving out bonds. Someone commits a crime, they give him a bond and he gets out! 

We are saying that the police are not observing the 48 hours’ detention limit. We cannot have it both ways! We are saying the prisons are not enough, that they are congested. We are the ones saying this, and that is factual. 

We also know the purse, the treasury, and the resources that we have. To me this is a challenge, particularly as we go to the Constitutional Review Commission. Shall we keep the 48 hours? Shall we keep the 365 days? Hon. Mwesige read a story of someone who was in prison for five years. It is not really that someone is against that person and says, “you keep that one there.” It is not so! It is just that the judges are not enough. You have heard this story before. 

I heard a new term that hon. Mwesige brought, “temporary judges”. It sounded an initiative but I do not understand it yet. It is just an admission that there is a constraint. The judges are not enough and we know why, the prisons are not enough and we know why -(Interruption)  

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I also want to add my voice to those who have thanked the Human Rights Commission for the work well done. I am part of the committee; I must make this confession. 

The first point, which I want to highlight, is that when we talk about increasing judges, we should also borrow a leaf from what happened. I think in the Amin days, when magistrates were recruited massively to clear the backlog, this helped. Some of these magistrates even stayed on, and one of those is Justice Odoki, who is now the Chief Justice of this country. Therefore, what we are proposing is not out of the blue, it has happened before and it worked very well.  

The other information I would like to give is that when the Human Rights Commission visits prisons, one of the perturbing things they find out is that people are being held past the constitutionally allowed number of days. But then, these people are still not brought before the High Court, and this is really an abuse of human rights. It is an issue, which we would like the Human Rights Commission to address. 

If you are talking about backlog, then you have to look at the unconstitutional laws. They are very many. The Constitution has been in operation for seven years. We are glad that the Land Act had a time limit. At one time we were even proposing that we should have a time limit as to when these laws, which are unconstitutional, should be amended. The judges’ hands are tied. They cannot invent the law. And they are denying justice in the course of it, and they are delaying it too.  

It does not serve us any purpose to have a Constitution in place if the enabling law continues to divert these issues from what was supposed to have been attained by the Constitution. So, honourable minister, these are issues that are of paramount interest and importance. They should be given a time limit by all of us as a government. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Really, if I have not said it, I thank the committee for the good work done. But at the end of the day, we have to balance our budget. We want more prisons, we want more magistrates, and we want more judges. We also want our people to access anti-retrovirals for AIDS. We want our people to get nets so that they are not bitten by mosquitoes, and we want roads to our villages to be improved! I want power to my constituency but electricity is not there. So, at the end of the day, we really must cut our coats according to our cloth. That is why I am saying there is an opportunity coming, with the constitutional review. 

You are right; why should we put the judges in such difficulty? We say after 365 days they cannot keep a criminal, but they have not had time to try this person so what do they do? They send him back to my village and the mob kills him? So, we are in difficulty. The villagers expect us to make realistic laws; they expect us to protect them against the criminals.  

One of the fundamental questions we will have to answer as we review our Constitution is, “are the number of days realistic?” Are we answering the cries of the people who are saying we are releasing criminals and putting them back into the villages? 

I would like to end, Mr Speaker, by saying this. One; all of us, Members of Parliament, must not just make accusations because we have privileges in the House. We should not say, “People were shot in a ditch.” No! We must come up with good evidence and pin the government. We should say, “We went to the Police, the bodies are here, we told the Police and they did nothing, you Minister of Internal Affairs, what happened?”    

Two; human rights are relative. There are no absolute human rights and we will have to build –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I wish the minister could be honest because there are so many truthful stories that have come to the government and no action has been taken. There is the case of Mr Ochwero, who harassed me and attempted to shoot me twice, in the Police Station. This case was tried in court and the gentleman was found guilty but what the government did was to promote him. So, you have facts but what we are concerned about is that you condone the activities of those people. 

Probably in your conclusion, I would like you to also address the excesses of the RDCs and the excesses of the Kalangala Action Plan. We would like to know about that. I did not want to raise it because I knew somebody in government would come up and tell us. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Secondly, the issue of making laws, which are realistic to our situation, is important. I am putting this question of 48 hours and 365 days on the table. I think they need to be re-examined in the context of our situation.  

Three; we must really applaud the Movement System for establishing the institutional framework so that human rights can be watched and we can be able to discuss and cause corrections.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is not my portfolio but definitely I am going to take interest in this issue of accusations against Operation Wembley. It would be undoing our revolution if Wembley is the one violating human rights. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, apart from the chairman who presented a report, so far 15 members have been able to make their contributions on the report of the committee. There are only eight members who wanted to make their contribution today, remaining. This is a convenient time to adjourn. We shall continue with the debate tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)




