Wednesday, 11 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORTS FOR THE YEAR 1998, 1999, 2000 AND 2001 SUBMITTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 52(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION

(Debate continued.)

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you for seeing that I am around after standing so many times yesterday. 

I thank the Committee for a well-written report, though there are a number of issues that I would like to be clarified.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report we are discussing this afternoon is very important as far as the Constitution of Uganda is concerned. Can we proceed with the debate in the absence of the Minister of Justice and the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? Not even the deputy is there! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is one member of the Government. I hope he can relay the messages to the Executive. We can proceed.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule what?

MR AWORI: The consistency and the Rules of Procedure in principle. Two weeks ago, when we had just embarked on debating the report on violence in elections, we were unable to proceed because it was noted that the matter we were debating at the material time was subjudice. In other words, some of the items appearing in the report were being heard before the courts of law. The Speaker, therefore, ruled that we could not proceed with the debate on the report until certain cases had been disposed of in the courts of law.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. If we are to stick to that rule, can we proceed to debate this report when page 14 of the report also touches on matters before the courts of law? I just want to know the consistency in the rulings and procedure on matters before the courts of law and matters being debated in this august House. Do we proceed or what? Page 14 refers to elections and there is a petition in court. Also on a matter pertaining to violence in Karamoja, there is a case in court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, the recommendation on page 14 and 15 is an innocent recommendation. All it says is that there should be a comprehensive review of electoral laws and timely enactment of laws. That is all the report is saying. There is nothing subjudice in this.
 
MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer you to item No.6 of the report. This is in respect of the remand homes. I would have wished to see the Committee giving us the names of these remand homes, because from what I remember of the report they were reviewing, there is supposed to be a remand home in Bugungu in Mukono District. This remand home ceased to be a remand home and at one time it was debated here that this place had been sold to an investor who wanted to turn it into a hotel.  

After resistance from the members of public in the place -(Interruption)

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the Member for giving way. I am a Member of the Committee. When we were sitting, we invited the Minister in charge of remand homes to come and defend their position in the Committee; she did not turn up. This Committee reported that the Minister would come on the Floor of this House and inform the House or explain everything that will be asked on her sector. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you for that information. That is where I wish this Committee should not to have said that there are three remand homes when they do not know what is on the ground. 

We have been trying to meet the Minister and the responsible people together with the RDC of Mukono, to find out what is happening to the place, because it is deserted. There are a few juveniles who are almost like children living in a child headed home.

So, when we get a report saying that there are three remand homes in the country, we are misleading the public. But I thank the Member of the Committee for having highlighted that the Minister is still finding time to come and give her view on the said institution.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to turn on page 7 on delayed administration of justice. This is in response to the law concerning rape and defilement. I believe the first law on rape and defilement is not yet repealed. So, whenever the offenders commit this offence either rape or defilement, we as the public, especially the people in Mukono where this tendency is quite on a recognised alarming rate, the offenders are normally charged a fine of Shs200. It has become a saying that the offenders can pay in advance and rape girls as much as they can because if you are charged Shs200 and you deposit Shs10,000, then the person is given a go ahead to rape until the Shs10,000 is finished, which is not quite interesting to hear. Other than that –(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: I am shocked! There is no law in this country where the fine for rape is Shs200. I think the lady is referring to adultery; it is not rape.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank the Member for that information and that only confirms what I am saying; that those who rape our girls are fined Shs200. But the learned Member calls it adultery, but for us who take these defilers to court, these men are fined Shs200. Other than that, many of them are asked to go and settle the matter  -(Interruption)

MRS DORAH BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for giving way honourable Member and thank you, Madam Speaker. I think there is a mixture of issues here, because you are talking about defilement and defilement happens to girls who are forced to have sexual intercourse with men if these girls are below 18 years. When it comes to rape, rape is for those girls or women who are above 18 years. When you talk about adultery, adultery happens to people who are married. If you are married and someone who is not your spouse has sex with you that is called adultery and all these have their penalties prescribed in the Penal Code Act. 

When you look for example, for defilement, the punishment ranges from whatever number of years to death. When you talk of rape, the punishment ranges from whatever number of years to life imprisonment. Adultery has two aspects to it, because there is civil adultery and criminal adultery. And the criminal adultery part is the one where I think the amount is Shs600 not even Shs200 and civil adultery goes into compensation and so on.  So, at the end of the day, I think we need to be very clear about this, because whoever is taking the law into their hands and is penalising the defiler by fining him Shs200 should actually be arrested. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WACHA: I only want to add Madam that in respect to defilement, even if the girl consents, the law will still take its own course. But rape presupposes that the lady or the woman who is above 18 years does not consent.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the Members for that elaboration which I would wish to see being explained to those who protect the law and are faced with these cases in our local courts. 

Madam Speaker, I would also wish to talk about lack of clear categorisation of offences. There are offences, which are committed in our local areas, and when these offenders are taken to courts of law, the laws fail to classify the category of the offence committed. This is say in line with people who exhume the dead. This has been happening and I would refer to Mukono again.  There are some people who exhume the dead and take them for food and they have been taken to courts of law, but when they get there, we are told there is no law against eating what has been rejected. But according to our society and our cultures, the dead are also respected and people wish to have their dead stay where they are buried. So, I would wish to see this law being put in place. Otherwise, many people are now getting scared as to how they can handle such people when they are living in community with us, and we do not have a law to protect those people whose dead persons are exhumed and eaten.

MR KAWANGA: I think the officers who are enforcing justice in Mukono must be given a little more lectures. Under the Penal Code, there are offences dealing with cannibalism and there is a punishment for it. Similarly, there is also an offence against exhuming a dead body. You are not allowed to exhume a dead body unless you have made an application to a magistrate and received permission to do exhumation. So, there is a law to cover it, perhaps it is not known in that area.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, these people are not tried in Mukono, they are normally brought to Buganda Road, high court and that is where we get this explanation, it is not in Mukono.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take clarification from hon. Kiraso?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my colleague on the Floor, because I am getting confused and lost. We are debating a report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Human Rights Commission Annual Reports of 1997/98, 1999/2000 and 2001. I want to be guided by my colleague on the relevancy of these people who exhume others and the laws not being in place to this report.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, I was referring to item No.9 of the report, and in addition to that we are touching the human rights; the dead, these are delayed –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, honourable members, the honourable Member is right. Even in the Constitution, people have a right not to be tortured. If you bury your dead and somebody goes and exhumes them, that is violating your human rights.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise –(Interruption)

MR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and Madam Balemezi for giving way. When a person dies, he or she is supposed to rest in peace and not in pieces. So, when someone comes and disturbs that peace and ends in pieces, in principle, it is bad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, hon. Balemezi.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I thank the Member for giving that information. I also wish to touch on No.15 -Joint Negotiating and Bargaining Machinery mechanism on wages should be finalised. There are employers who violate the law on employment and the workers sometimes are not paid as per the agreement or terms of employment. When we try to report these people when we have identified a case, there is a lot of room given to the employers to keep on changing their terms of employment. It therefore becomes so difficult to penalise the employer.

So, Madam Speaker, I would wish to see that the Members of this Committee strongly come up with good advice to the lawmakers in this respect so that we find good laws that will protect the wage earners whereby they can also sue their employers. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate the Commissioners for having been re-appointed to serve this country, for they are doing very good work.  

Madam Speaker, what I hear the Commissioners and the Committee asking this House and asking Government is to give them good policies and to sweep off the bad laws from our books. To have the bad laws repealed so that they can actually function properly. On Page 9, they refer to two; I want to point out these two: One, is Land Acquisition Act, and secondly is the Witchcraft Act.

Madam Speaker, on the Land Acquisition Act, I want to speak particularly on the issue of land grabbing as it is happening today in Mubende. I am a Member of Parliament from Ntenjeru South, Kayunga. But I am also a landlord and I am concerned about what is happening in some areas of Mubende where some Bakiga from Sembabule have come to grab land in Mubende irrespective of the procedure of how to acquire land in this area.  

Yesterday, we were warned that we should be very specific. I know of a case, where LCIII in Katosi, Kiganda held a meeting last month. The LCIII Chairman, Mr Sebulime, was trying to explain to the people, who have just come to this area, how to acquire land and how a landowner is free to open boundaries of his land. Before he finished the sentence, stones were thrown at him and these Bakiga came with sticks and almost killed him. I was a witness to this.

In the same area, an elderly man (80 years old), Mr Kakembo owns land in Kassanda. When he went to open land again, the Bakiga, who have come to that area, took stones and sticks and almost killed him. Madam Speaker, probably the Members of Parliament from Kabale should help us to tell people coming this way, how you go about acquiring land in Buganda. We cannot sit around and see the land of our ancestors disappearing like that by force.

MR STEPHEN BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification from hon. Ssempangi. He is talking about the Bakiga from Sembabule. I know for sure that every Ugandan is free to live anywhere in Uganda, under the Constitution. But as far as I know, the Bakiga originate from Kabale. There is also a difference between the Bafuruki because a Muganda can also be a Mufuruki.

Secondly, you should be able to differentiate between a bona fide occupant and a trespasser, and somebody who has bought land for value. Really we should be able to protect anybody who has acquired property legally. I would wish therefore to get a clarification from hon. Ssempangi whether he is talking about squatters or he is talking about bona fide occupants, or he is talking about people who have bought land for value anywhere in Uganda including Sembabule rather than just telling us hearsay and rumours. 

We want a clarification on whether they are Bafuruki, whether they are Bakiga, whether they are bona fide occupants, because you are trying to portray the Bakiga to the rest of Ugandans as if they are land grabbers even when Bakiga are buying land with their own money legitimately. I am seeking that clarification.

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact, to add on more, one time, I reported it in this House that the same Bakiga from Bukiga also came to our forest reserves in Mukono and they are finishing all our forest reserves. I complained and at one time, hon. Kagonyera attacked me in this House. But we have facts! These are Bakiga, we see their structures and we know them and they are taking this land. So, I think hon. Ssempangi has a point.

MR WACHA: I get concerned that we are turning this House into a hate platform. Is it in order for us to start naming tribes without even justifying whether they are the people from that tribe? Why don’t you call them individuals who are invading your areas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssempangi, I think you should desist from pointing out tribes because you are drawing attention to them, and drawing the wrath of other people to a particular tribe.

MR SSEMPANGI: Thank you for your ruling, Madam Speaker. I wanted to be very specific because yesterday, we were told here that we need to be very specific, and this is not hearsay. This matter has been taken to the RDC in Mubende, to LC V, to the Land Board there. There are people who have settled there before and who are not trespassers. 

We have some vague clauses in the land bill. When you talk about a bona fide occupant, who is a bona fide occupant? Somebody who has been there for 12 years? But the LC chairmen are tipped and they can endorse that this person has been here for 12 years whether they are telling lies or not.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank him for giving way. I think it would be advisable for me to give this information. Much as every Ugandan is free to live in any part of the country, it is equally true, with reference to the Third Schedule of the Constitution, that every Ugandan is also free to be identified by a given ethnic grouping. It is not out of order for one to prescribe a given people by stating whether he is a Mukiga or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I have made a ruling. Are you suggesting that it is the habit of the Bakiga to invade land? Are you identifying invasion of land with the Bakiga? You are out of order, and sit down.

MR SSEMPANGI: Madam Speaker, the other day, there was a motion here about protecting squatters, but I think land owners should also be protected, because if a landowner is attacked with stones and clubs, this is a violation of human rights. I know that the Baganda are very accommodative, but I do not think their hospitality should be abused. In my area, Kayunga, every tribe has settled there and you do not hear this clamour and fighting. They are all accepted. We live in harmony in our area; you do not hear of this fighting over land.  

I want to go to the point of witchcraft, because we still have some laws. Some were set in 1996 but today children are still sacrificed by witchdoctors. We have these people, who hon. Balemezi was referring to in Mukono; the culture of getting dead bodies and whatever they do with them! Unless we amend the law or put in place a new law altogether to address these practices, it will make the work of the Human Rights Commission very difficult. We need new laws. 

Again the Committee referred to the juvenile courts, which are not available. I think if we make laws and we find them impracticable maybe they should be changed. The LCI courts, which are the first courts, are not functioning. If some of them were functioning, we would not have had so much of child abuse and neglect, defilement and all these things, which are done to children - beheading children alive. I think we need to change these laws on witchcraft because we are losing a number of children per day.  

Madam Speaker, I want to wind up by saying that something has been said here about Operation Wembley again. This is something we need to take seriously. I have travelled in some cities - I do not want to mention their names again to bias - but you find that it is unsafe for a person to travel in the city. Unless we take some steps here in our city, it might be the same. 

One time I noticed an Indian crossing the road with his family, a thug took a mobile from his child and the child fell down. As the child bled, the father was chasing the thief. The people standing by were saying “akavuddeko”. They were supporting the thief! We cannot blame the Police that they are not doing enough. This Operation Wembley is doing a good service to our nation and I think they need to be supported. Thank you.

MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee for bringing up this very important report. I also thank the Human Rights Commissioners for the good work they are doing. 

We debated the Anti Terrorism Bill recently and the Commissioners did a great deal to contribute on this bill, particularly on sensitising the people to ensure that things like that do not impact on the human rights of the citizens of Uganda. I think it is the duty of Parliament and any other law abiding Ugandan to ensure that whatever laws are made in this country, do not negatively impact on the human rights of citizens.

Madam Speaker, without life you would not be talking about human rights. Article 22(1) of the Constitution says no person shall be deprived of life. We are in the 3rd millennium, this is a state allowed to kill; this is a country where we still have capital punishment! Imprisonment of a person is meant to be reformatory; it is not meant to be punitive, it is not meant to eliminate somebody to another planet. When will this country remove capital punishment as a way of punishing people who handle affairs of this country contrary to the laws? (Interruption)

DR STEVEN MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Member for giving way. He has made a comment on the death penalty. The death penalty is a deterrent against murder and violent robberies. In countries where the death penalty has been removed, people commit these crimes without regard. I think in a country like Uganda where we still have problems of violent crimes, murders, and sacrificing children; the death penalty will stay. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague has made very swiping statements, that the death penalty is deterrent, that where we do not have capital punishment, crimes have gone up. Do you have empirical evidence you can produce? If anything, it is the contrary. 

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member has had the privilege of living in the United States and he knows that some states have a death penalty while others do not. In the states where the death penalty is still in existence, like Texas, violent crime has gone down whereas in the states where the death penalty has been removed, violent crime still continues. If anything, it has gone up. So there is solid evidence that when you remove capital punishment, violent crime rates go up. I think it is basic. Since biblical times it has always been a tooth for a tooth. When someone kills and is found guilty, he should be killed. Thank you very much.

MR FRED OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Dr Mallinga was just giving his opinion rather than information. We are not supposed to base our laws on other countries’ or other people’s laws. The important thing is that capital punishment is taking place here in Uganda, and the question I am asking is; for how long are we going to continue with that?  

Madam Speaker, the same Article says in sub-section (2) that: “No person has the right to terminate the life of an unborn child….” A number of unborn children are having their lives terminated in this country. All over the towns in Uganda, people are selling aborted foetuses. All over this country, there are clinics carrying out abortion and nobody is punishing them, yet it is against the Constitution. For how long are we going to continue to destroy the lives of our unborn children? Isn’t this a violation of human rights? (Interruption)

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: I thank the honourable member for giving way, and I thank you, Madam Speaker. Abortion is not against the law. The Penal Code provides that abortion can be carried out in certain instances. So, it depends on these particular instances. What the Constitution says in Article 22(2) is: 

“No person has the right to terminate the life of an unborn child except as may be authorised by law.” So, there are instances when the law does authorise abortion. I would like you to take this into account. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, where I stopped with the quotation I read is what should be in the Constitution of this country. Who has got the right to say that this child should have his or her life terminated? The Constitution has to be amended to ensure that we respect human life whether it is born or unborn. 

Under the circumstances, which I am quoting, these people who are selling the aborted foetuses, the people who are undertaking elimination – (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Omach. I do appreciate your fervent support for the sanctity of life. However, supposing the maintenance of that pregnancy definitely threatens and will take the life of the person bearing the pregnancy? What do you say about that?  

DR BULAMU: Madam Speaker, it is a pity that we at times perfunctorily read these laws. Most of these laws have humanity embedded in them. I will start by informing you that there is no single qualified medical doctor who is not taught how to abort, including me (Laughter). There is a provision termed “medical indication”, where abortion is done to save the life of the mother. That is not outright abortion. You terminate the foetus and save the adult. 

So, abortion is not as simple as that. It has so many reasons attached to it. Some women’s pregnancies are implanted in their tubes. Without abortion they would die within less than five minutes. I do not know what my honourable colleague would say about that. He is defending abortion and yet he is a man and does not know where they abort.

Madam Speaker, this law about abortion should be given a chance to be analysed by a committee and a paper presented before you ambush Members of Parliament here without weighing the reasons why abortion is done. Just yesterday someone was saying -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bulamu, you are now contributing! Please conclude, hon. Omach.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Both a veterinary doctor and a gynaecologist have advised me. I do not know which advice I should take. However, I have been told that doctors like the honourable member are being trained in how to abort and therefore commit crimes in this country. I think that is deplorable. 

The point I am making is that there are a number of clinics in many places in this country, which are not authorised, where lives of unborn children are being terminated. This must be condemned in the strongest way possible and people should be told what is acceptable in the law and what is not.  

Madam Speaker, Article 24 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda says, “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” In a number of homes where shelter is a problem, children sleep under the beds on which their parents are manufacturing other children. This is a very terrible thing happening in the country, and it has got a very bad impact on the minds of these children. These children can understand what is going on while they are beneath those beds. 

As if that is not enough, in the camps where we have the internally displaced persons, we have got children who are undergoing the same treatment. When children go through this for five, 10, 16 years, the trauma will take this country a number of years before it can be eliminated. So, do we want a Uganda with children who are traumatised or we want a Uganda with people whose human rights are protected? We should all enjoy security, which is good for all of us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, although I do not feel very happy with it. However, we have waited for this report for so long that when it comes it should be appreciated in terms of what is said, “better late than never.”

If I am not mistaken, I think human rights protection is the most important provision in any Constitution. Our Constitution makes it even more important because Article 1 says that all power belongs to the people. It is the very people who are supposed to have power on whom human rights violations are emitted, and this is very sad.

This report entraps the report of the Human Rights Commission, and its lamentations on the violation of human rights. It appears neither Parliament nor the commission have any power to impose sanctions on the violators of human rights. In fact, it is so sad that even at this stage in Parliament we are making recommendations for redress to the very people who in the first instance violated those human rights. 

I think this is very serious. There must have been some serious omission in the Constitution and in the making of the Human Rights law. The powers to impose sanctions for the violations of human rights were not given to the Human Rights Commission or even to Parliament.  

Because of this concern, I am recommending that we do not have to wait for the responsible ministry to bring here a law to this effect. I insist that the committee should bring a Private Members Bill to scrutinise this particular aspect. We should, as Parliament, show that we are concerned about the most important provision in the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, you will therefore find that the whole process is simply lamentations about human rights violations, which have gone on at large and cannot be addressed. I am even more disappointed when under the section of the report on the tortures, the committee seems to be satisfied with the statements of the officials of Internal Security Organisations, Prisons, and the Minister in-charge of Security that issues that were complained about have now been rectified. Statements that “the people who committed those offences have been punished”, were accepted by the committee, without probing further. 

I wish the committee actually pressed these officers to produce evidence of the people who were punished, and the kind of punishment they were given as a result of being accused of violating human rights.  

I would also wish, Madam Speaker, that once the Human Rights Commission identified “safe houses”, it should actually have named and listed these “safe houses” and their addresses. I have not read the report but I think that if this has not been happening, it should happen. Unless there is something in the law that stops the Human Rights Commission from listing them, they should list them. However, I am convinced that there are still “safe houses” in this country. 

I have raised the question of auditing classified expenditure on this Floor, and the minister stood here and courageously said that I was wrong. He has even gone out to repeat the same statement when I know very well, from my own responsibilities –(Interjections)- when I know from my work in the Public Accounts Committee that classified expenditure is not being audited. If I were to take these ministers seriously and agree out of ignorance that he was right and serious, I would be wrong. So, this is a situation of human rights violations and torture. No minister is going to accept the truth, unless the minister is subjected to very strict questioning and asked to produce evidence, Madam Speaker.  

Section 11 of the report shows existing laws inconsistent with the Constitution. The committee has barely recommended and urged the responsible ministers to have these laws amended. Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and the chairman of the committee. You say these laws are inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution, how about Article 2(2) of the Constitution? It says that any law, which is inconsistent with this Constitution, is null and void to that extent of inconsistency. I mean, we are asking for them to be amended but why do we not insist that this provision of the Constitution be applied in full? Or are we waiting for them to be amended?

We have people being arrested and beaten up at public rallies when the Constitution allows people to hold peaceful demonstrations, peaceful gathering and so on. Then we resort to Penal Codes, which are already inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution! I wish to know why we must wait for the laws to be amended and not insist on adherence to Article 2(2) of the Constitution.

Armed Conflict: section 12 of the report. I expected to see the committee recommending and urging government to try to resolve conflicts peacefully. I do not see why Parliament cannot make this statement again, even if we have been making it in vain. We have made it on many occasions, and it has never been followed, but I think it is our role and duty to insist on the right thing to be done. There is no such recommendation here.  

Madam Speaker, the committee should have recommended for reconciliation and peaceful resolution of conflict to this commission, otherwise it appears we are endorsing armed conflict. We have made simple, light recommendations, but I wish to see these two additions.

I am winding up. Page 15 of the report has abuse of freedoms Madam Speaker, freedom of association is not mentioned in this report at all. Instead the particular section I am referring to is talking about freedom of worship. How can the Legal Committee of Parliament and the Human Rights Commission do all its work and not mention the question of freedom of association? We may have been defeated in the Constituent Assembly; we have been defeated here in Parliament, but we should not succumb to the war of attrition. We must consistently refer to, and expound in detail, the abuse of the rights of freedom of association in any sense, particularly the freedom of political association. 

As a pluralist, I must insist that a report of a committee on human rights, which makes very little or hardly any reference to freedom of political association and pluralism, is not doing service to this country. Madam Speaker, I know of no other constitutional democratic practice and principle, which does safeguard the rights of the minority. In a situation where the rights of the minority are being trampled upon everyday, and through fear of legislation, surely Parliament must express itself in no uncertain terms, on the issue of the freedom of political association. I thank you very much.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to imagine that the commission responds to complaints taken to it. I do not know whether they sit, imagine and say, “Now let us address religion.” As you may not have actually moved to go and complain to the commission, I think you should not just accuse them, generally, of doing nothing.  

DR OKULO EPAK: Clarification then from you, Madam Speaker. Alternatively, can I ask for clarification from the chairperson of the committee whether in the report of the commission no mention was made at all on the question of freedom of association?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He will reply later.

DR WIBERFORCE NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will make a contribution on three areas. The first one is the absence in the report of any mention of the people who have been imprisoned under the Terrorism Act. A lot of people in Uganda are being arrested, under the Terrorism Act, and in my constituency there was a terrible story. 

In 1996 a fellow was arrested in Jinja and he spent two years in Kirinya. His name was Ndereya Namungaya. He spent two years in Kirinya until the judge dismissed his case. In 2002, he was rearrested on the same charges under the pretext that when the judge dismissed his case in 1997, it was not an acquittal. So, Madam Speaker, and fellow Members of Parliament, what do we do about these people who are being arrested under the Terrorism Act? 

The second contribution I want to make is that this country, the Republic of Uganda, has two nations, which are co-existing in it. The first nation is that of the rich people. Those are the ones who really enjoy basic human rights. The nation of the poor, who are the majority, does not enjoy basic human rights because they do not know them. 

In 1998 somebody called Harriet Nankabirwa from Mukono went to Budondo and allegedly took away a child of 12 years called Yusuf Balikowa to Rwanda. Up to now the child has never been seen again. 

As you recall, Madam Speaker, this matter was brought to your attention and you sent a request to the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle that issue. I am told that up to now this lady is still at large. Nothing has been done. The poor parents, Sheikh Kisitu and his wife Nulu of Budondo, are still crying for their child. Can this matter be addressed as soon as possible?  

There is another important issue. If the Uganda Human Rights Commission is going to carry out its work properly, it must be transparent. It is only when these organisations are transparent that they can promote democracy, basic human rights and freedom in this country. I would like to give an example. 

Some people were interviewed for the post of investigation officers in the Uganda Human Rights Commission. The process started in the year 2000, and somewhere in December 2001, after a whole year, these people were still being tossed about.

A Makerere consultancy firm was requested to interview these people, and it made its own recommendations after interviewing the candidates. After that, the Uganda Human Rights Commission nullified those interviews, even after it had hired them. Now, where is the transparency in the Uganda Human Rights Commission?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. To further illustrate the fear we have about this, I would like to inform hon. Nabwiso about the allegation of lack of transparency in the Human Rights Commission. The information in the community is that if the Human Rights Commission had been transparent and committed to handling the complaints of the retired Col Dr Kiiza Besigye, who is now in exile, perhaps he would not have gone into exile. And the threat of war that is being talked about would not be there. 

So, the work of the Human Rights Commission is a matter that is very serious. Lack of transparency can be so costly to this country. That is the information I would like to give you.

DR NABWISO: Thank you for that information. I think the point has been driven home. This is a matter, which should be investigated: the employment of investigation officers.

The last point I want to bring to the attention of fellow Parliamentarians is about the organisations that are just reactive and not pro-active. In my own assessment, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is a reactive organisation. It waits in its offices until complaints are taken there. But if we are just going to wait for complaints to be brought to our tables, we shall never do very good work. 

There must be a strategy whereby the Uganda Human Rights Commission becomes more proactive and makes sure that it co-ordinates with all the stakeholders in this issue of human rights, right down to the grassroots level. I am not sure whether it is in the plan for Uganda Human Rights Commission to work with the LCs and MPs in their respective constituencies, to ensure that what we are talking about is understood by all the people at the grassroots. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the highlights in the report. I would like to refer to section 14 of the report, on page 10, about the internally displaced persons.

I would like once again to appeal to the Ministry of Defence about the people in Kyamugashe, Rwikiniro Sub-county, Ruhama County in Ntungamo District, who were displaced by Kyamugashe Barracks about two years ago. Fifty families were displaced by this barracks and the Government promised them compensation, but up to now these people are still living in precarious conditions. They have no shelter, no food and every other day they are being promised that something will be done.

So, I am just humbly appealing to the minister in charge, since she has just arrived, to adopt the policy on IDPs as stipulated in the report, which says that the implementation of this policy should be done in one year. The policy will address emergencies and problems of IDPs, like their settlement, conditions of living, relief assistance, social services and rehabilitation, I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues of human rights are broad, and I would like to re-echo hon. Okulo Epak’s concern. We are now considering a report touching on five years. Certainly I do not think the committee had sufficient time to consider all these reports in detail, nor can this House surely have time to consider all these reports. I am appealing to the Committee on Business and Welfare to allocate more time to such reports of human rights in future. 

Also on the first page of the report, the last paragraph, the committee is complaining about certain ministers who were invited to give evidence to the committee and they absconded. I am sure that the honourable chairperson of the committee knows the powers under our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution, to deal with people who refuse to comply to the committee by not giving evidence.

Madam Speaker, I have grown up in a turbulent political environment. When I was in P.1, I returned home from school to find my mother crying that Mengo had been attacked and that very many people had died. Her daughter was doing a nursing course and she thought her daughter had died. I am referring to the attack on the Lubiri.

As I entered P.6, there was a military take over in this country. We grew up with some of my colleagues in this House in that turbulent environment of economic war, scarcity of commodities, and lining up.

As I entered the University, Madam Speaker, there was the liberation war from Tanzania and we went through that period, resulting into the mismanagement of elections and ending up in the bushes of Bulemezi and Luwero. We did everything that we could to reserve human rights and have good governance.

Madam Speaker, I am sure you have lived in this country long enough to know that we have had a Chief Justice of this country murdered, an Archbishop murdered, and several ministers and MPs and other Ugandans. Some of us would not like to see the same situation happen again.

Yesterday I followed the debate of the hon. Minister Crispus Kiyonga, the National Political Commissar, and I wondered if I was not dreaming, because hon. Kiyonga knows these things. He has lived in exile! A number of members of the Front Bench have been in exile. Therefore, Madam Speaker, when we have an opportunity now to be in charge of national affairs, we must make sure that we leave no stone unturned in protecting human rights. There should not be any attempt, whatsoever, of covering up. We should put our house in order because we never know who will be affected next.

Hon. Kiyonga knows very well that one of his predecessors, as National Political Commissar, is in exile; for what crime, we do not know, maybe on political beliefs. We also know that before he ran into exile, he reported to the Human Rights Commission and I do not see that in the report. (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my brother holding the floor. I wanted to know the truth, because it seems Kiyonga’s predecessor is here, that is the former Speaker, hon. Wapakhabulo. I want to know whether he means that now he is in exile - (Laughter)- Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I said one of the predecessors, but I am sure you live in Uganda and you know that Col Kizza Besigye was a very powerful National Political Commissar and now he is in exile.

Madam Speaker, times change, and I want to appeal to my senior colleagues in the Movement to go back and read the writings and the teachings of 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986 and also to grasp in their minds the original ten-point programme, especially point number one. If it affected us then, let them know that it can affect other people today and we should cut across the board. 

In this report, the committee is telling us that the Minister told them that safe houses no longer exist, and you know how many times they came on this floor and denied that they were there.  Why, in the first instance, should safe houses have existed in the administration of the National Resistance Movement? (Interruption)  

MR AWORI: I would like to inform the honourable colleague that when he talks about safe houses, I know the line minister lives in a safe house.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I did not get the information clearly. Probably hon. Aggrey Awori could explain to me more, so that I follow my debate.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. At one time, my committee was informed that hon. Muruli Mukasa was living in a safe house.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to inform the House that I do not live in a safe house, but my house is safe. Thanks to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence, and of course security, for making sure that there is a very good secure environment for me to live in a safe place. I live on Bakasambe Close, Nabe Road, in Kiwatule, which is not a safe house. Thank you.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Kazoora for allowing me to seek clarification from him. This is in connection with the debate of the NPC, Dr Kiyonga, yesterday. I happened to have been around and listened to the speech myself. To my understanding, it appeared that he was trying to clarify certain issues that had been raised, but we have different understandings of these issues.  

I looked around and I did not see Dr Kiyonga in the House and I do not know whether there will be an opportunity for him, before we wind up this debate, to answer hon. Kazoora, or whether it is just going to pass like that.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member did not say anything specific. He was talking in generalities.  So, I think it is okay.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very sure Lt Col Katirima is with me in this debate because of his historical ties and undertakings, and he cannot deny this. He has just said, “in his own understanding”, and he said people understand differently. Fine, I respect his own understanding and he should equally respect my own understanding.  

Madam Speaker, we have got exposed and enlightened leaders today. I am happy to see my honourable sister, Ms Nankabirwa here, as the Minister of State for Defence.  The hon. Kiyingi, we have done a lot of work before on the floor of this House and she became a minister in charge of internal affairs, and very many others like the hon. Muruli Mukasa, whom I have worked with for so long. (Interruption)  

MS NAMUSOKE KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Kazoora. I just want to clarify that I am not the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs. I am a minister of state and not the minister in charge. Thank you.  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if I promoted the minister and yet I do not have those powers. But what I was saying, anyway, is that we now have exposed and knowledgeable leaders who should be able to really help this country and manage the affairs in a sober manner. They should show a difference from the past leaders, the swines, as they are called.  

What I am saying is, if I am a suspect and I have been arrested, I have a family and my children do not know what I am saying on the Floor of the House. The President told us that, “these people went to attack my old mother, my old father, and they did not know where their son was”. If you have got the suspect already, why should you go for the car, for property in the house, for all these things that would help the children and the spouses? 

Certainly, these leaders can tell their operatives to do things in a modern way and they would still achieve the desired objectives without causing stampede and hatred in society. I am appealing for clean leadership, which produced the National Resistance Movement. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate. I want, first of all, to thank the Human Rights Commission for producing these reports on a regular basis. I know there are commissions and other authorities, which are supposed to produce reports regularly, but some of them do not do so.  

For instance, the minister responsible for privatisation is supposed to give a statutory report every six months, to tell this House how privatisation is progressing. Have we heard from this minister for the last year or so? This is just to give one example.  

Madam Speaker, I want to also commend the Human Rights Commission for at least being relatively independent. To a certain extent, they have been very open in the reports that they have submitted to this House. Where there are safe houses, they have said so. Where they have found things wrong, they have said so. For that, I would like to commend them.  

Thirdly, I want to thank them for having conducted the first ever, public hearings on the violation of the rights of the disabled persons. This had never been done in this country. They did it, and I commend them (Applause). 

I gather they have a problem and they cannot produce the report because they lack funds, as stated in this report. I would like to request the minister responsible to enable these people to produce this report. Give them that little facilitation so that the report can be produced. 

Since the Minister for Constitutional Affairs has a lot of sympathy for people with disabilities, having been a minister there before, she will find the little money so that this report can be produced and we can now understand what is going on. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank the committee for clearing the backlog of these reports. Parliament has been condemned and blamed for receiving reports like these and taking no action. I think they have helped Parliament. The challenge we have as Parliament is the way forward. What do we do with these reports, which have been given to us by the Commission? What do we do with these reports given by our own committee? 

Indeed, as one of the honourable members has stated, I think one of the problems is that the Human Rights Commission needs more powers to give sanctions and to do things which they are not able to do today. I want to add my voice to that of the honourable member who proposed that this committee should come up with a law to strengthen the Human Rights Commission, and also to give it more powers and make it even more independent. I think they need this. 

Of course, there were references to some cases, which they should have dealt with in a very clear manner but for reasons, which we cannot go into now, those cases have not been so handled. At the end of this debate, the commission will be wondering. So, how do we move from here, what do we do? 

Hon. Kiyonga was here and he supported the Executive as strongly as he could. Of course, he had to do so, but that does not help us. Defending the Executive for this weakness or for not doing this or that does not help us. I think we need to work out a way forward. For instance, Madam Speaker, this committee, in spite of the known powers it has, summoned the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Minister for Disaster and Preparedness, and these ministers ignored those summons! The committee is helpless! It does not have sanctions, but when you look at this –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILDREN (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that there were no summons from the committee to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Otherwise, we would have come. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, maybe the minister is not well informed about this, but I have evidence that our letter of invitation to the Ministry of Gender was received. We have a delivery book in Parliament and whenever a letter is delivered, someone in that ministry must sign. 

I think we should not use flimsy excuses. What this Parliament requires is a response from the relevant ministry about the issues raised by the commission. There are no two ways about it! Let the minister go back, prepare a response and present it to Parliament.

MR MWANDHA: So, Madam Speaker, you can see for yourself. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has the biggest number of ministers, six ministers, and none of them could come and represent the ministry and answer charges given in the human rights report. Here we are mourning about this, lamenting about it, and we are helpless! 

Madam Speaker, for the Ministry of Defence, what explanation does hon. Amama Mbabazi have? If he was not able to come in person, why could he not have sent the younger, more energetic lady, the Minister of State for Defence, to come? (Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way, and I thank you, Deputy Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I must apologise that the Ministry of Defence did not appear before the committee to give our views. 

But I wish to request that when letters are written to ministries, let ministers of state also be given copies. Just give us copies so that in case the minister is out of the country –(Interjections)- This is a request. If the minister is out of the country, I will be able to know the programmes in Parliament. There is no way I can look into my colleagues’ files. There are ministers who are very busy, who move a lot and have a lot to do, and by the time they come back the meeting may be over. So, this is a genuine request. Write to ministers of state as well, so that we can be able to come in without waiting for colleagues who may be busy. Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am amazed! I thought that when hon. Ruth Nankabirwa rose, she was going to refer to page 8 of this report, and specifically to paragraph 10. Paragraph 10 reads as follows: 

“Accessibility to military detention centres: The Uganda Human Rights Commission experienced difficulty accessing military detention centres since UPDF insisted that visits must be after advance notice and prior permission from the Army Commander - of course, when they are prepared. Unfortunately, the Minister of Defence did not appear before the committee to explain this issue. However, the Minister of State for Security and the Director General of ISO who appeared before the committee pledged to guarantee the Uganda Human Rights Commission unlimited access to detention centres under their jurisdiction”. 

I do not see how the Minister of Security can actually commit the Minister of Defence and the UPDF in matters of accessibility to detention centres, and these are very serious matters. There have been various accusations of violation of Ugandans’ and other people’s rights in these military detention centres. If the Human Rights Commission itself cannot access these centres, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I would like to thank hon. James Mwandha. The detention of Ugandans in army barracks is a very serious matter. As I speak now, two people from my constituency are detained in army barracks, and one died in quotes, “by hanging himself” in Mbale army barracks. This was due to illegal detention of civilians in army barracks. 

This is a very serious matter. When Human Rights Commission raises it and you have people in charge and they do not come out to give the information, this creates worry in the hearts of Ugandans. What do I go and tell the people of Tororo County about the Ugandan who was arrested from Mela, taken to Mbale and killed, and then they said he committed suicide?   

MS NANKABIRWA: Hon. Ekanya is raising a very serious issue. He is saying “somebody committed suicide.” I want to request that in case he has that information, let him give it to me and I will follow up the issue. I have never heard of civilians detained in Mbale barracks, and we have been meeting with hon. Ekanya here in Parliament many times. I am hearing it from him for the first time. I am just requesting that in the event of such a thing happening -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to see more respect for this House and its committees. If the Minister of State for Defence had appeared before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, this situation would not arise, and these issues would not be raised on the floor of the House. 

Is it in order therefore, for the ministers who have been mentioned not to have appeared before the committee, to start giving us piecemeal information? They are rising to defend issues in isolation rather than looking at all the issues that have been raised by the committee and preparing an exhaustive response to this House. Is it in order? What is going on, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is out of order. Will you be responding to the contents of this report formally?

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I disguise my point of order under clarification -(Interruption)
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members do not engage in a separate debate on that side.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I think it is very unfair for a Member of Parliament to derail Parliament by introducing new issues that do not form part of the agenda. We are debating reports of 1998, 1999, 2001 and 2002. What hon. Ekanya is talking about is happening now. So, you wait and raise it in another report -(Interjections)- yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, if violation of human rights is a continuous process, I think it is important to keep on raising these issues (Applause).

MR MWANDHA: Well, Madam Speaker, you can see the Front Bench is in disarray. But the challenge to us is; what do we do with these people? I thought the Minister for Disaster Preparedness would be the one to immediately respond to issues that relate to the violation of rights, but they have ignored it. What do we do? We have a problem. That is challenge, a very serious challenge.

And, Madam Speaker, you asked the hon. Minister of State for Defence whether she was going to give a formal response, but she does not appear to have one. In spite of the very serious matters that have been raised about this report, the Minister of Defence has no answer to give. The Minister for Gender and Labour has nothing to say; the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is also not interested in participating and defending her position; what do we do with these people? (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mrs Christine Aporu): Madam Speaker, my minister informed me this morning that he apologised here yesterday. We are preparing to come and respond to the report, as requested by the committee.

MR MWANDHA: I want to appreciate the response from the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. I hope the Minister of Gender will also respect the House in the same manner, as well as the Minister of Defence.

Madam Speaker, there are a lot of things, which are going wrong in the field of human rights. 

Number one is the inadequate funding.  

Two, the illegal arrests and detentions. 

Three, there are tortures all over the place and some of the places cannot even be accessed. 

Four, the conditions in Police cells, jails and prisons are intolerable.  

I mean, you go through this report and you do not find anything positive and the ministers are not prepared to give us a way forward! Madam Speaker, I hope this report is a challenge to government. They had better come out with a clear answer of how we should move forward. Thank you.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a report, which apparently took a bit of trouble and agony to produce. I find that perhaps there are areas, which should have been clearly addressed but were not. 

Before I go any further, I am one who has a tendency to sympathising with governments in the Third World because they are trying to establish law and order where it sometimes has not existed before. But even in that process, the rights of the people should be observed. 

I was here in 1962, during the so-called colonial days. And I can assure all Ugandans that I recall very well that liberty and security were here during the colonial days. It was much better than what we are going through now, and what any government has been able to provide to the people of this country after independence.

From time to time, when the security situation reaches a certain level when there is rampant insecurity, certain organs within the security system of the country can intervene. I would particularly like to thank ISO. In the past we had the problem of bombings in Kampala and we were all scared. The Minister of Internal Affairs could not handle it but ISO did. Again this year we were going through the same problem until ISO came into the picture, in the name of Col Kayanja or Operation Wembley. We would like to thank him. 
 
However, it is a matter of concern among the citizens of this country. There are several security organs causing concern among the people. I am glad that the Minister of State for Security is here. He should really explain to the people of this country what each security organisation does. We have the Ministry of Internal Affairs, with the Police and all its departments, we have the Military, the CMI, and we have the Kalangala Action group – whose members are all over the country. In my constituency I know someone, perhaps you also know him, called Col Kiiza. He has been visiting my constituency quite often and I do not know what he is looking for. 

Then we have ISO and ESO. I think ESO operates outside the country. So, we have seen this before in this country and it was a very painful experience, the General Service Unit of the UPC I government in this country. As a matter of fact it was rumoured that hon. Awori worked for the General Service Unit, that he was in charge of the television station then.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, serious business is transacted in this august House, and we debate matters responsibly. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to make a serious allegation without foundation? He says that I, at one time, worked for the General Service Unit, and that I worked under a terrorist government. Can he substantiate that? Is he in order to come up with such a serious allegation against an honourable member of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, the report we are debating starts in 1999, so I think that by going to 1960 you are really taking us out of jurisdiction. We should concentrate on 1999 to today. (_Mr Muruli Mukasa rose_).

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for an honourable colleague to stand up, when you have made a ruling, and pursue a matter on which you have made a ruling? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not know what he was going to say. He did not say anything.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I would like to thank hon. Mallinga. He raised the issue of many security organisations and he was wondering what each one of them does. 

I would like to inform hon. Mallinga that there are several documents, which are with everybody in this House - I believe - which spell out what each security agency does. The first document is our Constitution of 1995, which is available to you. Then there is the NRA Statute of 1992, which spells out what the army does, and what the various security agencies under the army do. There is the 1994 Police Statute, and the 1997 Internal Security Organisation Statute, which talk about ISO and ESO. 

The Kalangala Action Plan is not a security agency. I would like to make that clear. As its name suggests, it is a plan, it is not a security -(Laughter)

MR DOMBO LUMALA: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The security of this country is a very important issue about which Parliament must be clearly informed. I want to seek clarification from the Minister in charge of Security. 

Quite often the Kalangala Action Plan members have been seen armed and conducting operations, which are of security nature, like arrests. You as the Minister in charge of Security, do you usually sanction such operations? Do you also sanction that they should be armed? Do you know how many arms the Kalangala Action Plan actually possesses? To whom are they accountable, when they conduct such operations, which are of a security nature? I thank you very much.

MR BEN WACHA: My understanding of plans is that they are targeted for a certain thing. It is a target with a span of time. The minister says this Kalangala thing is a plan. What is it targeted towards? Is the yellow bus part of the plan, the armed men - are they part of the plan; disturbing people with bayonets - is it part of the plan?

MR JORAM PAJOBO: Is the minister aware that in today’s paper it is reported that Kalangala Action Plan carried out activities in Western Uganda, that is Mityana? They went and beat up six workers and tortured them in Buseruka. Is he aware of that? 

Secondly, can we regard the Kalangala group as a terrorist organisation? Thank you.

DR MALINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think what happens to us is that when we get into positions of power we tend to become big and lord it over our fellow citizens. I am beginning to see what has happened in this country before happening again. Those in positions of power sometimes say they get drunk with the power and do things that hurt others. There is a tendency now to solve all our problems by means of arms, by the gun. We should try to discuss our problems and come to a peaceful conclusion.

It hurts me to see any citizen innocently shot dead. I do not want to go into that, but we have so many of those examples. There is a rumour, and I hope the Minister of State for Security will really address this House and tell us today: do “safe houses” still exist? This report says “safe houses” ended in 1997 and 1998. But there is still anxiety. Do “safe houses” still exist?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, hon. Mallinga, for giving way. I am giving a pertinent point of information, derived from the Constitution. Article 23(2) says; “A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law.”  

The information I am giving to my friend here is that up to now I doubt the likes of ISO Headquarters in Nakasero, because people are detained there. CMI on Kitante Courts, Clement Hill Road, and ESO near Nile Hotel here, I doubt whether all those places are gazetted by law as expected of them by the constitutional provision I have just read. Where are we going?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, try to wind up.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I am winding up. As I wind up, I would like to appeal to those in positions of leadership: it is a problem on the African continent that we do not respect each other. It hurts me to say 200 people were killed, or that a mass grave has been found in such and such a place. 

The other day human beings were cut up in Gulu and body parts found in pots. Is this what should be happening at this level of our development? We should be in position –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, hon. Mallinga for being a gentleman and allowing me to seek this clarification. Part of the problem is intolerance. Some people do not to want to listen to others. Hon. Awori speaks a million times here and we keep quiet. But as soon as we stand up he raises points of order, he hums, and he does whatever. 

The clarification I am seeking from hon. Mallinga is this. I appreciate his approach to the debate. His experience is very similar to mine in this country. He said there was law and order before independence, but he should tell us whether authority was respected or not before independence. And I was here. Tell us whether authority was respected or not.

Two; yesterday hon. Mallinga came to this House with his hands in the air over problems brewing in his place. He fears that even unrest may take place in his place, and it is not caused by the government. These people he is alleging are swollen with power are ordinary Ugandans. 

I would like him to help this House understand as to how he thinks situations of that nature can be handled, and whether the responsibility is with these people swollen with power or it is with everybody, all citizens. By the way, I have not seen anybody condemn those people who might eventually find themselves on the wrong side of the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that before someone is accorded respect, he must earn respect. What has happened in this country is that we try hard to respect our leaders. But how do you respect a leader when every single day in the papers there is a report of corruption and nothing is done? Are you going to respect that leader?  

How do you respect a leader when a child is killed and nothing is done? We heard the other day there was a demonstration, a boy was shot dead, and nothing has been done against the policeman who shot that person on Kampala Road.  We have not been told that anything was done about it. That is the foundation of disrespect for our leaders, and the reason why people tend to take the law in their own hands.

I can tell my friend that the way things are in Uganda, to get justice, you would rather go to an LC I council than go to a High Court. We have just gone through that, and you know what is happening in our judiciary system. So, we try hard to respect leadership, but there is a breakdown, and we are becoming trigger-happy.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, sometimes it pains me when people try to do their best and what they get is just condemnation. Many colleagues who actually petitioned the High Court have got favourable judgements and they are back to Parliament. So, is that injustice? Did they go to an LC court to be able to come back to this House? 

We are the same people who demand that even the inquiry into the Electoral Commission should be manned by a judge, and yet our purse cannot accommodate more judges on the bench. So, Dr Mallinga, I really respect you but I think the bench deserves your support.

DR MALLINGA: Let me wind up but I would like to assure the honourable minister that if you go to the lower courts you would be surprised. In Pallisa I know of some cases, which have been surprising. 

There is a case of an engineer who embezzled Shs6 million, which was meant for putting murram on a road. He accepted the charge, deposited the money at the police station, but then he was found not guilty!

School constructions –(Interruption)- but I would give you, Madam Speaker, and I have a lot of respect for you. I would give you a litany of these cases, which are happening at the lower courts, but I will not, I think to save time –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, in your submission you were talking of the High Court and LC1. Now, you have another entry point at the magistrate court. Are you talking about the High Court or the magistrate court? Which court are you talking about?

DR MALLINGA STEVEN: I think the judiciary. All of them are a problem. I have problems with all of them, Madam Speaker.  I would like to wind up by saying that those of us in positions of leadership should own up and lead our people fairly with justice, and place ourselves in positions - suppose we were the people who are being led, how would we like to be treated? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the Minister of State quickly respond to the queries?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A question was raised by hon. Mallinga as to whether safe houses still exist. I would like to say that safe houses, as places of detention, no longer exist but safe houses as places of work for the security agencies do exist.(Interruption) 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I gather one of the ways of concealing these safe houses is to register the property in private people’s names. Is the Minister aware that in fact this is the case, that property bought by the government for government use is registered in private people’s names in order to conceal them from appearing as Government premises? If that is the case, how can Government be sure that some of the people in whose names these property have been registered will not turn around one day and say that they own the property? What security does Government have to make sure they will recover these houses?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, you are now saying that Government should have property protected. That is not what the issue was. They wanted to know about safe houses and the action plan.  Please address that. Minister I have asked you to address the question.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, safe houses as places of work for security organisation still exist and these are restricted property, they are still there and have been used for their proper work.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I disagree with the honourable Minister when he says that they are only places of work. One of the places of Wembley where there is an office of the operation officer, people are kept there for over two weeks. The one on Clement Hill Road; is that a place of work or a detention place?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Is the Minister aware that one Vincent Matovu, Editor of Mazima Newsletter was confined at Kitante courts under CMI interrogation recently, before he was moved to CPS? If so, why does he tell us lies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please respond.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These houses or premises, which have been mentioned, CMI on Kitante Road, the offices of Operation Wembley are not safe houses. Those are places of work. They are offices run by the various security organisations and they are known. They are not safe houses. 

Safe houses are restricted property and many times kept secret for secret security work, which goes on from time to time. And these are not those of the CMI, the Operation Wembley and these are part and parcel of the security work all over the world. Kenya has them, Tanzania has them, the United States has them, and Britain has them, name it. They are there!

Madam Speaker, there was something about the Kalangala Action Plan –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, what we are talking about is a very important matter, which even has overtones of the Constitution of Uganda. I sought to know, with reference to the Constitution, and I quoted the provision for him verbatim. The quotation was “A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law.” 

I wanted to know from the Minister whether places like ISO at Nakasero, CMI in Kitante Courts, Operation Wembley Clement Hill Rd, ESO near Nile Hotel are gazetted in accordance with this provision. Is it in order for the honourable Member to bulldoze a question of a constitutional implication for the sake of causing disturbance for the people we represent? Why doesn’t he talk clearly with reference to what –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what the problem of hon. Lukyamuzi is? The Minister was still answering the questions.

MR LUKYAMUZI: He had already gone to another item.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is going to answer the question.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, these are the official offices of these organisations like we have the headquarters of the Minister of Health along Kitante Rd, we have the headquarters of the Ministry of Gender somewhere and Ministry of Justice and so on. It is known that an organisation or agency has to be with an office, and you do not have to go to the constitutional court to gazette an office? What is clear –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Minister, I think the question Members want to know is whether these are places of work, or are they are also detention centres?

MR MURULI MUKASA: No, they are not. We have places of detention, which are gazetted. We have the police stations, prisons, and for serious cases connected with terrorism and so on, we have Kigo as a place of detention, which has been properly gazetted.
 
MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear, and the honourable Minister is a senior Member of this House. When the Speaker is talking and guiding the House, you sit down. You were trying to explain to him, he kept standing and answering you directly. I did not want to put that as an order but I thought he had better get used to the procedures of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kazoora.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, the question of property belonging to Government is another matter, which does not come exactly about safe houses and so on. There is a procedure of making sure there is an inventory of Government property whether or not it is registered in private names. Some of these safe houses I must say are actually belonging to individuals. They are just rented and used for some time, and then other houses are found whenever they are no longer safe. In other words, if their identity is known, then they are abandoned and – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of clarification – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, this is not a dialogue between you and the Minister.

MR SABIITI: Could the Minister clarify, a question was put “do safe houses exist?” Now, can he be very specific and say yes they exist. He was meandering.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have already quoted one Vincent Matovu who is an editor of Mazima Newsletter. If evidence were brought to the effect that he spent a week in Kitante Courts, would the Minister be ready to resign? 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the question of resignation is really beside this point. What is clear is that Vincent Matovu actually was taken to a place of rightful detention.  

Madam Speaker, something was said about Kalangala Action Plan. As I was explaining some time back, a group of about 2000 Movement people went for a retreat in Kalangala for a period of one or two months and then at the end of that retreat, they came up with a memorandum which was termed the Kalangala Action Plan. Among other things this memorandum focused on how to improve and increase the mobilisation tempo in the Movement throughout the country. So, they drew up this plan, how they were going to mobilise. Part of the plan talked about how these mobilisers could actually be empowered to go on and mobilise. This is what was called the Kalangala Action Plan; it is not a security agency. All the security agencies we have are known, they are gazetted, they are in the Constitution and there are in the law. 

MR BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like some clarification from the honourable Minister.  Under which authority is the Kalangala Action Plan falling, so that if it happens to act in a way that is not really legal, the managing authority will streamline its action? The people of Kalangala we have always known this word “Kalangala” which is appended to the nomenclature of this plan and we think Kalangala should be related to good action.  

So, if people perceive Kalangala Action Plan as a bad organisation, then we the people of Kalangala feel offended. So, we should know where to go if we feel that our name is being used in a wrongful manner.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, we are on a very important and sensitive subject, KAP. It is known in this country that the action of KAP (Kalangala Action Plan) almost ruined elections of this country and almost brought us to a political disaster. Can the Minister tell us today - I have been told that it was conceived in Kalangala, they had a preamble, it was a plan which included arming this group with guns, with bayonets, with knives and sticks, including working and beating up people, without any law or authority. Was this really part of the plan?  We want to know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you are now touching on matters of the other report. I do not think that is what we are discussing today. Let the Minister answer the questions related to human rights.   

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I think I have really answered the questions about the safe houses. There were two main questions. I think I have exhausted them.	

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker for according me this opportunity to make a substantive contribution without necessarily using the Rules of Procedure. First and foremost, I would like to thank the Committee, which has brought this report to us.  

Secondly, I would like to congratulate the Uganda Human Rights Commissioners upon being re-appointed to continue with their work. I would like to sympathise with them for having tirelessly worked with little resources at their disposal.  

If I had my way, really this commission should have become part of judiciary so that they just prosecute cases of human rights violations. In that light, I would like to state categorically that in our society, the worst violator of human rights is always the Government! Ninety percent of human rights violation cases can be laid at the doorsteps of the Government. 

I am glad the majority of our colleagues have more or less proved that point. It is only a few cases such as Kony and maybe social situations here like we have in Sebei of female genital mutilation that one can talk about violation of human rights by other organs other than the state.

Madam Speaker, I am saying so for the following reasons: all the cases which have been mentioned, specifically the armed persons in uniform or carrying gazetted guns emanate from Government sources. KAP is funded by this government; Maj. Kakooza Mutale is an employee of State House among other organs of the State and he is using a Movement bus. Since I cannot draw the distinction between this Government and the Movement it is responsible for violations of human rights. 

I do not want to go into details of what Kakooza Mutale has done to this nation, otherwise, I will be impinging on a matter, which you have declared subjudice. Madam Speaker, you are aware this man is now terrorising the north. But let us come back to more substantive issues rather than this notorious man called Maj. Kakooza Mutale. 

Madam Speaker, we have mentioned safe houses. No other organ in our society, administrative or otherwise, religious or whatnot, operates the safe house. I note with great concern that the people who have come into this new system called NRM government do not know how to operate safe houses. I, for one with long experience in governance, have known safe houses internationally. They are all over the world. Safe houses are meant to be guesthouses for guests you do not want to be seen in the general public. We have been doing so here and there. 

I have seen at the Airport some Congolese friends of ours were there because trouble whenever they come here, we do not take them to Nile and instead we take them to safe houses. When I earlier on alleged that my honourable colleague here was staying in a safe house, it is true in Bunga there is a house where he stayed for a long time. It was a safe house. When he left and went to this other place Kiwatule, it continued to be a guesthouse called a safe house for the Congolese guests. 

This is a fact. Every government operates a safe house but do not change a safe house into a torture centre. It should not be a place for torturing people. I for one, if I run foul with your government, do not take me to Luzira, take me to a safe house where you can accord me wine, spirits, good food and good company, but do not use it for torture. 

I was once detained in a safe house under a certain regime when President Museveni was a Minister of Defence. I was comfortable. It was a safe house. They did not want me in Luzira, they did not want me in the CPS, but they kept me in a safe house. It was proper. That is how it should be. 

There are certain people you do not want to circulate. So, a safe house my honourable colleague, make it torture free. No problem, gazette it. That is all. As my honourable colleague put it, do not put a property where you are carrying out government business under a private person’s name. It should be a government property and as far as I know, we have stopped government owning property. So, really the purpose for which you want to carry out this kind of heinous act, please organise a proper place for it.

Madam Speaker, there is a question again going back to prove the point that human rights are being violated by the State. First of all, by denying the Human Rights Commission facilitation, in itself shows the Government is not interested in their work at all. 

The Human Rights Commission, for three consecutive years has have made reports, which I have never seen in the daylight of this august House. It was not until the Chairman of this Committee put pressure on the relevant departments that we have seen this report. Why do you have a statutory body make a report and you do not want to look at it? Where human rights violations are concerned, generally the Government is reluctant to provide resources or to take necessary action. We have heard a case of Kanungu; up to now that report has never seen the daylight of this august House. That shows lack of interest on the part of government to make sure peoples rights are honoured.

Madam Speaker, we have a serious case of IDPCs where more than half a million people are detained under inhuman conditions and yet we have the resources for defence. The majority of people in detention camps are the IDP. Actually, they are victims of war not necessarily of Kony alone! It cannot be Kony alone. 

Only the other day, a junior member of the Ministry of Defence came out with a notice giving the people of Pader, Gulu and Kitgum districts 48 hours notice to move to a camp! Are we in a state of emergency in the north? 

That is a serious violation of human rights, when you tell somebody to leave a place of his abode to go to another place, unless the conditions are under some difficulties such as natural disaster. I hope the honourable Minister of Defence can tell this House. Where did that officer get authority to order the citizens of Pader, Gulu and Kitgum districts to move to detention centre; under what authority in the absence of declaration of state of emergency? That is why, Madam Speaker, I am saying the worst violator of human rights is the Government- (Ms Nankabirwa rose_) I leave the floor to my honourable colleague.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. This is the second time hon. Aggrey Awori is raising this issue although he raised it in another forum where the Prime Minister was in the chair and I explained. However, let me repeat the explanation I gave then. The officer got operational orders from his boss and he had to act. This was purely operational. The army on the ground had identified a serious problem and they had to come in to save people, and that is why the announcement was made. It was an operational order.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for an answer, which is totally complete if not diversionary. When you say an operational order, that is strictly in matters of defence. Defence orders are not above the rights of Ugandan citizens. You can only have that kind of operational order under a state of emergency and no other condition. You just cannot come up and say move!  You cannot!  Which law are you using, by the way that is operational command.  

We have been asking this Government all along, please declare a state of emergency in northern Uganda so that such operational orders can be effective and legal, but you have declined to do so. Now, you are bringing them through window II. Why don’t you be direct with us?  Why are you using window II? Come through the main door and tell us a state of emergency exists and then we shall allow you to order us around notwithstanding our human rights.  

In terms of human rights, while my honourable colleague is still listening to some address from the Minister of Defence, we have been constant even violating the rights of the soldiers. 

I happen to be familiar with the military procedures. Madam Speaker, our soldiers who have been operating in Congo for the last four years, were the other day, moved from Bunia via Entebbe to Gulu, without giving them the ordinary two weeks leave. That is violation of the soldiers’ rights –(Ms Nankabirwa rose_) Are you on the floor to educate us? (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the soldiers who were removed from there had spent eight months without fighting. They were guarding and not fighting. Those are the soldiers who were taken to the north.

MR AWORI: I would like to thank my honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, I am even salivating on that answer. Do you know why I am salivating? She has revealed something very important; that the soldiers were sitting in Congo for eight months at our public expense, on leave. Is that where they take their leave whenever they have to rest? - (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Is it in order for hon. Aggrey Awori to misinform this House by misinterpreting the information I gave him, when he says that the soldiers were on leave in Congo? I told him that these soldiers were in Congo and they were not fighting, for eight months. When they are not fighting, it does not mean that they are not doing any other intelligence work. 

We have a process we are following as we withdraw soldiers from that place; MONUC has to take over. We are not supposed to leave a vacuum in that area; MONUC has to be ready to take over places where UPDF withdraws. Therefore, we have to wait for MONUC to be ready to take over security issues in that area, that is, when we can come out. The soldiers were not on leave in Congo. They were following the Lusaka Peace Accord.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think I heard her correctly. She said the soldiers were on non-combat duties. They were not in combat but they were on duty. They were not on leave.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not like to harass my honourable colleague, the Minister of State for Defence, but every time she comes to give information, she opens a new gate.  Now a new gate has been opened, but I do not want to follow it. Let me come back to the Judiciary. (Interruption)  

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Awori for giving way. I would support hon. Aggrey Awori if he had advocated for the wives and children of the UPDF soldiers who remained, because those are the people whose rights have been violated.  

MR AWORI: Thank you very much. My colleague has also opened another window, but maybe I should not pursue it. We have gone to Congo, we have fathered children and we have abandoned them there. Ugandans have now been left in Congo. The wives, the people who have been giving us the comfort during the hardship days, we have abandoned them there. What kind of situation is this? Violation of human rights is violation of human rights! Did those soldiers leave those children and wives on their own accord? They are Ugandans; we have left Ugandans in Congo to suffer because we took them there.  

Madam Speaker, let me come back to another issue on violation of human rights, which is equally serious. We are aware of a difficult situation obtaining in Karamoja and the adjoining districts.  We have had drought in that area for a long time - not for one week, one month, one year but three years. There is serious shortage of food in Karamoja but we are busy sending -(Interruption) 

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, hon. Awori, for giving way. It is most kind of you to give me the opportunity to give information to this august House. 

The situation in Karamoja is very alarming, and it is jeopardising the lives of people. For the last three years we have had drought and now everyday the Karimojong are deserting the area in groups. They are going to the neighbouring districts and the majority has gone to Kenya. So, could the government do something as an emergency, to assist these people? Otherwise, by March next year, there will be nobody in Karamoja, except the urban people. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AWORI: Thank you. That is the point I was trying to pursue, but I am glad the honourable colleague representing the area has been more accurate and onto the point. As we speak now, 30 Karimojong have been buried in the suburbs of Mbale in a mass grave, because of famine. 

Meanwhile, we have given US$9 million to a Ugandan company, one of whose prominent directors is the daughter of the President of Uganda, to export food to Zimbabwe. Ugandans are dying in Mbale and we are exporting food, through President Museveni’s daughter, to make a profit in Lusaka! Violation of human rights! (Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Have you concluded, hon. Awori?

MR AWORI: No. When I saw my honourable colleague rising to the Floor, as you know, Madam Speaker, I am very accommodative - (Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, please also accommodate me by trying to wind up. 

MR AWORI: But would you accord me the privilege of allowing my colleague to supplement on what I am trying to say?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No!

MR AWORI: I continue, Madam Speaker. These are serious issues; these are not allegations, they are facts. When Ugandans are dying here and then you give somebody who is related to the head of state money to export food much needed locally, I call that violation of human rights over and above corruption.  

To wind up, Madam Speaker, on how the Government has been violating our human rights, so many para-military organisations have been set up. I will not waste any more time on the question of the -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: The statement hon. Awori is making is a very serious one, and I think it was important, in terms of procedure, to allow the air to be cleared when the Minister attempted to do so.  Otherwise, everybody who has heard hon. Awori would think that what he is saying is the gospel truth. 

So, in terms of procedure, isn’t it better that the air be cleared by the Minister who attempted to rise and respond to that very serious statement of my honourable friend?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! Hon. Awori, please conclude.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To wind up, as I said I am not going to dwell on the matter of KAP. My colleagues have ably debated or said all about Maj. Kakooza Mutale. 

However, we also still have two other organisations, which are not provided for in the laws of Uganda. There is one anti-corruption group, SRPS, in URA. I have been looking at all the regulations to the Act governing URA but there is no provision for this organisation. These people are armed! In my own constituency, they have so far killed two people and nobody knows where to go to pursue the matter. When you go to URA, they say, “they are not part of us”. Where do we go? The Ministry of Finance says they do not maintain any armed group. I am talking about Kale Kaihura, who one minute is in charge of the border anti-smuggling units, one minute he is fighting Kony in Gulu, another minute he is consorting with other guerrillas in West Nile, or former guerrillas, we do not know. What kind of organisations do we have for our security in this country? Can’t we name these organisations? So that we know where they derive their authority and when they make a mistake, we know where to go. 

This person who was killed in my constituency, I have the responsibility of paying school fees and looking after his kids, among other things. Why should we continue to bear responsibilities for the mistakes of the Government? Why can’t the Government get organised –(Interjection)- They gave me votes, but should we be the ones again to look after their welfare? The UPDF has the responsibility of maintaining our borders. The Uganda Police Force has got the responsibility of maintaining law and order. Why do we come up with all these other new paramilitary organisations whose authority cannot be confirmed?

Last but not least, Madam Speaker -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, hon. Aggrey Awori, you are introducing too many new matters. 

MR AWORI: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, but please allow my two colleagues on the Front Bench to supplement what I am saying. Otherwise, I take my sit. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES (Mrs Amongin Aporu): Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to the issue of Karamoja as raised by hon. Aggrey Awori. The Office of the Prime Minister, Department of Disaster Management together with World Food Programme have just completed a food needs assessment in the region. 

On the average, the food situation is not very good in Karamoja. The food gap indicates that most families actually go hungry. The situation is deteriorating in Karamoja, and the Department has drawn a joint plan to respond. 

Presently, the Department of Disaster Management and World Food Programme are distributing food to the children in formal and non-formal schools. In hospitals, the patients, outpatients and other health centres are also being supplied with food.

In Moroto Municipal Council, however, the food is given to the socially targeted populations that have completely nothing in their households. We reach out to these populations through the churches and other organisations, which are implementing agencies in Moroto.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, we are aware of the situation in Karamoja and we are handling it accordingly.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I thought hon. Awori tied the issue of Karamoja to the issue of export of our maize to Zimbabwe, and I thought that the Minister was going to give clarification on that matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think the Minister for Disaster Preparedness can discuss trade between Uganda and Zimbabwe? I do not think that is fair!

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I go to the substantive issues concerning my ministry, I want to respond to some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. 

One; I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that there are still American soldiers in Vietnam, so our Ugandan children and women being in the Congo is not a new phenomenon. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I think the daughter of the President, whose name I do not know -(Interjections)- yes, she has not been named, but as a citizen she is entitled, like any other Ugandan, to trade. In her own right as a Ugandan, she is entitled. 

I do not think that because a consortium of Ugandan companies that trade in grain under Uganda Grain Millers Association have traded today, that is why the Karimojong are hungry. Our brothers and sisters, the Karimojong, have always had famine, and Government has always responded within their means. So, do not link the famine in Karamoja today with this programme of export by Ugandans under a consortium. 

Two things here, the President’s daughter, like my daughter, like Aggrey Awori’s daughter, is entitled as a Ugandan to trade or have a job. So, that one does not raise a finger; she is one -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I arise to correct the wrong impression the honourable colleague has made on - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I have not given you the floor.

MS JANAT MUKWAYA: Hon. Aggrey Awori, you said that a figure of money was given to the daughter of the President to buy maize to export. I am submitting that this is a consortium of Ugandan companies including the President’s daughter. It is unfortunate that hon. Aggrey Awori’s daughter is not part of this neither is my daughter, but these are Ugandans, following an organised programme of export promotion by Government. So, they are entitled. 

And I am saying that the fact that these people are exporting grain does not mean that the Karimojong are hungry. The Minister has already stated; we have done a baseline survey to know what the situation is, and we are responding. I wanted that to be put on record. But I pledge that the Minister of Trade will come and make a statement about Uganda Grain Millers Association and the trade policy, here. 

I now come to my substantive contribution to the debate. I want to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for a job well done under the constraints. I also want to thank the Committee of Parliament –(Interruption)

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, since the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is the minister concerned here, I thought she would summarise after all others have debated, because we are going to raise more questions which she will have to answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have given her permission to respond now and we will continue the debate. Other members of the Government are here.

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague. I was saying that I want to thank the committee. Within the limited time that we gave them, they read the reports and brought a report to the House.

I want to also salute Government for having guaranteed the independence of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. It would have been mentioned in their reports that at any one point, we interfered as Government. So, I salute Government for that.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to respond to hon. Nabwiso, who stated that in his view - and he is entitled to his opinion - he envisages the commission to be proactive. I wanted to draw his attention to Article 52(1) (a) of the Constitution, which says that the Uganda Human Rights Commission can, “…investigate, at its own initiative or on a complaint made by any person or group of persons against the violation of any human right.” 

When you read the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, they have done investigations on their own initiative and they have also attended to complaints. So, I think that they have lived within their mandate constitutionally.  

Madam Speaker, I want to say that I understand the concerns and fears of colleagues. They are really genuine fears. Having lived under peace and order for the last 16 years, I know your concern and fear is that one day we may go back to the past. So, your concerns are really genuine. Your concerns are really valid, and I am glad that the chairperson and other members of the commission are here and they have heard. We shall try to improve, where we have not done the best.  

Under the report of the Committee, under the sub-theme, “Delayed Administration of Justice” and the recommendations that were made therein, I have to report that for the increase of Judges, the process has already begun. We hope that in the next financial budget, we may get some more Judges, because Government appreciates the pressure on the Judiciary. We shall look into the possibility of this recommendation of appointing temporary Judges to handle the backlog.  

Madam Speaker, the other recommendation was that we should look into the jurisdiction of the magistrates’ courts. I have to report that it is good that the chairperson and some members of the committee have attended the fourth review of the Ministry of Justice and other law enforcement agencies. We have already identified this area as one that we need to look into.  

Concerning the laws that are inconsistent with the Constitution, I want to report that the Ministry of Justice and the Judiciary are aware of this problem. But we were toying with the idea whether if the President issued a proclamation to repeal all these laws, there would be a vacuum. The speed at which both Government and the First Parliamentary Counsel are moving would really leave this vacuum for a long time. So, in the wisdom of Government, we took a decision that let us limp on and try to make good what we have. We are working on it. 

As far as I know, I have now about 10 laws that I have to table before this Parliament. The Ministry of Trade has about 12 laws. The Ministry of Gender has about 15 laws, and others also have, all these for the next session. We are moving, but you are aware that our First Parliamentary Counsel, which is the machinery that churns out our laws for the House, is really incapacitated because of manpower.  But we are trying to look into that issue as well.

On the issue of the Electoral Commission, Madam Speaker and colleagues, with the new commission in place, this item is high on their agenda after handling the by-elections. They will recommend to me how to move with the Law Reform Commission to improve on their laws. That is something that is on their agenda.  

Yesterday my colleague, the Woman Member of Parliament from Moroto, raised the concern about courts in Moroto under the disarmament exercise. There is a huge report about the Judiciary, the DPP, CID and Police deployment in the region under the disarmament. I want to promise that I am going to write a report and circulate it. I want to assure you that the Chief Magistrate has been making reports on the issue of deployment, but I will make a report and circulate it to the House.  

An issue that was raised by a colleague who has already left, that a person was arrested, discharged and then re-arrested. If the chairperson of the committee can remind me, I remember in the Magistrates Court Act, I think under 118, the court can dismiss a case for want of prosecution. But that does not mean that you are free for life.  When the prosecution later finds evidence, they can re-introduce the case to court. I think that is the situation, which my colleague did not know.  

Madam Speaker and colleagues, those were the only issues that were raised concerning the Ministry of Justice. But I want to also say to colleagues that the report is as brief as it is because Government interacted effectively with the committee. Those ministers who appeared before the committee were able to interact with them to the satisfaction of the committee, and I want to salute them. 

I also appeal to other ministers, as they have already indicated, to make an effort to answer the queries. I thank the Human Rights Commission once again, and I wish them success in the next seven years. Thank you very much.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I raised three important questions, which the Minister has not responded to.  At least they are important to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him speak first.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to discuss this report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I thank the committee for the report. 

On page five of the report, under remand homes, it is mentioned that Kampiringisa was attacked by robbers and there was no action taken. It is good this institution has been mentioned in this august House. I do not think this institution still serves its original purpose, simply because it has been dilapidated. It no longer serves the purpose for which it was established.  The whole institution is already vandalised, no infrastructure in place, yet what makes it worse is that the –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to inform the honourable member that a lot of work is currently going on to renovate Kampiringisa. If you went there today, you would probably not recognise the place. Very useful work has been going on and the place is now very transformed. I thank you. 

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: May I get some information from the minister: when will renovation on Naguru Remand Home be done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you could ask a specific question on that. Let us give these people who have not spoken a chance. 

MR MUTULUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for that information but as a person representing that area, I have reservations about this. All I know is that last week a certain company donated some bedding and other materials to the few children who are there. I am glad that there is something being done, but it has been a nagging concern. 

The problem is that government is spending a lot of money on the civil servants who are working there. So many people there are earning for no work. Government is paying money to all those people for nothing, because if you compare the number of the children who are there to the staff, you really see there is redundancy. (Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam speaker, I am sorry I am saying this as a former Minister of Gender Labour and Social Development. If I remember correctly, the statute that establishes Kampiringisa as a reformatory school says that the place only receives children who have been convicted by court. So you cannot tell whether one day the court will convict 100 or less children. Actually you should be happy that now society has improved in looking after their children and they are not there in Kampiringisa. 

Part of Kampiringisa, which is a reformatory school, has been converted into a rehabilitation centre specifically to accommodate the street children. That is the renovation that has been done, and people have been donating according to the needs of that new street children’s facility. 

MR MUTULUZA: I thank the minister for that information. However, if there are no more children, they should also reduce the staff so that the government does not go on spending money on these redundant workers.

Another issue I want to raise is the trans-night prayers held in and around Kampala. In spite of the fact that Article 29 of the Constitution provides that there is freedom of worship, these denominations are depriving us of human rights, especially the right to rest at night. There are also trans-night discos in areas that are not gazetted. I stay around Kabalagala, Madam Speaker, but we rarely sleep. 

Some time back the mayor announced that he is going to deal with those people who make a lot of noise, but that has fallen on deaf ears. Madam Speaker, I think the ministry concerned should help us also to enjoy our night’s sleep. That is our human right.  

Another issue I want to raise is pensioners and retirement packages. There are so many people in my constituency complaining that after retiring they have not got their retirement packages or pension. Madam Speaker, according to the budget of 2002/2003 only the people who have clocked 70 years are supposed to get their pension. I do not know whether that is –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to correct the erroneous impression that we are only paying pension to people who are 70 years and above. This is not correct. What we are doing with those people, the ones above 70, is that we are paying them their arrears, which have accumulated over the years. 

I also want to inform the House that pension is a right and it is paid on a monthly basis. We accumulated arrears because of the revision of the formula that we were using to calculate pension, which was backdated to 1988 and implemented in 2000. We created arrears since 1988 to 2000 and those are the arrears that we are handling systematically. We are paying out to the most senior citizens first, but pension is paid every month. 

There are some people who have not accessed pension payrolls for reasons that we are trying to deal with on a daily basis. However, the procedure is that you are paid pension on a monthly basis. 

I would like to encourage honourable members that if you have specific complaints, encourage the beneficiaries to write them down and you give them to us so that we can handle them in a specific way. You cannot generalise pension. Pensioners have got peculiar complaints so we normally tackle them individually. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, please.

MR MUTULUZA: Thank you, honourable minister for that information. However, I have evidence that some of these people are just being referred ahead for years. According to her, the arrears were accumulated and it is very hard for them to be paid if one has not clocked 70 years. That means there is corruption in that department. I therefore request the minister to check the corruption tendencies in the pensions department. 

Also, since pension packages have got something to do with the central and local government, let me raise this issue. Currently there are LDUs who were retrenched. These people served the nation, they worked hard but some of them were just retrenched without being given anything. So I have that problem, Madam Speaker, in my constituency. 

Another problem –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up.

MR MUTULUZA: Another problem is human rights violations. In my constituency, we have insecurity caused by graduated tax collectors. The method used to assess graduated tax is an issue that should be addressed by the ministry concerned. I understand there is supposed to be a committee at parish level to assess tax. But that does not exist. A Muluka chief does the assessment, which is unfortunate. He can decide to victimise some people. 

When they assess tax and somebody is unable to pay, he is harassed and his human rights are violated.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA: Thank you. Assessing tax at local government level is the role of the local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluza, I thought you were relating the treatment of tax defaulters to the violation of human rights. I thought you were going to say they are undressed or their arms are tied, but assessment is not our issue here.
 
MR MUTULUZA: But that also happens, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this debate is not -(Interjection)- concentrate on human rights.
 
MR MUTULUZA: Lastly, some people have commented on Operation Wembley. Well, they say it is not in this report but it is not good to discuss things that passed yet we have burning issues now. I think Operation Wembley is victimising people. 

I have a person from the constituency who was arrested about four months ago. The man was kept at Nakasero Crescent Hill Road for about a month. From there he was transferred to Makindye Barracks. When I went and asked the one in charge of the court martial there, he advised me to go to the overall Commander of Operation Wembley, and that the case was civil. I am wondering, they say civilians are not supposed to be detained in barracks, yet they are there. What do we do? When such things happen, people come to us for assistance because they do not know their rights. Madam Speaker, I request the ministry concerned to come to our rescue on these issues.

ENG HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking government for operationalising the Uganda Human Rights Commission effectively. They have done it in a way that allows the commission to submit to this House reports reflecting social turbulence arising from some social mismanagement in our country. 

The issue I would like to address here is on page 13, paragraph 18 - social security. To me social security must be there for every citizen, and it is a human right. The absence of social security breeds all the social turbulence that we are reporting here. The violation of human rights seen here all reflects problems related to the social security of the people of Uganda.

I would like government to review the concept of social security in this country. The unemployed also have a right to live. They must be given something to keep them going. In other countries, the employed pay their social security from their salaries and the minimum wage is determined so that employees are not cheated. They are paid the rightful wages and from those they pay for their social security. 

When they are unemployed they get something to keep them going. They do not turn into robbers and the situation does not necessitate the creation of Operation Wembley, recruiting more judges or even recruiting more lawyers. We would minimise crime in this country if we did the same. 

The reason we are going to spend more to enlarge institutions of confinement and law enforcement is because we are not addressing the fundamental issues, and corruption is one of them. Corruption is actually a result of this social insecurity. People who are corrupt are trying to create their own social security. They build houses in Muyenga so that when they retire they have something that will look after them, an issue that the state is not looking into. 

I wish that the government would revise and review the concept of social security in this country. The overall concept should be reviewed so that everybody - those who are working and those who are not – is equally looked after. A system should be put in place that is maintained and managed properly by the state. Then our country will have social equity. When there is social equity, you minimise the crimes.  

I now address the issue relating to my constituency of Lamwo County, and the Acholi sub-region generally. The commission laboured the point very well here. They elaborated the difficulties that have been going on in that region. They have reflected in their report that over 610,000 people are in internally displaced peoples’ camps. That is about 60 percent of our population. And after the 48 hours’ evacuation announcement, everybody is now displaced.

In Kitgum town alone, eight people died of hunger last week. We do not know how many are dying in the villages as of now, because of the problems caused by the insurgency there. The roads are very unsafe, and only the World Food Programme vehicles are escorted. I ask government to look into the possibility of escorting other civilian vehicles travelling there, so that they can facilitate trade in the area.

MRS APORU: I want to thank hon. Onek for giving way. It is not only the World Food Programme vehicles that are being escorted. Even the trailers from the office of the Prime Minister are escorted. Right now six trailers have just returned from Pader. The UPDF escorted six trailers, each carrying 26 tonnes of food to the internally displaced people of Pader. 

So, one convoy escorts World Food Programme vehicles and the other one takes the vehicles from the Office of the Prime Minister. We shall soon be going to Kitgum District, to Lamwo County in particular. We shall move to Kitgum next week. (Interruption)

MRS LOCHIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am asking a question on the disaster preparedness we have in place. The honourable minister said that the planning is still going on. However, I thought there was an early warning system in the ministry whereby it is able to know that community “X” is going to have this disaster or the other. 

The disaster of hunger in Karamoja is not like some other disasters, which just happen suddenly. It is not like the rain falling and washing away homes or something like that. This is something, which happens gradually. I imagine the ministry would be able to prepare itself so that death is prevented, instead of waiting until the people die then we are informed that the planning is still going on. For how long will the planning go on? The people are dying! I want to get that clarification from the minister (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to arrange and make another statement on this question of disaster. For now let us try and finish issues of human rights.

ENG. ONEK: Madam Speaker, I would like to commend the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, particularly the Minister, hon. Aporu Amongin. She has been dedicated, and we really appreciate your activity. However, when we bring these problems here, we are trying to highlight the difficulties so that you increase your energy and get the job done even better. We know you are doing a lot though, and we appreciate that.

The convoy I was requesting for is for the civilian vehicles, for traders. We actually brought this to the attention of the President at the Conference Centre when hon. Jane Akwero Adwong raised the matter. The President said he was going to look into it. So this is information to the Minister of State for Defence. Look into that aspect of escorting vehicles not only to Kitgum, but also to Pader, Moyo and West Nile. We also need it to parts of Lira, going to Otuke and so on. So, all these problems should be looked at within that context.  

On the Karamoja problem, I would like to appreciate the apology made by the Chairman of Karamoja Parliamentary Group, to the Teso Parliamentary Group. I wish that the same apology could also be extended to us in the Acholi area. We also still deserve that apology, and that is in itself a challenge put before you, Karamoja leaders. You do not only apologise, but you go down to the villages to try to change people’s attitudes and minds towards invading neighbours. 

Last week the Karimajong killed one person in Oromo sub-county, Chwa County in Kitgum. I think the administrators there are trying to handle it. We do not deny you grazing and water in our areas, as long as you conduct yourselves peacefully.

Finally, I would like to make a statement in relation to some utterances made against the Late Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa in this House. I knew Gen. Tito very well; he was a very loving father, and he was a very kind person. When he took over government in this country, the country was at war, even Kampala had different security groups running it. He never governed this country; he initiated peace, which he failed to realise. Therefore, it would be very unkind for anybody to blame somebody, whom we know as a very peaceful person.  

If you talk of Idi Amin, yes, I agree with you. He governed us very brutally. The statement that you would be fed to crocodiles, that is nothing to do with Gen. Tito Okello. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I request that we give respect to this Mzee. Thank you very much.

MR JOHN ALINTUMA (Bukoto East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the work done by the committee. However, I have other issues, which I think have not been mentioned either knowingly or unknowingly in this report, and they rotate around three issues. 

The first one is to do with the corporal punishment of children in our primary and even secondary schools. I do not know whether the committee has gone as far as discovering that despite the law passed by our predecessors in this Parliament, there are still schools that condone the punishment. Children are beaten or told to kneel down and hold heavy stones in both arms, to put it lightly. 

An environment that does not favour the children will not allow our school children to achieve higher horizons. Unless their human rights issues are put into consideration, we are in trouble. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request the Minister of Justice in this country to pass out an authoritative letter reminding head teachers in primary schools to put into consideration the human rights of children. Beating children, in other words corporal punishment, should be forbidden. It should not continue whether in private or public schools.  

Secondly, the treatment of children, especially girls, who work for people here in Kampala as housegirls, is important. These children are in most cases treated like animals and slaves. Often many of them leave, after a very long time of working for someone who would probably be a wealthy person, without being paid. Even when they are paid, they are always harassed so much that they even begin to hate life. 

So, I have not sat down to see the way out, but a mechanism could be formulated to stop such harassment of the house girls. But given the mighty capability of the NRM Government, it would be possible to make our children, who work for wealthy people, be treated like human beings. 

The third issue is to do with Indians who are working here as business people. I remember when I was young, my father told me that all people in Uganda are good, but the Indians are very bad. I did not know it then, but I realised this afterwards. Cases come to me of Ugandans who work for Indian business people who go even to the extent of spitting in their faces, because they have not done the proper job they expect them to. This is terrible, and many of them do that knowing that they would never do it to someone of their own colour. So, I would call such actions of some Indian businessmen racist, and at the same time disrespectful of the country from where they operate.

So, I would request that there is a circular which goes around to our Indian fellows here that we prefer our people better than bringing us business after all, when they were away we were continuing to survive. In fact, their input in this country if it jeopardises the human rights of Ugandans, it should be halted and that they should be put to book if they continue to harass our people.

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that our people willingly or unwillingly travel Overseas to countries like the United States, the United Kingdom, to the European Union in general, but the way they are treated when they want to get visas is totally inhuman. You have all heard probably that there are even people who have collapsed waiting to get visas. I would not mind so much because this is to do with their procedures and they are looking for ways of hindering people from going to their countries unnecessarily. But I would mind very much to see them robbing our people of money which they know that the income per capita of our nation is so low; that you cannot impose visa fees like what we are seeing the United States doing. 

We know very well that an educated teacher who has worked so much for her or his education for four or five years earns on average Shs90,000 after taxes.  So, if you ask the same teacher to pay 100 dollars to obtain a visa in a country, which you categorise as the poorest country, I think that is abuse of human rights. They might claim that this is their own foreign policy, but when they want to bring their embassies here, we also have the right to put down our terms to operate within our country. It would be a matter of human rights respect if the government went to those embassies or the head of missions and told them about the plight of our people. 

These people suffer and some times when I go there as a Member of Parliament, I feel so embarrassed that I just submit my passport and they ask me to come back the next day. Well as the Ugandans who actually gave me their votes have to come every other day and every time they come, their money is robbed. If you are not going to give me the visa, why do you then take my money away and you encourage me to come back. So please, I cannot tell that the Government would be able to change their policies, but let them know that we are not pleased with the way they treat our people. 

Madam Speaker, I have been observing the operation and the behaviour of our police for the last ten years and I have come to two conclusions. Whether or not we have Christmas or Easter seasons, if someone is killed during Christmas by a criminal, the death is the same as someone killed during other ordinary days. So, when I see the Police in these seasons acting in a manner that the crime committed during Christmas is worse than the crime committed in other days, I simply cannot comprehend.

Now, I come to the conclusion that during Christmas the so-called patrolmen on the roads collect money to go and feed their families over Christmas and Easter. And they look for all sorts of ways of extorting money from the person stopped on the road. In fact, we come to conclusion that maybe the Uganda Revenue Authority sends them out there to harass people so that they can collect money over Christmas and Easter season. I think the manner in which they do this is completely an abuse of human rights because you cannot stop me on the road and get me off my car and start harassing me because you think I do not have the actual papers of the car.

MRS MUKWAYA: Honourable colleague, are those policemen you are talking about specifically in your constituency or it is the general trend?  

MR ALINTUMA: Well, when I come here as a Member of Parliament, I act nationally and therefore, I am not talking about the constituency. I am talking about the highway from Masaka to Kampala and the highway from here to Busia, and the highway from here to Hoima and within Kampala as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Alintuma, I think you should concentrate on the matters, which the Human Rights Commission can handle. The things you are talking about are issues of corruption and they should be in the criminal court. I do not think the Commissioners can now go and say, “You policeman, you charged so much on Christmas Day, then the other day do not charge please”. You are creating a problem for the Human Rights Commission. 

MR ALINTUMA: You are right, Madam Speaker. But when I was beginning, I said that I appreciate the work done by the Committee, but I see that there are certain issues, which were left out.  And these are the issues I am raising now, and I am concluding.  Despite that, I have to say that the Uganda Human Rights Commission has really been doing a great job. We only request the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to allocate them more funding, so that they have the capacity to investigate matters brought to their offices.  Thank you very much.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few observations to make. The first one is to thank the Human Rights Commission and to say they are doing a very important job to this country in the name of self-evaluation, in the name of self-house keeping. It is very undignified to wait for Amnesty International, to wait for Human Rights Watch, to wait for other organisations to come and tell us what we are. The Human Rights Commission has saved the face of Uganda in that regard, and I would like therefore, in the same spirit to say that Government should not look at this as a tug of war.

Really it gives us opportunity to examine ourselves, and that is the spirit with which we should receive these reports. Apart from approving expenditure of government, the next important duty for Parliament is actually oversight; and reports of this nature do not come here by accident; they come actually deliberately. They come here to enable Parliament to assess the performance of Government, and we should welcome these reports in that mode. 

I would like also to say that sometimes infringement of human rights arises out of action of Government but government, which is in panic.  When Government is pushed to a situation where it is panicky, it tries to make shortcuts and the shortcuts result from infringement of human rights.  Government laws are there so that we can be able to predict the next action. The laws should help us to be able to predict Government action. That is why it should be important for Government, which is in charge of protecting the population and their property, to observe the law. If the Government fails to observe the law, all of us shall be at a loss, because we shall have lost prediction. 

I also want to say that when the Human Rights Commission is given the responsibility to monitor Government compliance with the international treaty, it should not stop at telling us what has not been done. It should also tell us how much has been done so that we are able to arrive at the deficit, because in accessing all of these we are trying to determine whether at the end of the day, we have a good government or a bad one. Some of these treaties give us an indication of what the ideals should be. The Human Rights Commission should also help us to give us the deficit as far as government action is concerned.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you hon. Mwondha for giving way. You are talking about an important point, which is constitutionally streamlined as per Article 52(1)(h). The clarification I am seeking through you is whether any monitoring at all of conventions of human rights already ratified under have been carried out. You are talking as if any monitoring has taken place but I would like to challenge you that I do not believe any monitoring has taken place.  

MR MWONDHA: According to the report, which is before us, there is a desk in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which makes appraisal and gives reports on a regular basis. Unfortunately, those reports do not find their way into the House.  Maybe we should ask the Committee that in future some of these reports should find their way into the House to complete the picture. It is not a question of laws conflicting only with the Constitution but they are actually laws we have made in this House, which are conflicting with each other. Look at the amnesty law and the terrorist law; they are in conflict. You are giving amnesty to somebody you have already declared to be a terrorist. How is he supposed to behave? Suppose he is walking to a reporting centre in the process of seeking amnesty and he is arrested as a terrorist. Both laws are now operational. So, what do we do? How are we supposed to behave when laws are actually head on each other? It makes either one of them a gimmick or it puts us in duplicity, which makes action impossible. 

I would like also to say that the importance of these reports has not been quite understood. I cannot see why we have taken so long to discuss 98,99,2000,2001. Maybe the Business Committee should enhance the grade of these reports because they are very vital for us to determine on which path we are moving.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to join the others to thank the Committee for the wonderful report. I want to observe that the Human Rights Commission has done a wonderful job. It has built an institution because this is the first Human Rights Commission we have had. It is therefore not surprising that one of the original members of the commission has been appointed a judge and all the others were recently approved by Parliament for a 2nd term of office.  

We appreciate the fact that the commission has been working with very limited resources but despite that, they have been able to open up country offices. We have no doubt that with a little better facilitation, they will be able to move expeditiously. It is important that the commission is sufficiently facilitated because already they have a backlog of cases, which they have not been able to handle. Their continued facilitation will enable them not to turn like the judiciary, which has not been able to handle cases as and when they come.  

Madam Speaker, I however, want to note that civic education is important in as far as implementation of human rights is concerned. You are not able to claim a right until you know that you are entitled to it. A scholar defined ignorance as not knowing and not knowing that you do not know. But if you know that you do not know, then you are in a position to seek knowledge, and that way you are not ignorant. It is also dangerous to know just a little, because if you do not know the whole truth, it makes you take decisions that may hurt you in the end. 

I want to give the example of the popularised children’s rights. The people in the general public do not know in details what these children’s rights are.  So, any thing is assumed to be children’s rights.

Recently, there was a case in my constituency where a teacher walked into a P.7 classroom and the candidates were tearing down scholastic materials. When he shouted at them, they ran and in the process, one of them hurt himself. But the other children because, they know they have rights, just went to the police station and declared that their rights had been violated.  

The local administration police officer went ahead to walk into the school compound and arrested the teacher, took him into custody without even investigating the matter, because children’s rights had been violated. The case was widely publicised on our local FM radio stations and this teacher was reasonably humiliated. 

The point I am trying to make is, we need to educate our people about their rights correctly so that they can be able to claim – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Kamugisha): Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable Member that we have a national programme to disseminate and explain the children’s statute and it is this statute. It is this statute, which gives out details of the rights of the children. It may be possible that we have not reached every corner of the country, but this is an on going programme. I do hope that through the measures we have taken to use seminars, radios and even the newspapers, these rights will be understood by all members of the public. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KIZIGE: Thank you, honourable Minister. I just hope that you move expeditiously because if you do not do it in good time, we might lose a whole generation. We know culture evolves and at a very fast rate.  By the time this information gets to be disseminated, we might have lost a whole generation. It is not only children’s rights, even other human rights, aspects like freedom of expression. You have heard people talk about it and at times others have divergent views. So, what is important is education.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, for taking our report very seriously and for appreciating the work of the commission, and for appreciating that the commission is under-funded. I am sure in the next financial year, this House will support the budget of the commission further than we have been doing.

Madam Speaker, the report of the Committee is based on the report of the Human Rights Commission. We had no mandate as a Committee to expand our terms of reference because we strictly based ourselves on the facts and issues as presented to us in the reports of the commission. So, if by omission we have not been able to tackle some aspects of human rights, this is because those aspects are not touched in the reports. 

The reports cannot be exhaustive because the issues of human rights are so many. There are so many international conventions on human rights. But we believe that the aspects of human rights, which have not been tackled in this reporting period, might be reported on next year.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, our report could not cover all the aspects of human rights.

On the monitoring function of the Human Rights Commission, it is not true as hon. Lukyamuzi was saying that the commission does not monitor the implementation of international conventions. As a matter of fact, the Human Rights Commission has monitored Uganda’s compliance with international conventions. We have evidence on record in their reports; we also got this evidence when met the Minister of Foreign Affairs.  

To answer hon. Mwandha’s question, actually the Human Rights Commission did report that to date, 23 reports have been submitted to the various committees of the United Nations responsible for various international human rights conventions. So, some work has been done. But the commission further pointed out that there is a backlog of 18 initial and periodic reports, which are yet to be reported on. So, some good job has been done but there is still a backlog, which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs undertook to tackle before they report back to us next year. The report on this compliance with international human rights conventions is on page 16 of the report. The figures are very clear.

Madam Speaker, Members raised concern that certain rights were not mentioned. But as I have said, we were limited to the reports of the Human Rights Commission. I do agree that domestic violence, for example, is a human rights violation and I do think that in their next report, the Human Rights Commission will address it.  

I share the concerns of Members on the manner in which Operation Wembley is being handled. I think it was a general consensus that the objective of setting up Operation Wembley was good but that the manner in which it has been conducted has impacted on the violation of human rights. I was happy when the NPC yesterday undertook, I think on behalf of Government, to look into the complaints of honourable Members about Operation Wembley.  

On the question of the labour laws, Madam Speaker, it is true the rights of workers are being abused both in the public and private sector. It is true that there are no contracts of employment, which bind employers. I would also invite the Human Rights Commission to take interest in the rights of workers. But there is a law, the Employment Decree, which enjoins employers to put contracts of employment in writing. There is a bulk of the common law on labour rights where an employee can challenge an employer for wrongful dismissal, for summary dismissal, for non-payment of benefits. So, the remedies are there, but maybe it is the civic education, which is lacking, to enlighten workers on how they can take up the enforcement of their rights.  

I do support the idea of having more police and the courts in Karamoja.  The people in Karamoja cannot easily access the justice system like other people of Uganda. This is true, I have a personal experience in Karamoja myself as a private lawyer, and I think the situation there is pathetic. 

Government must do something about the access to justice by the people of Karamoja. The nearest high court, which can try criminal cases for the people of Karamoja, I think, is in Mbale and Mbale is very far from the Karamoja region. So, suspects remain on remand for a long time; people cannot access justice instantly as enjoined by the Constitution.

I do take up the recommendation of the Members that the Human Rights Commission should strike a balance between the first and second generation of human rights. I think the commission has tried its best. The first generation of human rights is the civil and political rights, which are enshrined in the convention on civil and political rights. The second generation of human rights is the social and economic rights, which are in the convention on social and economic rights.  

I think the commission has elaborated and reported on workers’ rights. Those are economic and social rights, health, education, the rights of displaced people, the rights of social security, the rights of children, and the right to property. I think the commission has tried to strike a balance between political rights and social and economic rights.  But I would encourage them to continue to balance the investigation of these rights.  

I am happy that the Minister has accepted our recommendation on temporary judges. Some people did not understand this concept properly yesterday.  The idea of temporary judges is not new to Uganda.  It is like when we have a crisis in Mulago for example, when doctors go on strike, Government has always intervened by bringing doctors from the Army to assist the patients. We have a backlog of cases in these courts; we can recruit lawyers on a temporary basis, clear the backlog and they can resume their other duties. Those who want to remain on the bench can do so.  

I am also glad that a resolution to increase the number of Judges will be brought, because the lack of Judges is affecting the human rights of our people.

An issue was raised that there is need to review the 48-hour rule, the 360 days of remand in case of capital offences and 120 days in case of minor offences. In my opinion, I do not think the review of these rules will help because even when we have the 360 days rule, people still remain on remand for five years. These cases were highlighted here. So, it is not increasing the days from 360 to 400 or 500 that will solve the problem. I think we need the political will to implement what the Constitution says. 

I would not recommend that we should extend the 48-hour rule to 96 hours, because originally it used to be 24 hours. The CA in its wisdom doubled it to 48 hours, but the question of detaining people illegally beyond 48 hours has remained. So, increasing the hours may not solve the problem. 

I think Government needs to impress it upon the bodies responsible for implementing this rule to honour it. Uganda is not the only jurisdiction, which is following this rule. There are many common law jurisdictions where this rule applies, like in Zambia and other countries. People are really charged in court within these hours in many countries, and I think we can do it.  

My colleagues, hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Ben Wacha, defined the offences of rape and defilement. I do not have to belabour repeating them, but we should not confuse the two offences. Rape is having sexual intercourse with a woman against her will, or without her consent.  With defilement, consent is irrelevant; for as long as you have sexual intercourse with a lady below 18 years, that is defilement. 

As MPs, we should discourage the LCs and the clan courts from handling these cases, because they are capital offences. The maximum penalty for these offences is death. So they are only reserved for trial by the High Court. Instead of lamenting that these cases are being tried by the LCs, by the people in the village, it is our duty as Members of Parliament in our respective constituencies to raise objections when this happens. We should raise complaints with the courts or with the Police wherever these incidences happen.

On the rights of landlords, I think the Land Act is very clear; landlords have rights, bona fide occupants have rights, lawful occupants have rights. Trespassers on land do not have rights! If someone trespasses on your land, the law is also very clear; you can take legal action against that person in the courts of law. So, the law is very clear. It is not because of lack of the law that people are trespassing on other people’s land. 

On sanctions for human rights violations, I think these have been provided for in the Constitution.  The Human Rights Commission is empowered, under the Constitution, to give remedies to people whose rights have been violated. These remedies include compensation. The Human Rights Commission, under the Human Rights Tribunal, has powers to award compensation to a victim of human rights violation. 

The Human Rights Commission also has powers to order for the release of any detainee who, in its wisdom, has had his or her rights violated. They also have powers to make orders, and I think they have invoked these powers in some cases. They have been mentioned in the report, if we had time to read them. But I do agree that we need to give them more powers in the human rights law, so that they can operationalise the powers, which they have in the Constitution. But the powers to impose sanctions are already provided for in the Constitution.

On the laws inconsistent with the Constitution, I am happy the Minister has already commented on these and that she is going to take action.

To answer hon. Okulo Epak’s question, that laws inconsistent with the Constitution do not need amendment, this is not correct. Not all laws whose parts are inconsistent with the Constitution are null and void under the Constitution. If you take for example the Marriage Act, it has some sections that may be unconstitutional but the entire law is not unconstitutional. That is why we always call for the amendment of such laws, to expand those provisions that are unconstitutional and leave those that are constitutional. 

I am happy that the Minister has undertaken to bring these laws, but we need a timeframe, as colleagues are saying. I hope the Minister will be able to come up with a timeframe. (Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: My point was not on whether you should not amend the law. I asked, for the time being, what do you do with those provisions that are inconsistent with the Constitution? Do you allow them to be applied? Do you allow the Police to go and use force to disperse a lawful assembly or peaceful assembly, which is a right provided in the Constitution? Because the Penal Code, as far as that Section is concerned, is already inconsistent with the Constitution. This is what I am asking. 

Must we wait until the entire law is amended? Because I do not think the entire law can be inconsistent with the Constitution. Only some provisions are inconsistent. Those are the points I wanted education on. Why those provisions, which are inconsistent with the provision of the Constitution, are continually applied.  

MR MWESIGE: Well, I do not have an example of a law which is inconsistent with the Constitution, which has been applied by the courts. I know the Public Order and Security Act was actually declared null and void by the courts themselves.  

I have a lot of trust in our courts that should someone be charged under a law that they know is unconstitutional, they would certainly apply that law. They have always pointed this out in their judgements. 

I have not seen a case of witchcraft which they have applied using the witchcraft law. I need to be educated more. But I remember people were charged under the Public Order and Security Act and the Constitutional Court, in its wisdom, held that the entire Public Order and Security Act of 1967 was unconstitutional and it could therefore not be evoked in the courts of law.  

So, I think the most effective way is for the Minister of Constitutional Affairs to identify these laws, bring them for amendment, so that they can be off our books. I think that is the best way. 

But if you are talking of application, each law has got to be challenged in the courts on its own merits. Unless a law has been challenged and nullified by the courts, it will remain on the statute books. But I do not have a precedent of a law that has been applied by our courts, which is inconsistent with the Constitution. 

In any case, it is the role of the courts, anyway, to determine first, whether the law they are applying on a particular set of facts is inconsistent with the Constitution. If it goes to the High Court, they will refer that matter to the Constitutional Court first before proceeding with the case. That is the position that I know.  

I think the Minister of Disaster Preparedness has answered the query about the situation in Karamoja and Kitgum. 

Trans-night discos were mentioned by one of our colleagues. I do not think that is a subject of the Human Rights Commission. Trans-night discos can be governed by the by-laws of local authorities like Kampala City Council. However, there is also a law, which we call “public nuisance”. If someone continues with trans-night discos, you can take him to court on a charge of public nuisance. So, there is a remedy; you can do it collectively or individually. But it is not mentioned in the reports of the commission.  

On the LDUs’ rights, it is unfortunate that they cannot be compensated. I cannot speak for them; this should have been for the Minister for Internal Affairs. But in my opinion, there has never been a law to cover local defence force units. I do not see the legal basis, first of all, for paying them and secondly, for compensating them. But the Minister of State in charge of Pensions can advise us on this. We had been demanding for this law throughout the 6th Parliament but the law never came. 

That the issues of corporal punishment were left out, it is because they are not in the report. But just to give you information, the Supreme Court has already declared corporal punishment unconstitutional. So, whether it is in schools, in prisons or imposed by the courts, corporal punishment is unconstitutional (Interruption).  

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: I beg your indulgence. The chairperson is pleading some level of inadequacy, which I do not quite agree with. I think one of the purposes of these reports is for us to assess, as lawmakers, whether the law is adequate for the situation or it is not. Where the committee and the House are convinced that the law is not adequate, is it possible for the committee to initiate legislation rather than to helplessly wait for Government or the line ministry, which may never come forth?

MR MWESIGE: Well, I do not know which particular law you are talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we are placing an unnecessary burden on the committee. If there are subjects you are interested in, you can move your own motion even without waiting for the committee. Let us be fair to one another, please. 

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, we are open to proposals. We are ready; if there is an area where we think we can help, we have no problem with that.  But I was talking about the unconstitutionality -(Interruption)

DR KAMUGISHA ALEX: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House and the chairperson that the issue of corporal punishment has been raised at various forums, mainly following brutalisation of children by some teachers, which has actually caused bodily harm. This has led us to start consulting, and we are beginning a public debate to get people’s views. We think these views will culminate into some ideas and principles that may end up in the enactment of something in the Children’s Statute to make it a punishable offence. 

So, some consultations have already started going on. I thought I should let the members know what is going on now. Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, I have a different view. I do not think we need to create a new offence for someone who administers corporal punishment on another, because the law on assault, the law on grievous harm is there. But that can be discussed later.  

I do not see a conflict, personally, in my interpretation between the law on terrorism and the amnesty law. I do not see any conflict between the two at all. I was responsible for the committee, which processed the bill on the terrorism law, and we were mindful that there is an amnesty law. 

My position is that if someone commits terrorism under the terrorism law and if he complies with the conditions set in the amnesty law, he can benefit from the Amnesty Act –(Interjections)- Yes, that is my interpretation. Even when the LRA has been scheduled as a terrorist organisation, provided a member of the LRA satisfies the condition set out in Section 3 of the Amnesty Act, that member, in my opinion, qualifies for amnesty under the amnesty law. That is my interpretation. I do not see anywhere in the terrorism law where the Terrorism Act takes waives or repeals the provisions of the amnesty law. That is my interpretation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have also taken note of the frustration about lack of debate on these matters. I am aware that we are the highest body to whom these constitutional bodies report. So, I do undertake that in each session, we shall create quality time so that we can actually debate the reports of these constitutional bodies.  

I would like to thank you for all the work you have done. We adjourn to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)

