Thursday, 17th December, 1998. 

The Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WORKERS COMPENSATION BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT(LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Dr. P. Mateke):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Workers Compensation Bill, 1998' be read the first time.

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION, DEBATE AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PRIVATISATION

(Debate continued)

THE VICE PRESIDENT (DR.Wandira Kazibwe):  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I would like to thank the Parliament for the way they have expressed a lot of interest in what has been put before us, and I would  like to state that Government welcomes the report of the Select Committee.  This falls within the constitutional role of Parliament which is to provide effective checks and balances on the executive and the totality of Government.  

The Committee reported that the objectives of privatisation as laid down in section 32 of the PERD Statute 1993 have not been achieved.  I would like to say from the few enterprises selected and examined by the Committee one could not make such a recommendation.  The terms of reference or the job that was given to the Committee did spell out what they were to do.  

In their report, despite the limited sample, they established according to them that the law was not being followed, that the process is not transparent, that the Privatisation Unit had no independence in the process as there was a lot of influence peddling from politicians and some line Ministers, that there were established cases where, I quote:"The privatisation Unit encouraged assets stripping in some enterprises for the benefit of some individuals, created monopolies for the benefit of individuals and ignored the Boards of Directors and Management for the benefit of the purchasers".

They also did note that the appointment and determination of professional fees is done arbitrarily and is one of the biggest drains of the divestiture account. 

They also noted that there are instances where sale agreements are not followed up to conclusion, and that Boards and management of enterprises that have been identified for privatisation have run down enterprises into bankruptcy through bad deals, false claims and outright stealing; and that political interference has sometimes slowed down the process of privatisation, causing further drain on the divestiture accounts. They gave examples of Uganda Airlines, Coffee Marketing Board, Air Cargo, UGIL and others.  They concluded that Government has also lost money through bad contracts, inaccurate legal advice and settlement of liabilities.  

They also did say that there has been political influence in the tendering process and final awards for enterprises and settlement of contentious claims. 

They also finally, noted that the investigative organs like the IGG have not played their part to ensure the smooth implementation of the privatisation process.

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, Government wants to submit that what the Committee did find out are not really new discoveries, because His Excellency, the President, has also been decrying these weaknesses i the bureaucracy. As the President told donors recently, the NRM/NRA was able to stop the overt abuses like killing of the wanainchi and the looting of their property, because these were not surreptitious activities.  In other words, these were done openly and we could see what was going on.  

The report points out some areas of weakness that are known, and I would like to highlight a few. For example, we know that the lack of adequate technical expertise within the bureaucracy to advise Government appropriately is one of the reasons we have been talking about capacity building in the right places. For instance, the Bank of Uganda could have traced the movement of money between Greenland Bank, City Bank and the Privatisation Unit, but they did not do so in time.  It was only recently, after hon. Ssendawula, the Minister of Finance put pressure on them to do so, that they moved to establish the facts.

Secondly, we also know and we want to admit that some of our political leaders over-rely on foreign expert advice. A case in point is that of Morgan Grenfel.  his is a firm of international repute, but see what has happened, see what its advice has done. Our Government has received endless admonition for foreign experts because of our refusal to do a number of things.  For instance, they have been insisting about our expenditure as far defence is concerned.  In other words, wanting us to have a weak army and they have been hammering us about the need for us to move as quickly as possible into the multiparty system, despite advice from our own people who elect us into Government.  We know that over reliance on expert advice can lead to disaster.

Hon. Members, just around the corner, in Africa, Congo Brazzaville is a very good example.  In that country, they did have a democratically elected President under a multiparty system but the President was over thrown by insurgency, because the political leaders listened to more of foreign experts than what was on the ground to advise and lead their people into what is right for that country.

(iii)  We also want to admit that there is a tendency for some politicians also not to use available organs of State to verify technical advice.  

When it comes to corruption today, Ugandans demand greater probity of Government officials who are suspected of having engaged in corruption.  However, when it comes to embezzlement of funds or bribery, you know that these are covert activities that need enhanced capacity of investigation, and this is one of the serious weaknesses we have.  They also call for enhanced accountability by strengthening mechanisms of monitoring and punishment, not only using the law, but also oversight by formal institutions and ordinary citizens. Therefore, while there is a need to catch the thieves now, this does not provide a permanent solution.  

We also have to go through a long process to build up a system that renders corruption highly risky and hardly paying.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the good performance of the NRM/NRA on stopping State inspired extra judicial killings and looting of wanainchi's property on the one hand and the problems we continue to have in uncovering the covert actions of wrong doers or misguided people on the other hand, shows two phenomena characterising our situation. We do have the strong political will of Government to act against wrong doers, but we also must admit that we have poor capacity to investigate these wrongs by the bureaucracy.

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I would now like to specifically address an issue which is connected to the lack of capacity, and that is the issue of the capacity of Parliament to investigate within a given time frame and avail the executive with timely relevant information and advice to enable it take appropriate measures, both preventive and collective. This lack of capacity by Parliament is also exemplified by what is in the report and also what has been precedent to this report and I will give examples. 

Parliament has to look at the procedures and rules for doing a number of things in this Parliament.  For instance, what is the procedure for determining whether an issue should go to a Standing Committee, whether it should be go to be examined by a Sessional Committee or whether it should be examined by a Select Committee? What is the procedure of the Committee if indeed it is investigating malpractice or suspected malpractice in Government? What capacity does that particular Committee have in having skills to investigate? What has happened up to now, Mr. Speaker, is that, the Committee sits and they bombard questions to whoever is in front, but what is the preparation that has been put in place to enable Parliament have the capacity to ask the right questions so that the answers given lead us to conclusions that will help everybody? Mr. Speaker, what is the procedure of laying reports of Committees before the House?

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Point of clarification.  Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I have got very high respect for the Vice President, and I very much know as she knows, that Select Committees are approved by this House. Does she want to say that the whole House in its blindness does select people who do not perform?  We would like this one to be clarified.  

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, when we talk about capacity and we talk about building institutions, I think it is only right that as we sit here, Executive and Parliament, pointing out strengths and weaknesses on each side, we actually do point these areas out so that we correct them and operate in an effective manner.While you are talking about whether the Members who are elected do not have the capacity, Parliament constitutionally acts like a Judiciary. It does pronounce itself on issues, but I would like to say that also in this particular case, how can the accuser again be the one chosen to investigate? It is against the laws of natural justice that when a Member of Parliament or a particular Committee of Parliament does find out that there is a problem, then other members who are in a position to look objectively at the issue should be put on this Committee so that they investigate, and this issue of thinking that people are being witch hunted is put on the side. Otherwise, having a Committee of Parliament pointing out that there is a problem and you have the chairman of that particular Committee again chairing a Select Committee to probe that issue, I think is really something we have to look into as far as the rules are concerned, so that all sides feel that they are getting the benefit of doubt of what is happening and we move ahead.

Procedures have to be looked into so that we are in a position to really know that what we are doing is going to help us. Mr. Speaker, I also want to say - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform Her Excellency the Vice President, that in case of the two Select Committees one whose report we are discussing, Parliament selected from across Parliament, it was not restricted to any particular Committee. In the case of the Select Committee which is looking into the Minister of Agriculture which I think she is referring to now, the Chairman just happens to have been the Chairman of that sector Committee, but they were elected here as a Select Committee and then he was by coincidence elected a Chairman of the Select Committee.
So, I do not think that should worry her very much. The whole thing was done according to the procedure, there is no lack of procedure here, we did it perfectly according to procedure.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, yes, the hon. Member is right.  Those are the procedures of Parliament and I am questioning whether these procedures should not be re-examined. We are looking at equity, we are looking at justice, and Mr. Speaker, I am quoting this particular Committee. When the Committee probing the dams reports, that will be another issue, because, now, I am using this particular report to evaluate the work of Parliament and how we should try to make it as easy and possible. 

I also want to contend that even the way we come here and move motions, can we relieve Parliament of some of this work and have better interaction between Parliament and the Executive? Can we have members write or put these questions before we move to actually go into doing some of these things, because some of the motions, when they are moved, it is because those members do not have the right kind of information, and it would really help and ease the work load of Parliament if we did streamline these procedures.(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask that I be allowed to continue so that I finish this section, then hon. Lukyamuzi can give further information. I would also want to say that connected with this kind of work - because also, there is a motion which has been circulated, let us also again look at the rules of Parliament and how we do many things.  The Constitution has given Parliament a lot of powers, let us within those powers put in place rules. For instance, the rules for censuring Ministers, rules for who gets up to talk, and also rules that we should respect each other, rules to say that when we talk here, we should give some respect to some offices. For instance, Mr. Speaker, Members stand here and talk about the President. When we get up to say that can we please give clarification, the Members do not give way.  The President does not sit in this Parliament and people are scolding him from day one to day two, to day three.  How can we really, expect people to respect our country when we come here to this Parliament and even start calling the President names, calling his Cabinet bicupuli, who will respect us a country?  Mr. Speaker, - (Interruption)

MR. WACHA: Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I think we need to clarify the position of the President in respect to matters that have been handled by this House.  Sir, we adopted in our Constitution a Presidential system of Government. This is different from the Westminster type which we used to have in this country. With the Westminster system of Government, it would have been possible for Ministers, and indeed, the Prime Minister or the President to be in this House and be attacked in this House, but with the Presidential system of governance, although the President is not here, he must own up to the fact that the buck stops with him. He is the one who is finally responsible for everything which happens in this country, whether a Minister resigns, or a Minister is censured, the buck stops with the Presidency; there is no running away from that fact. 

The problem we are having now is that there is a tendency of playing a grand political chess game. In normal chess, the pawns give way and then you reach the King or the bishop. But here, the pawns are chased away and then replaced immediately with the view of not reaching the King, and that is where at times, Members of this Parliament take up issues and mention the President. If it were possible for the President every time to come up and say, 'yes, I own up to the fact that Government has made a mistake', nobody would have been making those statements.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Ben Wacha who has been making a clarification, knows that I have not been talking about the President not owning up to the fact that he is in charge and responsible, because he appoints whoever is here. I am talking about the President being abused or abusive language being used against the President in this House, and he is not here to stand up and say so, and his representative is here and a member refuses to give way, so that the press can now put it the way it is. I think this is also something that we have to look into, so that we respect the representation of the President on the Front Bench and we come out of this House when we have been properly informed.  

Hon. Ben Wacha, Mr. Speaker, was in the Constituent Assembly and he knows why a Vice President, who, even if not a member of this House, becomes a member of this House, and I believe he is one of the people who guided us legally in that process. 

Back to what I was saying - (Interruption) 

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA:  Point of information.  I must thank Her Excellency, the Vice President for allowing me to interject into her speech. I think the point which I am trying to inform her is that, it is better to let people let steam off on this Floor openly. If we start putting rules which stop people from talking freely, then we send people to the bush.  I think it is very healthy for somebody, even if he uses very strong language against another, it is much better to let it out in the open. I think it is better to talk freely and exchange blows on this Floor here, at least verbally, than if we try to keep silent. That is what I wanted to inform her.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Hon. Gagawala indeed, you are making the point and that is why yesterday when one member, hon. Mwandha, moved to move a motion that I know it is one of the rules that a Member be stopped from speaking. Is it that some members should be allowed to let steam off and others should not be allowed to do so?  Precisely, that is what I am saying, that if we are coming here to let steam off, let everybody be allowed to let steam off, but let steam off knowing you are steaming, you are water and you are not milk or anything else; because people come here to let steam off, when they actually do not know whether what they are saying is the right thing or not.  This is a Parliament, Mr. Speaker and I believe that we should look at all these and find solutions to enable us to let steam off from a point of knowledge. 

I would like also to say that there are weak linkages between the way Parliament and the Executive work, and I believe this is an area that should be looked into so that we are in a position to harmonise the way we operate. This is a Parliament under a Movement system, it is a Parliament that is not under a multi-party system. So, if Parliament is given work and they come with a report in a way to make the Executive believe that it has been ambushed, I think this is really not the way we should work. I believe that in our operations, when reports are laid on the Table, the Executive should be given opportunity to look at these reports before debate ensues. Otherwise, how can hon. Members be expected to debate from only one side of the mirror?  Parliament is a double mirror, we should look at each side before we are made to make decisions.

I would also want to raise the issue of the work of the Parliamentary Accounts Committee and the rationale behind putting in place many Select Committees when there is a Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee.  What is the role of this Public Accounts Committee?   How can we strengthen it? Mr. Speaker - (Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I thought the Vice President was going to compare, maybe she knows the role of the PAC, why do we not allow her to develop her point, and then we can come in, because we do not know on what reference she was making this point.  

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, that is why I said, let us even establish linkages, so that we can have fora where we can, without due restraint - because like I said, this is a Movement Parliament, let us find ways of also looking at our strengths and weaknesses so that we are in a position to lay them before ourselves and build this institution and make it as strong as it can be.   

The Public Accounts Committee of Parliament is constitutionally charged with the responsibility of looking at audited accounts, looking at how Ministries are managing Government programmes and it reports to this House. It does not pay for us to run away from the fact that if we have a weak Committee, if it is weak under us, we should look at how we should strengthen it.  Because if we do not, we waste Parliament's time and time means money, and when we report here, we are not in a position to be able to follow up what we have done before and move ahead in a rational manner.

MR. AWORI:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity of interrupting Her Excellency the Vice President on her critic of Parliamentary procedure.  Mr. Speaker, the way I understand, in other words I am asking for your guidance.  Is the hon. Member on the Floor aware of this little book called our Rules of Procedure and I am specifically referring to Rule number 9, which reads, among other things, as follows: "These Rules may be amended in the manner provided in rule 51 of these Rules'. And rule 51(1) reads as follows: " A Member may move that any of these Rules be amended by giving not less than five days's notice."  Is she supporting a motion to amend these Rules or are we going through a seminar on how to conduct the affairs of Parliament? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think my understanding of her contribution on this point is that, there is a Public Accounts Committee which is charged with investigating and looking at audited accounts and use of public funds and I think her contribution was that, is that Public Accounts Committee not enough to deal with what other Select Committees are dealing with?  That is her view. I think she is aware that we have the Rules, but she was trying to say that the function of the Public Accounts Committee should be covering this. But if the Public Accounts Committee is weak, why do you not do something about it?  I think that is what she was saying.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that wise guidance. I would also want to bring out an area, because the Committee did say that the IGG has not played its part in all this. when we look at the Constitution and the way the IGG was put in place, the IGG's master is this Parliament. The IGG reports to Parliament, and in this reporting, it means that Parliament can use that institution to investigate.  Can we look at how we can best utilise the IGG's office?  If it does not have capacity, let us look at beefing up that capacity instead of setting up more and more Select Committees. The IGG reports to Parliament and sends a copy of the report to the Executive, to the President, and I believe that if we harmonise the way we work, we shall be able to do a lot of Parliamentary work where our main work is actually making laws for the country. (Interjections) 

I would like to ask the indulgence of the House to allow me to continue and they listen, because yes, when we come here hon. Aggrey Awori, we are like in a seminar.  Many people are teaching us many things and that is how we make the decisions.  

I want to thank the Committee again because it has been a very good attempt by Parliament to again voice its position and join the battle against corruption, and we welcome all efforts because this is a protracted battle. The fight against corruption cannot be won in a day, so if you delay to start it tomorrow, it means you start seeing results tomorrow.  

In spite of some of the wrong conclusions in some areas in the Report, the concern of Parliament and indeed the press, led Government to move into UCB and we discovered astronomical withdrawals which had come about as a result of fraud. It was then that a Mr. Virani was posted to oversee the banking operations in UCB. In fact, it was also at this time that Government discovered three officials, mysterious ones, whom nobody actually knew how they had been put to work in that Bank. So, this is a very, very positive trend and we want to thank Parliament and the press for this work.  These three officials have already been dismissed.  

I want at this point while talking about UCB and what has happened, I want to say that following the closure of the three banks in September, 1998, the financial sector has since experienced some turbulence.  Depositors have been uneasy because of the exaggerated newspaper reports about the banking sector, in particular the Uganda Commercial Bank Limited. Problems which have been identified in the Financial Sector have centred around four areas: poor management in financial institutions; inside abuse which includes owners lending themselves depositors money in contravention of provisions of the law; an inadequate capital base of the local banks; and the weaknesses in the regulations governing banking operations.  

The Bank of Uganda is working closely with the management of the closed banks, and indeed one of the closed banks has since been re-opened.  TransAfrica Bank is also likely to re-open before the end of this year.  The Bank of Uganda has stationed a residence supervisor called Mr. Virani and has intervened to change management at Greenland Bank. Mr. Virani is in Uganda Commercial Bank. The Government would therefore, like to re-assure the House that the Bank of Uganda has stepped up the surveillance of Commercial Banks and will not hesitate to take action to protect the depositors.  The Minister of Finance will be tabling a revision of the Financial Institutions Statute 1993, early in 1999.  The proposals to be tabled are aimed at closing the loopholes in the present law and to stamp out abuse by owners of banks.  

On the basis of the precautions so far taken by both the Government and the Bank of Uganda in the Banking industry, I would like to assure you, Members of Parliament, the depositors and operators of banks in this country, that we shall continue to strengthen the supervision of banks so that the depositor's funds are safe.

MR. DOMBO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to thank Her Excellency the Vice President for giving way.  The point of clarification which I wish to seek from the Vice President is as a result of the Press Conference which the President recently held. During that press conference, the President stated that he actually directed the investigations and closure of certain banks which were not operating according to the law. One thing I wanted to seek clarification from the Vice President is whether the Financial Institutions Statute requires the President to give the directive? If not, I want to find out from her if everything must be directed to the President, and whether this will not undermine the institutions which have been set up by Parliament to do their work?  Thank you very much.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE; Mr. Speaker, hon. Dombo knows very well that the President is the Chief Executive in this country, and all of us here On the Front Bench serve at his Will.  So, when a Minister directs, you direct because somebody loaned you those powers, and when a President stops directing, then why is that President a President?  So, it is also good to know that a President can have the time, despite all the work, to even find out what is happening in these financial institutions.  And like I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, these are the issues that we should discuss.  How should one move to do what should be done in time?  And that is part of building capacity and building the institutions of this country, given the fact that we are operating under a new Constitution.

I would like to contend here that, given the exposition by the Ministers as mentioned in this Report, the Committee could have certainly done much better if they had interacted with those Members of the Executive who had a lot of information on some of these matters.  For example, the Attorney General, he did give a personal explanation.  I know there was not enough time, and that is why earlier on I said, does Parliament within the way it operates really have enough time to actually re-examine all these issues in detail and be able to advise Government in time?  

I also want to add, Mr. Speaker, to his explanation by saying that the Attorney General in the President's putting into total effect article 119 of the Constitution, he has designated the Attorney General to do nothing else, but be an Attorney General. The Attorney General is not saddled by other ministerial responsibilities and he is concentrating on advising Government, advising Parliament, so that we are in a position to conform to the Constitution that we put into effect in 1995.  

The former Minister odf State responsible for Privatisation who has resigned, told us that he was not interviewed on the specific areas that could have given this House better insight into what is actually going on. Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the hon. Members of this House that the Front Benchers are Members of Parliament. (Interruption)

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the hon. Vice President and my old girl for giving way. What the former Minister said here was not accurate. In fact, it was not the truth, because our Committee met with him four times when we were beginning our work. We asked him the questions we needed to ask and after that he introduced us to the members of his team, the bureaucrats whom we continued to interview even up to the last week of our investigations. Thank you.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, that is precisely correct and hon. Rukikaire said so.  He said he was interviewed in the beginning.  And if he had been interviewed on the details of Transocean, for instance, one could have not thought that the Minister, the Privatisation Unit and DRIC, are actually responsible for the decision to keep the Nakawa inland port and the properties in Mombasa, because indeed that was a Cabinet decision.  We believe that, that decision was good for this country.  

I want to remind hon. Members that over and over again, this Parliament and people outside, before we actually accepted to come on board this policy, people were saying, how can you sell every asset that Government has?  When Transocean was set up, it was at a time when Government was in business.  Transocean was basically doing transportation and also clearing.  Mr. Speaker, I do not know, I cannot give the figure or the numbers of transporting and clearing companies in this country, and we believe and we still do, that the Nakawa inland port and the facilities we have at Mombasa should remain in the hands of Government and will be managed in accordance with how we believe Government property should be managed so that Ugandans are not stripped of land and assets when we know that in the future we may need them collectively and not as individual enterprises.  

The Uganda Airlines routes. Uganda Airlines is an airline like any other airline.  It is like Bulangiti Company, which is a bus company, it is like Uganda Peoples Company, it is like UTC.  I would like to contend that the Committee also questioned our having accepted to get these routes allocated to other people.  We are in the business of saying we need forex.  Uganda Airlines is like my former volkswagon which I used to drive with the engine in the back and the boot in front. We want to export our horticulture, we want to export many things, and we believed that Alliance Air where indeed we had partnership was in a position to actually take on this work and we move.  Uganda Airlines does the little shuttling between here and Nairobi, because that is what they were doing then, and we get Ugandans able to export what they could through Alliance Air where Government had also said, yes we shall be in partnership in that airline.  Nonetheless, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I think the decision would still be the same if Alliance Air was an airline which was completely private. The decision to give routes is not a prerogative of Uganda Airlines, the Civil Aviation Authority which is Ugandan 100 percent is the one to do that, and it has a right to give and take away depending on whether that route is being actually utilised.   

The Committee's contention that the objectives of Privatisation as put down in Section 32 of the Statute have not been achieved is really not a correct and true statement. We have had problems, yes; I want you to recap on what has been said here.  Out of the 105 enterprises to be divested, 87 have already been divested.  The Committee has looked at only about three percent.  Indeed, even the three have not been totally divested except UCB; and also the fact that with Transocean, the letter of offer has been given. This sample, hon. Members, does not under any pretext give an objective situational analysis that leads to the Committee's conclusion.

MRS. ATIM OGWAL:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, the Vice President seems to be giving the impression that the key objective of Privatisation is to divest 100 public companies, and that the people of Uganda should be grateful that out of a hundred and more, 87 have already been divested.  I want to understand from the Vice President whether that is the prime objective of Privatisation.  I would also like the Vice President to let this country know whether the companies which are being divested are being done with full approval of all the stakeholders.  I am of the view that public companies belong to the people. Were the people consulted before these companies were sold off?  Were they sensitised? These are the questions we are asking about Privatisation. We are not only talking about reducing the number from 100 to maybe 20, that is not the objective. So, I would like, now that she has brought out the issue, to fully understand, what was the key objective of privatisation?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Point of procedure.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am standing on the point of procedure.  At the beginning of this important debate, you clearly stated us that you will try your level best to see that each one is given limited time to debate on this important issue.  And as it clearly indicates, it seems it is a calculated move for the Vice President to speak maybe for four hours, then up to that, either the power goes off or we are closed -(Laughter).  Can we limit the time for the Vice President so that we can also debate? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is true I said that to enable as many Members as possible to contribute, I will give seven minutes - I did say that.  But at the same time I said, I think to be fair before we end this debate, we get the position of Government. And that position of Government is being given by Her Excellency the Vice President, and I imagine by her making this long statement, a number of Members that would contribute, especially the Ministers, will not be able to contribute after she has contributed.  So, I think we are benefitting from her long speech, and then we continue with other debate.  But I do not see how I can close her statement on Government's position on this matter. Let us give her time, she finishes, then I shall give opportunity to others.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.The Vice President has referred again to the three percent that the former Minister responsible for Privatisation talked about so much.   I may wish to clarify that the three percent could be the most important institutions that Parliament could be concerned about.  For instance, the 87 percent may not be all that important. Of the 87 Public Enterprises that were privatised, of those 97 percent may not be all that important.  For instance, we are now talking of Uganda's per capita income being 300 dollars per annum.  Now, of the 300 dollars, you may find that only three percent of people earn 97 percent of the 300. So that the other three percent is owned by the majority.  So,  it may not be all that important.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, can I be allowed to continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Samia Bugwe North,  we are taking up more time.

MR. AWORI:  Supplementary.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief.  Supplementary to hon. Ongom's question, I would like to know the position of the Government on Privatisation exactly. Was Privatisation flawed in modalities of divesture or was Privatisation flawed in ownership? Is it the question of ownership or management?  Where was it flawed?

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, that is why I ask that I be given the opportunity to continue, because questions like the one of hon. Awori could have been answered.  But I would like to respond to the clarification by hon. Ongom.  Really, why are our people crying of poverty, because they are the majority?  We have said here that over 55 percent of the population get less than the totality of the GDP which is consumed by the fewer people. And if one uses that example to say that let us look at those who are well off, and we leave those who do not matter, then this Parliament would not be debating poverty in the rural areas.

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, indeed later on I am going to recommend that let each of those enterprises be looked at.  Because the fact that there is nobody complaining does not mean that all is well or all is not well.  And that is when you can scientifically guide this House to say, the process was not transparent because this one was divested through employee buy-out and this is what happened.  This was divested through joint ventureship and this is what happened.  This was totally sold out and this is what happened. So, we also have other variables within the privatisation modalities that need to be looked at by the Committee.  So, I would like to say, hon. Ongom, that the majority scientifically, you need a sample - Mr. Speaker, I had a sense that hon. Ongom was not looking at and listening to me, so I wanted him to pay attention, and I turned out to be correct. So, the majority will give us a true picture of whether we are performing or we are not performing.  

The question raised by my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal will be answered by what I am going to say.  What were the basic policy objectives of privatisation for divesture?  Mr. Speaker, Government intended to reduce the direct role of it had in the Ugandan economy and to promote a correspondingly greater role for the private sector.  Government also intended to improve the efficiency and performance of the public enterprises that will remain under its ownership and control. Were the people consulted, did they accept, hon. Cecilia Ogwal? The moment the PERD Statute was passed, that is when the consultation through people's representatives was done. Hon. Lukyamuzi was not in Parliament at that time, he had failed to come through in Mukono, for reasons he knows very well. But having lived in Kampala, I represented him in here and he never raised any voice -(Laughter). I was representing him in Kampala District and he never raised a voice and yet he is always very voicy. Otherwise, I would have known that he did not want the privatisation process.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to thank the Vice President for giving way. If I am voicy, I have a right to be voicy. The information I wanted to give the Vice President is that we should not forget history so soon. It is on record that the sale of private enterprises in Uganda started before the PERD Statute was passed in 1993. I remember very well that in the NRC, much as I was not there physically, I was following what was taking place.  The Members of the NRC nearly rejected passing the PERD Statute.  If it were not for the President of Uganda to talk them down in various places, the Statute was going to fail. So, the information I want to give you is that much as we are selling the parastatals, the people of Uganda who own the parastatals, you better recall the history of UCB, how it was founded to cater for the people of Uganda so that they would compete in the banking sector with the white people. The independence aspect should be recalled by the Vice President.  

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for that clarification. The objectives of setting up UCB so many years ago, even in the hands of Ugandans, would have given us a difference among the Ugandans.  They are still poor, it is those who have been working there who are better of than the wananchi that you are talking about. So, it is not a question of a Ugandan managing that or managing this; and I believe if hon. Lukyamuzi is to sit down and find time to read what other people give him and write, scientifically, he will be in a position to use his analytical mind to know whether some processes have gone wrong and others have not, and I said earlier, yes, we have had problems, but the successes should also be minuted so that we do not say, the totality of the process has failed.  

When we decided to privatise, we wanted to improve on the production of goods and services, and we were thinking about the future earnings for the Country in general, not the physical cash that would accrue from the direct sale of these enterprises. Hon. Rukikaire, the former Minister of State for Privatization, indeed gave you examples.  I remember very well the position of Uganda Bottlers when I was Deputy Minister of Industry and Technology in 1989.  The situation was pathetic.  The sodas were being sold through chits and you would find lines and lines of people in the industrial area.  Mr. Speaker, the figures speak for themselves where we have managed to succeed and I think that this one should also tell us or show us how to even privatise better what we have not privatised.  The 1.8 million crates per year before sale and the 6 million crates now.  The 200 million in taxes per month and the 1 billion in taxes per month, from 300 employees before the sale to the 700 employees now.  

The terms of reference of the Committee must be exhausted by the Committee before it can pronounce itself on the totality of the programme, and Government supports the extension so that they find time to do their work.  

Government has committed itself to ensure that political leaders who knowingly or negligently failed to prevent grave losses or damages caused by corrupt officials under their supervision take responsibility, including resigning.  

The President did accept Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh's resignation because he went into secret deals even after the President had told him not to.  The President later did receive the Attorney General legal opinion on the matter which concurred with what he had told Salim Saleh.  This was good reason for the President to say, "ah ah, enough is enough.  I tell you, you go underhand,"  and this is where we need the bureaucracy, the beefing up of institutions because if Bank of Uganda had helped us to trace where the money had come from, then all this time and all the siphoning of the money from UCB would not have taken place.  The President has already instructed the Attorney General and the CID to look into possible prosecution where the law has been breached.  

The President, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, has accepted hon. Rukikaire's resignation and these are the reasons why he has accepted hon. Rukikaire's resignation. It is not that now the President has evidence to say, hon. Rukikaire engaged in corrupt practices. The reasons are that hon. Rukikaire failed to follow up in another case claims of solicitation of bribes having been the cause of that particular institution's failure to participate in one of our enterprises, and this is Midroc.  

Hon. Members, Midroc, then Karim, these were stories that have been all over the place, and the President feels that hon. Rukikaire should have followed this up, calling these people, especially after they paid the deposit of 2 million dollars towards the sale of the Sheraton Hotel.

Secondly, the President did call hon. Rukikaire to Rwakitura, indeed I was also present at that meeting, to verify the ability of Westmont to pay for its shares in UCB in the wake of the financial crisis that had hit Malaysia.  The President at that time was also apprehensive about the possibility of UCB money getting siphoned off to bail out Westmont's undertakings outside Uganda.  Even if Westmont had the capability to pay for its shares in UCB, the President said, "I am still worried.  What if they buy this UCB and syphon off depositors money outside the Country?" Hon. Rukikaire assured the President and the Cabinet that indeed due diligence had been exercised to prove and show that actually these people were capable of managing the Bank, that they did have the money, and that our laws would be beefed up to ensure that there is no way they can syphon off depositors money. 

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the Minister has failed to do the true due diligence and over relied on technical experts from the outside the Country, having known that Ugandans were especially concerned about their biggest Bank and they should have moved to ensure that Government, on the kind of advice that it was given, did not end up taking them on as partners. The President takes this as failure of supervision on the part of hon. Rukikaire.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the President has committed himself to investigate without prejudice, malice or witch-huntingall the ministers featuring in the Select Committee Report and in the media, in order to pin responsibility for failure of supervision in the departments under their control, and if it is found that they have failed to supervise and have caused damages, he will treat them in a manner similar to that of hon. Rukikaire. The investigative agencies have also started doing their work to prove the presence or absence of corruption.  

The technocrats who have been mentioned in the Report will also be investigated with a view to them being prosecuted, but in the meantime, the Minister of Finance is going to take administrative action against those officials who have been or are going to be found to have been directly involved in whatever the Committee has recommended.

I wish to move now to the Government position on each of the recommendations of the Committee and I would like to ask hon. Members to move to Page 20 of your Report. On Page 20 of the Report, the recommendations are specifically on Transocean Uganda Limited.  Recommendation 1 and 2 are really subject to what is contained in the contract. Mr. Speaker, we should remember that when we come here to make the laws, when one signs a contract, it is legal and you have to look at those clauses in the contract which would allow you to cancel that contract, and the Attorney General is going to look at this and if there is breach of contract, then Government will take action.  Mr. Speaker, Recommendation No.3 is in line with what Government would like to do.  

I would like move  now to Page 36 of your Report on the Recommendations on Uganda Airlines Corporation. On Recommendation 3, 9(i), Government has already committed itself to investigate and ialready the IGG is investigating, and we believe -(Interjections).  Mr. Speaker, we keep on telling people in our Women's Emancipation Programme that if you think that your wife is not really looking the way you want, do not look at another one's wife and covet her.  Make yours good also so that you covet her yourself.  So, if the IGG has problems of institutional capacity, let us beef up this institution, it is an institution which was set up and the law was passed by this very House. So, there is no way -(Interruption)

MR. RUZINDANA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The information I would like to give to the Vice President, she mentioned the institution - the Office of the Inspector General of Government.  But last night I was watching television and was listening very attentively to His Excellency the President, and he happened to mention that the Inspector General of Government had carried out an investigation into the valley dams, and had found - he had actually reported - that the money was eaten, but eaten legally since people paid themselves allowances they were entitled to. Now, facing the situation like that, I do not think that is the absence of capacity.  In fact that one shows a lot of capacity. Thank you very much.

MR. DOMBO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, you have heard the Members of Parliament here murmur when the institution of the IGG was mentioned.  The information I would like to give to the Vice President is that, recently the IGG fell from the window in a hotel in Wandegeya where he had been sent to investigate.  This is basically because of corruption.  A mwananchi rang Police when somebody from the IGG's Office - I said the IGG because that person was a delegate of the IGG - and he had requested for bribe and he fell through a window, and right now the case is with the Police, being investigated and prosecuted in Court. So, the institution of the IGG, unless something is done to absolve it, the image is completely eroded before the people of Uganda.  

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the IGG is an institution, and like I said earlier, the IGG's master is this Parliament.  The IGG reports to Parliament, if there is a problem with the IGG, which institution should help this House to investigate, then Parliament should interest itself in the beefing up of the capacity of that institution to perform. Otherwise, when problems are found in an institution, you do not write it off and say, that institution cannot perform. None-the-less, Government is also waiting for the Report of the IGG and the Minister has appointed a Judicial Commission of Inquiry which will start work, pending what comes out of the IGG's Report. On top of that, we have also endorsed the recommendation that the Committee continues to do its work.  

The Recommendation on Page 37 of the Report on Public Officials, Government has no problem with it.  

Recommendation No.3  - Government has no problem because indeed this is a policy of Government that shares be sold out to Ugandans, especially when the stock exchange becomes operational, and I believe the Minister of Finance will give us a brief on what is happening to the stock exchange, so that Parliament can go out and inform their constituents when and how they can buy shares to the public enterprises.  

On Recommendation 4, it says that at the end of the ENHAS contract, CAA should liberalise. This is already a known fact and so it is not something that we are going to change now.  It is known that when this contract does expire, the whole process is going to be re-examined.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask Members to move to Page 52 of the Report, on Uganda Commercial Bank Limited. This is where there is a recommendation on Page 52. On this one, Government wants to state here that there is no way one can move and say, the Government immediately cancels the whole contract, that is, between Westmont Land (Asia) and UCB and Government takes over the Bank immediately. It was very well explained by hon. Rukikaire that as Government, we knew that in actual fact, the person who got the shares was Westmont. We were paid, and according to the law, it is Westmont which got the shares. None-the-less, the Attorney General is looking at the contract and the investigation by the IGG and subsequently by the Judicial Commission of Inquiry will help us to know exactly what we can do.  But whatever we do must be according to the contract that we signed with these people.  

Recommendation No.2 talks about mechanisms for improving on the management.  I did comment on this earlier in the Government submission on what is happening to the banks in the Country, and indeed the Minister is looking at the regulations, but is also taking remedial action which started even before the Report was tabled in the House.  
Government has no problem with Recommendation No.3, Recommendation No.4 and Recommendation No.5. Government has no problem with Recommendation No.6 on Page 53, but this has to be handled within the existing Bank Regulations and indeed No.7, once you contravene the law, as I said earlier, investigations have been put in place.  

MR. WANGUBO: Point of clarification.  hank you, Mr. Speaker and thanks to Her Excellency for giving way.  Her Excellency has talked of investigations going on, but we have known of many cases that are being investigated and no results come out. Can we be informed of the time frame that Government has put up for these investigations so that we shall be sure that at this time, we shall have results announced.  Thank you.

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Speaker, as this Parliament knows, the IGG is independent specifically in his technical work -  Government cannot direct him. It is this House which is the master of the IGG.  It can cause him to speed up investigations.  

The time frame given by the Minister of Finance as far as the Judicial Inquiry is concerned, will be three months, and we believe that within that time, the Committee when it starts working, because it acts like a Court of law, issues will be coming up and resolvde because witnesses are interviewed under oath.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the SWOT analysis I did of Parliament and the Executive has helped us in the Executive also to look at how we can make it easier for Parliament to operate.  We all know that Parliament is transacting its business in the corridors except you the Deputy Speaker, and the Speaker. We have on capacity building for Parliament, committed ourselves to ensure that more room is available to Members of Parliament to execute their work. The Parliamentary Commission - in fact, I was shocked the other time to discover that the quarterguard to Parliament here, I think that is where the Serjeant-at-Arms should sit, is where our Parliamentary Commission is sitting.

LT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, I would want to be guided. Her Excellency has talked for two solid hours. Are we going to make a reaction really to this very useful debate?  We would request that you guide us on the procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought she was winding up. She has dealt with the Report and she was then dealing with facilitating Parliament.  

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I did say that finally on capacity building for Parliament, Government is committed to ensure that more room is available to Members of Parliament so that we are in a position to have room to read and do our work and consult within the premises of Parliament.  To this end, President's Office will work hand in hand with the Parliamentary Commission and your Office, Sir, so that those departments with no direct operational linkage to Parliament are moved to other areas to enable us create room for Parliament.  

Government will also support all efforts to beef up the research capacity for Members of Parliament. Those of us who were in the CA know that the facility for research that was availed to us helped all Members in the CA to do their research and therefore debate effectively.  As Leader of Government Business, I commit myself to work for the building of harmony and complementarity between Parliament and the Executive. I thank you.

MAJ. RABWONI OKWIR (Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would first like to thank the Committee for the Report.  I would like to thank Parliament for giving this Report the attention that it deserves.  I would also like to thank the people of Uganda who have been following with the keen interest what has been taking place in this House.  I would also like to thank media who have kept the people abreast of the deliberations within this House.  I would also like to thank the former hon. Minister of State for Privatisation who pulled out with grace without setting pressure from Parliament to do it the other way.

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that the participation of the youth of this Country in bringing about a democratic change, and trying to fight for the economic development and sustainable peace has been crucial for the survival of the Movement.  But Mr. Speaker, the youth whom we represent in this Parliament are very much concerned and angry at the trend the events are taking after 13 years of sacrifice. Mr. Speaker, some of us abandoned studies to fight for the ideals of the Ten Point Programme - up to now we have never completed our studies.  

We braved the rain, we braved the bullets, we braved the bombs to bring about not a mere change of guard but fundamental change in politics of this Country.  Mr. Speaker, what are we getting in return?  Members are telling us that we have arrived because we can come here, make statements and go back home without being killed.  I think this is playing around with the minds of Ugandans, Mr. Speaker.  Because I remember in the bush, when hon. Amanya Mushega was our Chief Political Commissar in the Army, he used to stress that we should not count ourselves as heroes because we were not raping people's daughters. That we should not be glorified and called great men because we were not killing people; shooting them on the streets. That we should not consider ourselves heroes because we were not grabbing wananchi's property. How can Members of this august House stand up and say that we have arrived, that we have achieved the objectives of the Ten Point Programmes just because we can come here, criticize the Government and get away scot-free?  I believe that is not enough. Our having fought these dictators is not enough. What the people of Uganda want at this point in time, at this point in our history, is to deliver, is to consolidate our democratic gains and strengthen our economy.  

If I could give an example, we have a Member of Parliament here who was 12 years old when we were taking over power in Kampala in 1986.  This Member of Parliament was in P.7 or P.6, I presume. Now, if you come here, Mr. Speaker, and talk about Idi Amin, to her you are talking about Kabalega and King Mwanga - the people who were three years old in 1986 are going to vote in the year 2001 - they will be 18 years old.  What are the expectations of these youth of Uganda? Are we going to continue telling them about Idi Amin? Are we going to continue telling them about Milton Obote? I think, Mr. Speaker, they deserve more.  We recognise, Mr. Speaker, the contribution of the National Resistance Movement and the Movement government now, in the liberation of this Country and some of us have been participants. But let us have a vision.

The Movement has almost lost its goals. We are talking about very very very noble objectives, we are talking about democratization, we are talking about modernisation, we are talking about the maintenance of sustainable security and we are talking regional integration with a Pan-Africanist agenda. Mr. Speaker, the tactics we used in the 80s to achieve these objectives may not be relevant now.  
In the 80s we were talking about broad-baseness, inclusiveness in order to create national consensus.  But the people of Uganda are saying, now it is high time that we changed tactics.  The people of Uganda gave the President a mandate of more than 70 per cent votes to bring about change and create a new order. The Youth of Uganda have sent me, Mr. Speaker, to tell you and this august House and the people of Uganda that what we want is clean leadership, and what we want is hard work, performance to deliver on what we promised the people of Uganda.  

Mr. Speaker, this is brings me to my third point and the last one.  I have to be brief because many other Members want to make their points.  What is the way forward? Some of us believe that corruption has about three phases. The first phase, Mr. Speaker, is the corruption of a secretary in an office who steals a ream of paper because the kid at home has has no milk to drink or the nurse in a hospital who steals tablets to sell and buy milk at home.  

There is the second category of the bureaucrats who feel that maybe I am a major in the armed forces, I may be entitled also to a land-rover; I am a doctor in a hospital, I am entitled also to a government house; I am an Engineer, I am entitled to this salary.  

Then the third is the corruption of the big fish - high level corruption - and all these three types of corruption, Mr. Speaker, have correspondingly different approaches in resolving them. I for one believe that, we can only solve the first type of corruption by broadening the economic base.  There is no way we are going to prevent the man who cuts grass from stealing the slasher if he has left problems at home - problems of paraffin and problems of soap.  

The second type of corruption, Mr. Speaker, is a combination of improving the economy, but at the same time going back to the drawing board and politicizing our people about the importance of belt tightening and their participation in the struggle for creating national wealth.

The third, Mr. Speaker, is the corruption of the big fish. This one needs political and administrative action. These people should not only be censured or moved out of office; these people should face legal action.  This type of corruption is criminal action. This type of corruption is what is making our comrades who died in the war to turn in their graves. This type of corruption reverses the gains of the people of Uganda - the blood of a million people who died in Luwero, reverses their gains and brings them to naught. Mr. Speaker, I urge this House to support the youth of Uganda, and if we can save this revolution, let us do it now by weeding out these elements.

This will also call  for institutionalization. Mr. Speaker, it is extremely dangerous for this Country, for us to depend on individuals.  There is no revolution which has made its base upon individuals. If an individual is tired, for God's sake, why can you not allow him to retire and get out of public office?  A person claims that, "I have been kicked out of the Army because of the indiscipline." Somebody says, "I am tired, I want to go and do business", you say, "No, come here, I want you to be a Minister".  A person says, "No, I am even tired of living in Uganda.I want to go to the United States", you say, "No, I want you to come back here". Mr. Speaker, the dependence of this revolution on individuals is what has caused this mess in Government right now.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am calling for institutionalisation - we are calling for system building so that this revolution can be relevant to the youth who are coming in. But Mr. Speaker, we are tired of elevating pragmatism to a level of political doctrine. Everything in this Country is becoming ad hoc, ad hoc, ad hoc. Tactics have become strategy. We want viable institutions that will lead us to tomorrow, that when Okwir goes, there is a replacement, so that the youth of this Country can be sure of their destiny and can be guaranteed a future.  If we do not do that, then we do not deserve the right, Mr. Speaker, to keep other political systems from coming in and competing. Because other political systems have been kept out for the express purpose of creating national consensus and creating an atmosphere over there. They can come in, but if the doctor is a confused man, then he will not diagnose the right atmosphere where these people can be brought in to participate, and also Mr. Speaker, we will not have the moral authority to condemn the past regimes if we do not clean our own house. Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my duty to give to this House our Committee's reply to the defense made concerning the privatisation of Uganda Airlines Ground Handling operations.  Mr. Speaker, I ask the indulgence of Members to listen to our Committee's reply.

Our Report when we presented it was general. For obvious reasons, we could not include all the testimonies that we had received, all the documents that we scrutinised in order to come to the conclusions that we came to. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure Members that we received a lot of information, scrutinised a lot of documents before we came to the strong conclusions that we came to.  

Mr. Speaker, when the Ministers presented here their defense, we had to go back and put together the information -(Interruptions) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Is hon. Winnie Byanyima in order to say that she is speaking on behalf of the Select Committee on Privatisation when the Chairman is here in front of us?

MR. AISU OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, in our Committee, we had a very good composition. We had Engineers, we had lawyers, we had statisticians and we had economists. We felt that to cover this Report properly, we needed to specialise.  

On the question of Uganda Airlines, we had Aviation experts. So, we assigned this responsibility to her, and we have said, she will be the one to respond to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is in order, please proceed!

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we were investigating Ground Handling Operations of Uganda Airlines, we did come to the conclusion that there was heavy political influence in the process of selling of Ground Handling equipment of Uganda Airlines.

Political influence, Mr. Speaker, is never written in a document.  You will not find it written anywhere, but you can observe it through the bending of rules or the absence of rules, through the taking of many decisions which ultimately benefit - it is supposed to be coincidentally - a powerful person. It is a clear pattern that has been observed by Ugandans many, many times, and we too, observed it in this process.  

The hon. Kirunda Kivejinja here on this Floor, himself mentioned that while he was a minister, that he was approached by the Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh - I fear to say his name after yesterday's incident, but I am sorry that I have to - that he was visited in his office by the Maj. Gen, together with hon. Sam Kutesa who was then not a minister, and that he gave them the concession, that the concession had to go to a particular group of people, that this is the case with every Government. This was said here on this Floor by the very Minister who conducted part of the sale.  Mr. Speaker, need we say more in addition to that?

However, our Committee was mostly concerned with what happened, especially after the consortium ENHAS had been formed and had been given the concession.  It got the concession on the 30th of March, 1996, and our interest was in what happened to the interests of Uganda which were in Uganda Airline's 50 per cent of ENHAS.

The hon. Sam Kutesa was elected to chair the Board on the 26th of October, 1995, as I said the concession was granted on March, 30th 1996. The operations begun in April, 1996.  In July, 1996, the hon. Kutesa became a Minister. The Committee is of the view that hon. Sam Kutesa should at that moment have resigned that chair, because now, he not only had to defend his personal stake in ENHAS but he also had to protect the interest of Ugandans invested in 50 per cent of ENHAS.  

There is a law in the Leadership Code that requires leaders not to place themselves in a situation of conflict of interest. Without thinking about this situation, he continued to be the leader of ENHAS and presiding over two conflicting interests.  We observed the conflict right from the beginning.  Because as I am going to show to you, the company ENHAS under his leadership was organised and managed in a way that completely marginalised Uganda Airlines, causing bitterness, complaints and breakdown of relations between the management, the Board of Uganda Airlines and the Chairman of ENHAS. 

We have a few examples to demonstrate this serious conflict and marginalisation of Ugandan interests.  For example, in July, Mr. Speaker, of 1996, the accounts of ENHAS were given signatories through a letter by hon. Kutesa.  You will see when I have laid it on the Table, Mr. Speaker, that the signatories to the accounts of ENHAS were either the Directors of Global Airlinks, the Company of hon. Kutesa or the Directors of Efforte, the Company belonging to Maj. Gen. Saleh or the workers of ENHAS. Nowhere was Uganda Airlines allowed to sign the accounts of ENHAS, yet it had 50 per cent stake.

On this matter, Uganda Airlines did not keep quiet, it complained and I have the minutes here, Mr. Speaker. These are the minutes of the 19th meeting of 4th December, 1996, and I will read it for you when I lay it on the Table. "Uganda Airlines reiterated its demand to be mandatory signatory for all Company Accounts.  It was explained that Uganda Airlines Board had demanded this to ensure that the majority share holder was kept fully informed of the Company's financial transactions and to protect the flow of funds."

"In response to the demand by the Uganda Airlines, it was noted that it was more appropriate for the Chairman to be mandatory signatory as he had been elected by the Board.  He would take care of the collective interests of the shareholders." This was the reply to their demand that the Chairman would take care of all theirr interests. Despite the fact that Uganda Airlines was feeling it was in the dark, its demand to be a signatory was declined.  So, Mr. Speaker, Uganda Airlines was put in the dark about the accounts of ENHAS and was to remain so until its shares were sold.  

Secondly, another example, Mr. Speaker, right from the start it was agreed and understood that the Chairman of ENHAS went ahead to appoint Managing Directors for the Company, and who does he appoint?  He appoints his partner from Global Airlinks, Mr. Ramesh Masirani, and a Mr. Zif Shif from Caleb's International to be the Managers of ENHAS.  Members, you will remember that Zif Shif is the gentleman who was in that plane which had that fateful accident in the Rwenzori.

These are the leaders of ENHAS now,the Chairman is from Global Airlinks, the 2  Managing Directors are from Global Airlinks and from Efforte; there is not any one from Uganda Airlines.  That is further marginalisation of Uganda Airlines in the management of the Company.  
Again Uganda Airlines complained, they were bitter, they kept complaining and it was many months later that they were allowed to have a third Joint Managing Director. Mr. Speaker, I told you that the business begun in April. The concession was granted on the 30th of March. But Uganda Airlines which had continued to do its job was asked to pay back its March revenue to the other new shareholders, because the argument given was that it had already been agreed in previous minutes that they begin on 1st of March; it did not matter if the concession was granted on 31st of March, they were to give back the money. This was also opposed and we have the minutes showing that Uganda Airlines, through Benedict Mutyaba, attested.

Mr. Speaker, I can read for you what was said: "Hon. Kutesa raised the issue of the March income. This is in a meeting of 23rd May, 1996.  It was agreed and minuted that Uganda Airlines would act on behalf of ENHAS from 1st March, therefore, money made during that period was owed to ENHAS although ENHAS took over from 1st April, 1996. The March income is due to ENHAS  as it was minuted that Uganda Airlines was to act on behalf and expenditure deducted from the income. Hon. Kutesa again pointed out that ENHAS has a legal relationship with the Government, and if the Minister refused the signed agreement which was indeed a suggestion from Mr. Mutyaba, ENHAS should have been notified.  Then it was agreed that Uganda Airlines should not suppress ENHAS."  This is underlined and bold-faced, and this objection was to be minuted strongly as a suggestion by the Chairman of the Board.  

Mr. Speaker, you can see here that there is a real conflict between Uganda Airlines, the representatives and the Board Chairman. But despite being a Minister, he continued to pursue this role of fighting for his stake while the Uganda Airlines stake was being fought for by very junior people who really were placed in a situation of fear to negotiate hard with someone who is holding a senior position in Government as indeed they testified to us. 

This crisis continued until in February, the management of Uganda Airlines demanded an emergency meeting. The reply to them was that they should wait for the regular meeting- indeed they waited.  But the situation was so bad that this time they got together with Sabena, the other partner, and demanded a meeting invoking the Company law. They had to invoke the law to cause a meeting to happen and the meeting was to discuss the finances and to discuss the management of ENHAS. This is the situation.  

Mr. Speaker, I can read for you again another minute. " The General Manager, Uganda Airlines was not satisfied with the statement showing income and expenditure for the months March to June. He questioned the manner in which certain payments were done and the secrecy around them.  The Chairman observed  that accusations of impropriety should only be in need when all facts are available, bearing in mind the positions of those involved." Mr. Speaker, those involved in the meeting were the Chairman himself, Maj. Gen, C. Akandanaho and others.  

When you read this you wonder whose positions are these supposed to be careful of? Here is Uganda Airlines complaining about the accounts, here is a Chairman telling them that be careful, people here have got important positions. I am revealing this to Members because we cannot get up and write in the Report and name someone unless we have seen evidence that there is something that went wrong.  

Indeed, we even had a testimony from the Manager of Uganda Airlines that at one point, two different sets of accounts were presented in a meeting, and that the Board Members from the Uganda Airlines side, questioned these accounts. They thought that one set of accounts reflected the true picture of the company, but the Chairman asked them to return them immediately. They tried to retain them, and as a matter of fact, the meeting broke down and there was a scuffle, according to one of them. I am embarrassed to say this, but this is what we had on record that a scuffle took place. In fact, we had him sworn. He swore on oath, he told us, this is the Manager of Uganda Airlines. " At the same time, we ran into a problem where we were not satisfied with the accounts that were being presented. In fact we kept asking for the accounts or financial reports and nothing would come until when the Financial Controller decided for unknown reasons to run away."  Then he goes on to explain to the meeting, he said, "I remember then, the Chairman told me - he refused to return the accounts - that he hoped I would live to read those documents". We asked him that what did the Chairman say?  He said that: "I hope he will live to read those documents, and of course this touched me as a person because I said, 'are you threatening my life or are you threatening my job?'  And actually we stood up when as a human being - and the Chairman decided to walk away."  He repeats himself and said, "I told him, are you threatening me as a person or are you threatening my job? And I remember telling him that, I know if it is the job, I know you are capable of it.  But as long as I am here, I am supposed to do this job."  This is the exchange that he describes they had, and indeed the minutes of that meeting confirm that there was a breakdown in the meeting and that the Chairman left the meeting.  I have the minutes here.  

So, Mr. Speaker, for us on the Committee, we felt that Uganda Airlines was placed in a very difficult situation where they had to fight for their interest against someone who should have been protecting them, and that when finally it came to selling the shares of Uganda Airlines, they were in the dark. They did not know what they owed, because they had been denied an opportunity to participate effectively. 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on giving you more examples; I could give you an example of how they disputed the accounts, I would give you an example of how signatories to an account were changed unilaterally by the Chairman. It is a law of this country that you need a board resolution to change the signatures for the company, but the Chairman changed them and wrote to them and said, "I will inform you at the next meeting." They demanded that he accounts to them in an emergency  meeting which he never called; again I have the letters and the minutes here which where availed to the Committee. So, Mr. Speaker, in all this, we felt that the hon. Minister pinched for his company against the Government interest. The representatives of Uganda Airlines found it hard to negotiate for the interest of the people of Uganda before a Chairman who was also a minister but who was out to get the best deal for himself.  

I would now refer to some of the issues that were also raised here.  An issue was raised that the Chairman of a company can be from a minority share holding; sure that can happen, but for us as a Committee  what we felt sad about was that first of all, out of 6 seats Uganda Airlines was given 2 despite having 50 percent. You have half the company but one third of the voice; that we thought was not correct.  
Secondly, should the Chairman be from another company, that Chairman should have the full support of the majority shareholders, but it is clear from the minutes of two years that Uganda Airlines lacked confidence in the Chairman. The only reason he remained the Chairman, we concluded, was that he was a minister. Short of that, they could have wanted a Chairman who could have defended them.  

I turn to the valuation. Again, Mr. Speaker, we repeat what we said here before, that two international companies valued the shares of Uganda Airlines and put them at between 5 and 8 million dollars. A third international audit company, but which happens also to be the audit firm of ENHAS and appointed by the Chairman of ENHAS, put them at 3.7 million dollars and this is the value that was finally agreed upon. We felt that here there had to be something wrong, because even if you take the average, it has got to be more than the lowest. And if the other two were wrong, what was right about this lowest one? We could only conclude that it is because he had a relationship with the Chairman that their value was found the most suitable. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we observed that some of the money that paid for these shares, particularly for 40, came from Uganda Commercial Bank and was unsecured, it is part of the loans that were unsecured from Uganda Commercial Bank. But I hasten to add that that is on the side of the 40. 

The workers of this country were treated in a shoddy way. It was agreed from the beginning that the workers would pay for their shares later; it is true they took a long time to pay, but it is also on record, and I have a letter here to show that they attempted to pay, but their cheque was returned. They attempted a second time, again it was returned. The PU Executive Director, Mr. Muganwa, told us that he attempted to hold two meetings between the workers and the Chairman of ENHAS, the hon. Minister, and that the Minister failed to come. He declined to come to meet the workers to negotiate their shares. So, Mr. Speaker, the issue of the workers remains an unresolved issue, and we felt that this was not the way for the Minister to behave who is supposed to protect the people of this country. (Interruption)

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Winnie for giving way. As a Member of the Committee and also representing the workers, the other information I wanted to give you is, that apart from the shares,  even those workers who were shifted from Uganda Airlines to ENHAS were supposed to be given their terminal benefits from ENHAS, but some ended up being sacked without getting their terminal benefits.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I now turn to the routes, and on this issue we found the Ministers, starting from the first one to the next one at fault. The Ministry takes a position that it is its mandate, through the Civil Aviation Authority, to give out routes, and indeed it is. But, it takes this mandate so seriously and it guards it so jealousy that it forgets that Uganda Airlines is also the people's company and also needs to be protected; its interests need also to be looked into. Every country that has an Airline has to take into account its national airline and give it strength through apportionment of routes before it considers to use them or to sell them to other carriers. I do have a statement from the Minister recently reminding - so Uganda Airlines was of the view that if it is to be sold, for it to have a value, it needs to have some routes that are lucrative that will give it value. Having taken off ground handling of pedestrians, having taken off in-flight, catering, weak as it was, now when you strip off routes, what is left there to sell?  The Airline has no aircrafts, there is nothing to sell, so Uganda Airlines has been of the view that its routes should not have been stripped from it just like that; a negotiation is needed between the company and the Ministry ,so that it retains something to give it value before it is sold.  I will not take this House into the letters -(Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: Point of clarification.  I wish hon. Winnie Byanyima could give more details, for the benefit of the House, of which routes Uganda Airlines is complaining about which were stripped from it, because I know that all routes are decided on by a lateral air service agreement.  And all the bi-lateral air service agreement we have put there is that the operator will be Uganda Airline on all of them; on others we have put there Uganda Airlines with another airline like Alliance. It would be better to find out which routes Uganda Airlines is complaining about, then it will give me a picture to see that maybe, we could have defaulted somewhere where we denied Uganda Airlines these routes which will have increased its value. Because as I know, many airlines have been wanting the route between Entebbe and Nairobi, and that is a very lucrative route for Uganda Airlines, and nobody, neither my predecessor nor myself would allow that. 

The route that we have given to Alliance is London and South Africa, Uganda Airlines goes there twice and Alliance goes there once. The London route, Uganda Airlines had failed to operate because it did not have the equipment and had actually given it to Kenya Airways. Maybe, it will help to clarify on this point later, if hon. Winnie Byanyima could see where the complaints of Uganda Airlines - I think she is expressing the complaints of Uganda Airlines, but are these complaints about routes?

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, Uganda Airlines insists that it would like its interests to be taken into account when routes are being apportioned. When a route is given to another carrier, loyalties are due and those loyalties could come to Uganda Airlines. This happens in other countries and could happen here, that if a route is taken away from it and given elsewhere then the loyalties, the money paid for that route, should come back to the Airline. This has not happened and that is what we called 'stripping', that what could have fetched it income is taken away from it. 

The Minister himself has said that he gave away some routes, but when you give away a route, a route earns money; where is that money, why does it not come back to the airline that had it in the first place, that was making money from it in the first place?  Mr. Speaker, this is important because when you see the British Airways, it is a very strong airline, it is private. British Airways is not owned by the Government, but is protected by the British government. It is not treated just like any other airlines that flies into London/Heathrow, London/Gatwick. It has its special privileges protected, and it is protected by the Government. This is the protection that Uganda Airlines is seeking, that should you take away its route, please, let it have the money for it.  

I wish to also refer to some of the arguments made yesterday. One of them was that, if the business is not working well and you sell it, when you have sold it and it does better, then you have achieved. Sure, nobody denies that, when you sell and people come in and do better, it is a success for the country for sure, but let us not forget - and this was important for the Committee - that these are national assets belonging to everybody, and they are passing on to private hands. This is a process of empowerment of some people. What the Committee objects to is that a small group of people are the ones to be empowered by this process of privatisation, this is the objection. Empowerment must come to as many people as possible. 

This is not new. Her Excellency the Vice President has been lecturing to us about corruption and institutional building. Very good; but I suppose the Government could also be learning, could be lectured too by the experience of other countries. Go to South Africa. They are also privatising, but within the  process of privatisation is a strong empowerment component. They have to make sure that those assets do not go back to just the white people but black people get, women get, disabled people get, everybody has a stake. The Committee is saying privatisation is okay, empowerment of our people is okay, but not just a small group, let it go to many.  

We also want to react to the issue of privatisation of parts of Uganda Airlines being done outside of DRIC. The hon. Rukikaire gave an argument here that CAA was liberalizing. First of all, we have shown in our report that there was no liberalization at the Airport, because there was a monopoly, and after the changes, there was still a monopoly; there was no liberalisation. What happened was to organise consortiums that could bring money and do the business better, but no competition was introduced - that is one.  

Secondly, there was a transfer of assets from a State enterprise to a body that is private. Ground handling equipment worth more than 600 million was transferred from Uganda Airlines to a new company called ENHAS. This is privatisation whichever way you want to look at it, from up, from down, from either side, it is privatisation of assets of Uganda Airlines and by law this was a mandate of DRIC and not another Ministry. We saw through the correspondence that in fact, the Minister of Privatisation was writing to the Minister of Transport letters which indicated that he was aware that privatisation was happening, using the word 'privatisation' was happening through another Minister that was irregular and we faulted the two Ministers for that.  

I wish now to conclude by making just one comment which is from me and not from the Committee. It is this, that while I have been in this Movement, I have always taken advantage of its good and neighbouring environment. I am a great beneficiary of this Movement, because I am able to stretch its limits in terms of criticising it. I have always felt secure, I have always felt it is my right to speak out what I thought was good for the Movement. But, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was sad, I was sad because someone so senior to me, whom I found in the Movement turned on me in a violent way and I felt unsafe, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Kazzora is a very powerful man, he is not just a normal back bencher - not the Major here, Mr. Speaker, I am talking about the MP for Rushenyi. I see him as a very powerful man, and I thought that the violent reaction he went into was threatening to me and I thought it most unfortunate. But, I want to assure the House that while I felt sad and unsafe, I remain determined to work for this Movement by emphasizing transparency and accountability of the leadership, Mr. Speaker; and I want to put it on the record that I have absolutely no hard feelings -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, on that issue, the hon. Kazzora withdrew and apologized, and I think we should give it a rest.

MR. KAZZORA: Point of order. Is the hon. Lady -(Laughter)-  in order to make serious insinuations that her life was insecure, was frightened by what I said in this House -(Interjection)- are you the Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Member, we should not continue with this kind of business. Yesterday, you withdrew and apologized and I was explaining to the Member that the remark you made was withdrawn and you apologized. That was accepted and that is the end of the matter.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. speaker.  In conclusion, I also want to say that since our report came out, all kinds of lobbying and pressure is being exerted, and I think much of it is appropriate, but there is some of it I find inappropriate and damaging to our Movement. I do not like it when a debate on corruption turns into a debate of family issues, and things of that kind. At an appropriate moment, I hope we shall have the opportunity to discuss this matter because it is most threatening to the national interest; let us address corruption, let us address abuse of office, let us leave those issues elsewhere. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kutesa, you want to clarify on some issues?  But be brief, because you see we are closing the chapter on Uganda Airlines where hon. Kutesa is involved; I think it is fair that if there is some clarification to make, he should do it please.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr.Sam Kutesa): Mr. Speaker, I am very surprised by the statements that hon. winnie Byanyima has made has made to my defence which I put before this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The correction here is that hon. Byanyima was winding up for the Committee.

MR. KUTESA: She started by saying that Maj. Salim Saleh and I visited hon. Kirunda's office, and that is how we were awarded this consortium. I think the background to the issue is necessary. The Civil Aviation Authority carried out a study on how to privatise or liberalize or give out concessions at Entebbe Airport. That study was presented to the board of directors, the board of directors did decide - and the minutes are available, I did not carry them here today - that there should be formed a consortium. This was decided by the Board of Civil Aviation where my good Friend hon. Winnie Byanyima was a member at the time.  (Interruption)

MISS. BYANYIMA: Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, some few days ago, a journalist called Ofwono Opondo went on the radio somewhere and some one heard him and told me; he said that I was on the board of civil Aviation Authority, that I was even the Chairman when this decision was taken. I have checked the record. I have found that I came on the board of Uganda Airlines long after this consortium had been formed and after the decision had been taken that the concession be given to them. The first minutes that I heard from that board, talking about ENHAS, are talking about going to visit them in operation. That is the first issue that I heard of in the board meeting of ENHAS. So, thre is no role I played in the formation of ENHAS and giving the consortium.

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was listening to Capital radio last Saturday, and I heard my good Friend hon. Winnie Byanyima state that she was able to intervene in the award by Civil Aviation of in-flight catering, and I know that in-flight catering was awarded prior to the coming into effect of ENHAS. This to me shows that she was already on the board at the time, but be as it may, the point I am making is that it was not because I visited hon. Kirunda that we got the consortium, this was a decision taken out of a study that was conducted and commissioned by the civil Aviation Authority Board and it is the power of Civil Aviation to give out this concession. So, it is not influence peddling, as indeed it is not I who said that there should be a concession. As I explained to this House, hon. Members, my intention was to do business alone, I was not looking for a consortium, a consortium was forced on us by the Civil Aviation Authority who were the ones managing the Airport, and therefore, it is wrong and inappropriate to say that we formed the consortium simply because hon. Kirunda was visited by me.

Quite a number of allegations have been made, and the minutes referred to, but because I do not have the minutes here, I will refer to what I have in my memory. Mr. Speaker, there has been talk that we of ENHAS appointed managing directors; we did not appoint managing directors to the exclusion of Uganda Airlines. What we put together was a managing team which was first a finance Committee. Secondly, we called it a managing Committee and it was composed of representatives of all the shareholders. Mr. Mujuzi represented Uganda Airlines; Mr. Masirani represented Global Airlinks; Shive represented Efforte; Mr. Layman represented Sabena; and there is no way we were marginalising Uganda Airlines. The facts of the matter are there, and in good time, I shall come out with the minutes that appointed them. 

I do realise that the statements that hon. Byanyima is making are part of the allegations that are made in the petition that they are filing against me, so I am sure I will have appropriate time to respond to them, then I will have the minutes. The point I am making is that there was no marginalisation of Uganda Airlines, Global Airlinks was represented, Uganda Airlines was represented, Efforte was represented, so was Sabena.  

I would like to move on and say that hon. Byanyima on behalf of the Committee has raised the issue that we got the concession in March 1996, and that ENHAS took over in April, and that we prevailed on Uganda Airlines to give us the revenue for March, and that hon. Mutyaba objected to it. My recollection on this matter was that there was an agreement, that as Uganda Airlines phases out its management, we should have an orderly withdraw, and that they should manage the business on behalf of ENHAS for the month of March as ENHAS recruited staff to replace them. The agreement was reached and it was also agreed that for all the operational expenses that Uganda Airlines would incur for running the business on behalf of ENHAS for the month of March, those would be deducted from the income. Do not forget, hon. Members, that when that income was passed on to ENHAS, Uganda Airlines was still a 50 percent shareholder. So, when the impression is created that the money from March was taken away from Uganda Airlines and given to ENHAS, there is a distortion and a gross misrepresentation of thinking that Uganda Airlines lost all the revenue. They deducted the operational expenses, then the balance came to ENHAS in which Uganda Airlines had 50 percent, and this was the agreement that had been reached.  So, the impression being created that Uganda Airlines was marginalised, that Uganda Airlines was being cheated I think is false.  The truth of the matter is that they were paid for their operational expenses that were incurred for the month of March.  The balance of the money came to the joint shareholders, 50 percent of whom were Uganda Airlines; and so really there was no loss or marginalisation of income to Uganda Airlines.

The other point I want to refer to, I would like to say that even if one is keen on censuring a Minister who is a Member of Parliament, it is wrong to impute that I could become a murderer as well. Surely, I am a Member of this House, and I will be either joining you on the Back Bench or remaining on the front Bench. I think it is wrong totally, totally unfair to say that I threatened that I could kill someone or take his job. It may be true that the General Manager of Uganda Airlines testified on oath; really people have lied on oath before, and I totally deny and dispute that statement, it may have been made on oath, it is false even on oath. I think it is only fair for hon. Members here at least to be - if you think I can turn into a murderer, murdering Uganda Airlines official - by the way, this is so many years ago. If I threatened one's life, why do you not go to the Police, do you wait for a Select Committee? Really, however big you are, if you threaten my life, I will go to the appropriate authorities. I think this is a falsehood, it may not be a falsehood by the Committee and I believe it not, but certainly it is a falsehood by the person who appeared before the Committee and I deny it. I appeal to hon. Members to leave some measure of respect of our colleagues, I may not be your Friend, but I cannot engage in threats of murder and violence. I totally deny that statement, whether it was made on oath or not; I believe, the Manager perjured himself.  

I would like to come to the issue of where Uganda Airlines is supposed to have lost revenue, because I presented accounts that were different.  I do not present accounts. There was an asian who was recruited by the Board sub-committee on Personnel to be our financial fontroller. Our financial controller ended up preparing accounts, they were supposed to be presented to the Board. When the accounts were presented to the Board, they were reflecting different amounts from what we knew; but the accountant had left the country because the mother had fallen ill and he was not at this Board meeting. This is an accountant by the name of Varma, I think. So, when these accounts were presented, we said, 'but what are these accounts for? They show a loss of about US $4,440', and I said these are not proper accounts. All members agreed that we should send these accounts back to the external auditors to have a look at them, and they could come and explain to us as a Board. 

We also said that if there are any failings in the accounting procedures, then auditors should be able to write up an accounting manual so that all our accountants could begin to follow the right accounting procedures. As it turned out, this money had not been lost, what had happened was that they would issue, for example, an invoice to British Airways which would have handled, and then they would not take away a credit note that had been paid by the British Airways in the past. So, this money was a mere misrepresentation of invoices and credit notes. That was sorted out.  

The other item I remember about that incident was that ENHAS was invoicing Uganda Airlines as if Uganda Airlines should be paying 100 per cent for being handled. In our shareholders agreement, we have a clause that says that Uganda Airlines shall enjoy 50 per cent rebate, because they are shareholders in our company. So, they were being invoiced 100 per cent, and this showed that there was a lot of money that was expected. However, when you deducted the invoices when it became 50 per cent, it became very clear that we had over inflated our expected income, and it came down by 50 per cent. These were accounting mistakes and they were corrected and there has been no loss of income to Uganda Airlines or ENHAS.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister the accounting years we are talking about.  First of all, when does the accounting year of ENHAS end?  Does it end in July or in December?

I would also like to know which accounts, according to those financial years, are in dispute? Whether they are the accounts for the year ended in 1996 or for the accounts which ended in the year 1997?  Thank you.

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The financial year of ENHAS ends in December of every year, that is point number one. I am not in a position to tell you exactly, because I do not remember, whether we are talking about the accounts of 1996 or 1997 or 1998 for that matter.  But most likely, it is either 1997 or 1996, and I am prepared to come forward to this House with the exact dates.
I was going to go to the issue of valuation of the shares of Uganda Airlines which were bought by the other shareholders of ENHAS. The impression is being created that I was responsible for appointing Deloittee & Touche to make a valuation.  That impression is erroneous, that impression is unjustifiable by evidence.  The Committee keeps saying that because Deloittee & Touche used to be the auditors of ENHAS, therefore, they are the ones who were made to value the shares of Uganda Airlines, and therefore, they bent the rules for us. I believe that Deloittee & Touche is among the ten top audit firms in the world.  Those of you who are accountants, those of you who know these things would really know that Deloittee and Touche is among the top ten in the world.  Now, these people earning billions of dollars, really, do you think Deloittee & Touche would bend to hon. Sam Kutesa or chairman of ENHAS to influence valuation by putting in peril their international reputation?  The answer to that must surely be 'No'.

Secondly, hon. Rukikaire came here the other time, and his testimony seems to have been ignored. He stated here before Parliament that there were different terms of reference that were given to these audit firms, and that is what accounts for the difference; that Ernst and Young valued as if the exclusivity of ENHAS at Entebbe would be perpetual; and that Deloittee and Touche knew that ENHAS was left with two years.  So, their valuation is that materially different, because in one case, it assumes the perpetual exclusivity, in another one, it takes into account the limited period of two years. Surely, the valuation of a company which is going to have an exclusivity for another 10/15 years, its value would be much higher than one which is left with a concession for only two years.  

For me, it makes sense, but let me also say that I did not know that either Ernst and Young, Deloittee & Touche had been appointed to value these shares until this Committee came up with this report. For anybody to create the impression or the Committee to suggest that I knew Deloittee & Touche is to half read the situation.

Hon. Byanyima referred to some minutes of a meeting held on 20th February 1997. Those minutes, if you read them completely, apart from referring to a disagreement in a board meeting, also refer as to when Deloittee and Touche was appointed as auditors for our company.  On Minute 7/1 of those minutes, it is indicated clearly that I was not in the Board meeting when Deloittee & Touche was appointed our auditors.  This was introduced by a Sabena Director by the name of George Titens.  So, a personal relationship between me and Deloittee and Touche does not exist - certainly what did not take place is that I talked to them to influence the valuation. I think the valuation was influenced by the term of reference given to them by the Privatisation Unit and that is where the matter must end, because we did not know about it, we did not influence it and I do not think that it would be fair or even reasonable to accept that Deloittee and Touche could be influenced by a small company in Uganda to put at peril its international reputation.

MR. BAMWANGA:  Point of information. Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of information, that as a valuer, when you are valuing an interest in any landed property or valuing shares, its net worth/value is reflected in the pay back period of the interest, that is, even if the house is the same, even if the land is the same, but the lease is for ten years, the value for that ten years is not equal to the value for the same interest, for the same property for the next 20 years.  So, I agree that unless the terms of reference were specifically clear, definitely when you are valuing any property or shares, you must be able to consider the timing that is involved. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR. AISU OMONGOLE:  Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister to clarify to this House, whether the three companies were appointed to value the shares in ENHAS under three different terms of reference. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I do not know whether he will be able to answer that because, - 

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am not in a position to answer that, I never commissioned them, I did not receive their valuation, I was only presented by offers of prices that we should pay for the shares.  Let me also add that the impression that is being created, that I personally participated in all these negotiations and moved and bent rules, I want to refer to minutes to which I shall lay on to this Table, minutes of an extraordinary shareholders meeting that was held on 8th April 1998.  This meeting was attended by me, Mr. Ramesh Masilan, Mr. Shirve Shallif and Mr. Gleen Leman on behalf of Sabena, and in these minutes, I excluded myself from the negotiations of these shares, and I shall read these minutes.  

" The chairman informed the meeting that Uganda Airlines Corporation had decided to sell their 50 per cent shares in ENHAS Limited and the offer was first given to the existing shareholders. He further informed the meeting that he could not participate in the negotiation because of his position in the Government which owns Uganda Airlines. He was of the view that the exercise be left to the Finance Committee to handle on behalf of the shareholders.  

It was also reported that Sabena Airlines had indicated that if the price named by the Privatisation Unit exceeds between US $25,000 and US $28,000 per share, they will not participate in buying the shares."  
I shall lay these minutes on the Table. I personally excluded myself from the negotiations and asked that these negotiations be conducted by the Finance Committee of ENHAS. So, I was not responsible at all for bending the rules, I was not responsible at all for valuation and the charge of impropriety on these issues is both wrong and unfair. Mr. 

Lastly, I want to touch on the issue, the very emotive issue of workers. I am being depicted as a person who is anti workers, as a person who wants to cheat little people who had shares in ENHAS. Let me repeat this position once and for all. First, I categorically deny the statement or the information given by hon. Bakkabulindi that there are any workers who were transferred from Uganda Airlines to ENHAS, and have been retired and have not been paid their terminal benefits. This is a fact and it is verifiable. What has also happened is that, we have given indemnity to Uganda Airlines, that anybody whom they had employed over the time and has been transferred to ENHAS, we shall pay them any month for every year they have worked for Uganda Airlines and ENHAS when they retire, and their terminal benefits are being paid.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Point of information. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Kutesa for clearing the Floor. Maybe I would have listened if he had said as the chairman, he did not know what was taking place down. But let me inform him. The workers who were transferred from Uganda Airlines to ENHAS and who were being terminated or sacked without their benefits, did not even stop there, they went ahead and used Ssemakula and Company Advocates in the court until recently; poor workers, when they had nothing to consume, they again resorted to begging him, up to now they have not got the money. 

I want to inform hon. Sam Kutesa that I represent workers, and those workers I am referring to belong to Uganda Airlines and fall under the Transport Union which is also a member of NOTU. I am also a representative of NOTU and it is only three days back that I had a meeting with them. Even those ones who are still in ENHAS, I can inform him further if he is not informed as a chairman, that the plan his Manager had brought, is to give them a bonus instead of terminal benefits. I want to know if a bonus to him means terminal benefits. 

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of workers in ENHAS who claimed terminal benefits and were not paid. It may be possible that there is a dispute between Unions and the management and these are normal things in any company. It may be unionised staff having a dispute with ENHAS but it is not that the chairman has stood here and ordered ENHAS to marginalise workers - this heartless man in the name of Sam Kutesa who does not care about workers interest, I think really, that is not the position. The position may be that there may be disputes between workers, there could also be disputes whether these workers should be claiming from Uganda Airlines or claiming from ENHAS; I cannot take responsibility for that. But I want to talk about the issue of the shares for workers, because I think that is the last thing I want to refer to, Mr. Speaker, as I wind up.

I did mention here, hon. Members, that when a consortium was being formed, it was agreed that Civil Aviation workers and the workers of Uganda Airlines should all contribute and own 5 per cent of ENHAS.  That was agreed between us, Civil Aviation and Uganda Airlines. It was also agreed that all shareholders should answer their call for funds by the 28th of February in 1996. When shareholders agree that everybody should contribute the amount on a given date, in normal cases, whoever fails to contribute their money then loses their option on the shares.  That is what would happen in normal cases. But this is not what happened in the case of workers. This heartless man who is being depicted as someone who does not care about the interests of workers, agreed that the period for the workers should be extended and the workers' period was extended.  

But one year and a half later, they turn up and say, "we want to pay the same amount of money as we would have paid one and half years before", and we say, "no, we have invested money, the company has increased in value, the shares have gone up in price, you must pay the current market price"; and one of them, the workers of the Civil Aviation Authority paid the market price, the workers of Uganda Airlines failed to pay that amount of money. Do you think I have one heart for the workers of Civil Aviation and another for the workers of Uganda Airlines? Why? It is because Uganda Airlines workers have failed to pay the current price. 

I will use the example of last time of my good Friend hon. Kanyike. I said, today, if I agree to start a business with hon. Kanyike and we both say that we should contribute 100,000/=, and hon. Kanyike contributes his 100,000/= in the company and I do not contribute mine.  He starts his business, he works, two years later, Kanyike's business is worth 12/= million and I come and I say, "My good old friend, Kanyike, we like each other, we know each other, you remember our agreement?"  He says, "Yes, I remember our agreement."  I say, "You remember we agreed to become shareholders?" and he says, "Yes." And I say, "Here I am now, I have come with 100,000/=." Would it be right and sensible for hon. Kanyike to accept my 100,000/= when he invested his 100,000/=, it has now become 12/= million? Surely, if I want 50 per cent of the original agreement to be forced between me and hon. Kanyike, I would have to pay 6/= million, because the business now is worth 12 million and no longer 100,000/=. That is the position of Uganda Airlines workers. I am willing today, and I think our shareholders are willing today to give these shares to Uganda Airlines workers if they pay the same price as the workers of Civil Aviation paid, and I think anyone of you, managing their own business, that is only when it makes business sense.  

In conclusion, I am being depicted as a heartless person for workers, I am being depicted as someone who peddled influence and influenced valuation of shares. I hope I have proved to this House beyond reasonable doubt that I did not play any part in that; and two, that the workers shares are still available. 

This reminds of a story a friend of mine told me a few weeks ago. It is a story about a leopard and a young sheep. This story goes that the leopard was upstream and this young sheep was downstream, and the leopard said, "You young sheep, you are spoiling my water." And the young sheep said, "But Mr. Leopard, I am downstream, how can I be the one spoiling your water, you who is upstream? Then the leopard realised that maybe that little sheep had made up its case. Then he said, "But last year you abused me, you young sheep!" And the young sheep said, "No, I could not have abused you, because last year I was not yet born." And then the old leopard said, "No, if it was not you, then it must have been your mother; I will eat you all the same." (Laughter)  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ADOLF MWESIGE (Bunyangabu County, Kabarole):  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have been tasked by the Committee to respond and reply to the points of law that were raised in this discussion. Let me begin, Mr. Speaker, by disagreeing with the Vice President. It is unfortunate that she has just left, but I am sure the Prime Minister will take the information to her, that I do not agree with her position when she says that the bad contracts which the Committee has proved to have been fraudulently executed for the time being are valid until the Attorney General finds them otherwise.  I find that position very unfortunate, because, the Committee made its investigations, found these contracts to be bad.  These contracts passed the test of the Attorney General's office. I think the timing is now wrong to say, after the Committee has pronounced itself on the contracts, the Attorney General should now pronounce himself on them.  In any case, officials of the Attorney General's office witnessed and signed some of these contracts that we found bad. 

What are these bad contracts I am talking about?  Let me address myself to the contracts of UCB.  We talked of the contract of a share sale agreement between Westmont and the Government of Uganda to buy shares in UCBL.  UCBL at this time became a company limited, independent of UCB, and in that agreement, it was agreed that Westmont will pay 11/=  million for the sale of UCB to Westmont - Westmont will pay 11/= million to the Government of Uganda for Government interest in UCB.  Westmont pays 11/= million down payment, it remains with a debt of 6/=  million, the whereabouts of this 6/= million, Mr. Speaker, are not known, and that was the concern of the Committee.  

Two issues are raised from here; where did the 6/= million go, because the  Committee found no evidence that 6/= million was actually paid to Government - that is the question which the Vice President and the Attorney General did not answer and the Minister in charge of Privatisation. Even if this 6 million had been paid to Government, there is a supplementary agreement which was executed by the office of the Attorney General and Westmont which says that the 6 million, actually will not be paid to Government for its interest in UCB, but the 6 million will go to UCBL as capitalization. It does not make business sense to me, Mr. Speaker, to say that Government which is one of the shareholders in UCBL should bear the total 100 per cent burden of capitalising UCBL. 
What is the burden of Westmont in capitalising UCBL? I would have expected the state of affairs to have been like this, that Westmont as a shareholder with 49 per cent in UCBL should have contributed 49 per cent towards capitalization, and Government of Uganda should also have contributed 51 per cent towards capitalization. Now, why put the burden of capitalising UCBL, which I now consider a legal entity, independent of UCB and Government, why put that burden on Government?  That question was not answered by the Vice President and the Attorney General. 

Parliament is not interested in lecturers.  We are interested in issues; the issues are, where is the 6 million? Why does Government bear the sole burden of capitalising UCBL? What was Westmont's contribution to the capitalization of UCBL?  And after taking UCB, Westmont enters into a management contract with the Government of Uganda, and Westmont, after entering into that management contract as has been proved by facts, assigns its shares to Greenland Investments.  This one, is proved in the report of the Committee. Assignment is prohibited by the Finance Institution Statute. It is also prohibited by the Share Sale Agreement. This is in law, what we call fundamental breach, and fundamental breach makes a contract void. For this, Westmont must pay damages. So, I get shocked to hear the Vice President saying that actually, Government is afraid of paying damages, that we cannot rescind these contracts now, because Government might pay damages and these things have passed the test of the office of the Solicitor General.  

I will read for you an agreement here, which was witnessed by the Solicitor General through one of his officials called Billy Keinamura, who signed for Solicitor General. One of the provisions in this agreement says:" Clause 8 (d), all payments by the Bank" - this is enumeration to Westmont for its services as a manager of the Bank - "All payments by the Bank to Westmont shall be made free of any deductions, and in particular, the Bank and the Government is required to make deductions on account of withholding tax, levies, duties or other government imposed charges under Ugandan law and regulations.  The amount of payment shall be grossed up by the amount of the required deduction so that Westmont shall not suffer any reduction in payments due to it, herein under in respect of such deductions." 

What is the import of this clause? We did point out in our report that Government and Westmont contracted out of taxes, that Government actually agreed with Westmont and UCB to contract out of taxes, because, here, what the clause is saying is that, first of all, Westmont will not pay any levies, any taxes, but in case those are deducted, then, Government of Uganda should gross up those deductions in the final payment to Westmont.  

I have taken this provision to the test of so many lawyers at the bar; they have found it a very big disaster. It is a very bad record for the office of the Solicitor General.

I would also like to address myself to the contract of Transocean and COIN Limited. The Vice President also talked about it and said, for the time being, that contract has no problem until it passes the test of the Attorney General's office. But I am still submitting that all these contracts passed through the office of the Attorney General; I am not saying that hon. Bart Katureebe was a party to the fraud, I am not saying so. I have not found any evidence to connect him to fraud.  But I am saying that his officials were privy to some of these contracts where Government actually lost money. This is what I am saying.  The Committee did point out that COIN Limited credibility was questionable, because one of its majority shareholders called Ddungu is a thug, he is a thief. The Committee proved this, that he owes Coffee Marketing Board Limited 423 million which he has refused to pay for a long time, and he has committed so many crimes. This was pointed out in DRIC and at a certain meeting which is in the report, when the two members who represent Parliament on DRIC were absent, the chairman did point out this and the members of Parliament on DRIC can stand and testify.   When the  Members of Parliament who represent us on DRIC were absent, Dgungu's bid was awarded. That is when it was given. So, which fraud do you want to prove in these contracts other than this one?

Finally, I would like to insist that these contracts that Government entered fraudulently, the fraud in UCB is very clear, it can be proved by Government agencies that are responsible for investigation. The fraud in the contract between COIN Limited and Uganda Government is clear. I will not comment on ENHAS because I do not have very clear facts, but there is an element of fraud also in ENHAS by circumstantial evidence, I do not have direct evidence. All these contracts where clearly there is fraud, the Attorney General's Chambers should immediately rescind them, and if possible sue Westmont for damages and for having breached these contracts. I thank you.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I said before this House last week, I said so openly that indeed there have been some weaknesses in the making of Government contracts, and I therefore, certainly welcome the comments which have been made by hon. Mwesigye, which as I said, I would indeed have loved to have gone through with the Committee had I appeared before them. Because I would also like to know what were the weaknesses, while at the same time, also identifying what are the strong points in the agreement on which we can stand to take Westmont to task to recover the money they have taken from us; because it is important for us to identify those things as well.  

As I pointed out, there are indeed strong points which we can use to rely on to make sure that Westmont accounts to us.  And as I have done in the past, Mr. Speaker, I do intend, and you know it very well, Mr. Speaker and other Members of the Legal Committee, I do intend to consult very, very much with the Legal Committee of this House as I have done on otherlLegal matters; I will welcome their input, they will be with me all the way, since we are allies in this.  

As far as I am concerned, as soon as I have got the conclusive reports from the Bank of Uganda confirming the frauds that have taken place, I will not hesitate to advise Government to take appropriate legal action, I will not wait for these other inquiries. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I call the Member for Kagoma, I remember hon. Winnie Byanyima, when making a contribution, said that she has documents to lay before the House; this was not done and I believe also the hon. Minister did it. Because I remember also sometime back, some Member said he is going to lay before the House documents and these documents were never laid before the House. So, this time I would ask hon. Byanyima to lay the documents on the table.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now lay these documents on the table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, there is now a motion.

MR. TAIRE IDHWEGE (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Arising out of the Report and the debate on it, Mr. Speaker, I rise to move a motion, that the Parliament of Uganda having received and discussed the Report of the Select Committee on Privatisation, hereby resolves as follows:
One, that the process of privatisation be reviewed within a period of two months with specific reference to;
(a) The Minister of Finance introduces to Parliament amendments to the PERD Statute in line with the Select Committee's recommendations.
(b)  The Minister re-organises the operations and personnel at the Privatisation Unit to ensure the achievement of the goals of privatisation.
(ii)  That until the above is achieved, no new enterprises are brought on board for privatisation.

Two, (i) (a) that immediate steps be taken to rescind the divesture contracts in respect of Transocean Uganda Limited and Uganda Commercial Bank.
(i) (b)  that the contract for the sale of UAC 50 percent shares in ENHAS be reviewed with a view to ensuring that the shares fetch a true market price, failing which, the contract should be cancelled.
(ii)  The Minister should report to Parliament on above within three months.

Three, that the Central Bank ensures the recovery of all the monies irregularly paid from Uganda Commercial Bank Limited after the fraudulent privatisation to Greenland Investments Limited related companies and companies associated with Major General Caleb Akandanaho.

Four, that His Excellency the President considers relieving hon. Sam Kutesa of his portfolio in Government in view of the findings of the Committee.

Five, that Government takes all necessary steps to recover monies lost through irregularities in the privatisation process from those directly involved.  

Six, that Parliament expresses its concern and displeasure at the role played by hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. Nasasira, and hon. Mayanja Nkangi in mishandling of the privatisation process.

Seven, that criminal investigations be carried out in the activities of Maj. Gen. Caleb Akandanaho and his collaborators, in respect of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited and other public enterprises with a view to possible criminal prosecution.

Eight, that investigations be carried out into the conduct of Mr. Tumusiime Mutebire and Mr. Leonard Muganwa and other public officers involved in handling or mishandling the privatisation process with a view to taking disciplinary action against them in accordance with the laws of Uganda.

Nine, that the Report of the Committee and all relevant documents be passed to the Criminal Investigation Department for possible criminal prosecution.

Ten, that the recently constituted Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the affairs of UCB be stayed until after the Select Committee has reported.

Eleven, that the Select Committee be granted 60 more days to complete its mandate.  

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? 

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER; Well, it is seconded.

MR. TAIRE:  Mr. Speaker, I chose to move under Rule 8, that Rule 39 be suspended for my motion to be moved. Thank you.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Mbale):  Mr. Speaker, I shall be very brief. I am seconding the motion presented by hon. Taire Idhwege of Kagoma County. In my seconding of this motion, first of all, I would like to state that I am a Movement supporter. People have been telling us stories that, you see, it is people who are against the Movement who are supporting this type of motion. I am giving some historical background on myself because -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But we have to be very brief about this.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:  I will be brief.  Sometime back, one of the young Movementists was lambasted, saying, "You see, you have just come in the Movement, we do not know you much", but for me I came in the Movement in 1985; the Political Commissar by then, hon. Amanya Mushega, may not remember, but you met us at Kyotera park in 1985, it is very relevant.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Now, hon. Members and Mr. Speaker, I second the resolutions of this motion for the hope that the process of privatisation will in the long run become transparent, exact, effective and clean, because the Movement believes in clean leadership. I believe generally the people of Uganda are behind us for this, and hon. Members and Mr. Speaker, the people of Uganda are saying that we are doing a good job but we should go a little further. 

Apart from investigating the people concerned, the people of Uganda believe external investigative bodies should come in.  The Scotland yard should be called in to assist the CID of Uganda, because most of these are already surrounded. Most of these CID officers in Uganda are surrounded and they may not do much on their own. They may be misjudged if they acted alone.  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But was this part of the motion?

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:  Generally, it is one of the reasons why I am seconding this motion, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The question of the Scotland Yard, is it part of the motion? 

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: It is clear.  The Report is very clear that they should be investigated, and Scotland yard could give a helping hand in trying to unearth some of these anomalies. Some of the institutions that are within Uganda that are charged with the fight of corruption are mistrusted now. The people of Uganda are mistrusting them, that is why they call upon Scotland yard through Government to come and assist.  Uganda needs us all, whether you are a Multipartist, a Movement, but if it concerns corruption, we need to see that corruption is fought jointly. 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the people of Uganda demand that the Capital Markets Authority start its operations sooner than later, otherwise the corruption will follow unhampered. I beg to second the motion.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, when the Report was presented to this Parliament, this Parliament agreed to give everybody a chance that was named in the Report to clarify in some of the allegations. The Ministers gave us their clarifications on some of the issues.  But I thought that DRIC as an organisation was named in the Report.  This Parliament is part of DRIC, we therefore have a part that we played in the decision making, in the selling and in the buying and in the mishandling of privatisation.  We have started this debate, I believe we are in the last hour of this debate.  I would have loved before I pronounce myself on the Resolution, before I make my mind very clear on some of these issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, you stood on a point of clarification.  What is the clarification you are seeking? 

MR. RWAKOOJO: I would want to be clarified whether this Parliament, being part of DRIC, should not have given us a statement so that we are able to judge for ourselves.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, what should be known is that there is no government institution in this country that is not under any particular Minister. The particular organ you are talking about is under the Minister of Finance, and for this particular Report, the Minister of Finance who was a Minister of Finance then, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, was the person to answer for DRIC and he did.

MR. AWORI:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the people who drafted this motion on Item No. 1(ii), reading among other things that ' until the above is achieved, no new enterprises are brought on board for privatisation.'  Mr. Speaker, I am expressing concern about one company whose status is not yet clear to me, that is Uganda Air Cargo, whether it is among the companies which shall be - because I really want it included here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, you see hon. Member, do you not think that, that particular proposal is all embracing? I think it is all embracing and that it is wider than what you are trying to do.

MISS. EGUNYU ASEMO:  Amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In accordance with Rule 44 (a) of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to move an amendment, that the debate and adoption of the draft resolution number 4 of the Report of the Select Committee on Privatisation be deferred for six days, as the Committee has requested for more time and to enable other factors to come into play as I will later enumerate. I beg to move.

MRS. MUKIIBI BENIGNA:  Seconded, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance from you on the procedure for debating these Resolutions. The first motion was moved by hon. Taire Idhwege and Kibaale Wambi and the second motion is now on the Floor moved by hon. Fiona Egunyu and the other Lady. Now, I am just wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether it will not be more orderly and proper for us to move item by item. And if these two distinguished Ladies would like these particular Resolutions 4 and 6 to be deferred, they should wait until that time instead of trying to come at this stage, debate their motion and so on.  Mr. Speaker, this is the question I am raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No. I think what we have really is that we have two motions now. There was an original motion by the Chairperson of the Committee to approve the Report as it was. Then following the debate, some two Members thought that we come to very concrete proposals and they moved their amendment. Now, the kind of amendment coming from hon. Fiona Egunyu is to the effect that we forget all other things, just do not pronounce yourself on the Report or any of the recommendations given by the hon. Member for Kagoma. Do not pronounce yourselves on the recommendations, but just extend the period, and then after that, we shall come and see what recommendations we adopt or not. So, since this is a proposal which has been made and seconded, I suggest that we dispose of it, and then we continue depending on the outcome, and then we shall deal with the other one.  I think it is fair that way.

MR. WACHA: Can I clarify on this motion by hon. Egunyu?  Mr. Speaker, I think the most significant aspect of the motion is that, the matter be deferred for 60 days. The assumption is that, the Committee wants the 60 days to continue investigating matters which are being reported upon. The fact of the matter, Sir, is that the Committee is requesting for 60 days to go and investigate other enterprises which it had not reported upon. I would sincerely suggest to this House that if the 60 days being referred to by hon. Egunyu is for us to go and re-check on the matter we have already reported upon, this motion Sir, to me is irrelevant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do we not get clarification from hon.Egunyu, what is the purpose of the motion?  Is it to give more time to the Committee to improve on their Report or to probe into other matters?  
MRS. EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if I had been allowed to speak on that motion I would have outlined many more reasons.  The prime reason is not to give the Committee time, there are other issues which arise, which I would like to put to this Floor and it is not with regard to the Committee getting more time to look into this particular matter.  So, Mr. Speaker, if I am allowed to expound on my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, you see the problem, hon. Member, is, are you talking about the matter in the subject of this Report, or you are saying that the other enterprises should have been probed by the Committee, so we give them more time to deal with those other enterprises, or you think that the probe in respect of the enterprises reported on is not adequate, we give them more time to deal with that?  I think that clarification could help the Members to understand the motion.

MRS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, I feel that the probe is not adequate and I also feel that in line of the conflicting statements you have heard here, when the Committee stands up to present its case it sounds very convincing, when hon. Kutesa presents, it sounds very convincing.  Everybody sounds very convincing and, Mr. Speaker, what I would have liked to see put in place, why I am asking for these 60 days, is proceduralrules for certain things to be effected so that we are not the investigators, the judges and the jury, so that justice is seen to be done. But the way it is now, there is total confusion and whether we want to admit it or not -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is your problem that our procedures have caused a problem?  It is the time factor or both?  

MISS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, it is both.

MR. WACHA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I think the matter is getting more involved. Could the Member clarify to this House which Rules are not adequate?  Which particular Rules is she complaining about?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I recall that the procedure in the House has been that once a motion is tabled and properly seconded, the Chair allows the Member to make a contribution to it. I am seeking guidance from you Sir, whether that procedure has been changed so that we put words in the mouth of the Mover. I would have thought the best procedure would be, since the motion is properly on the Floor, that the Chair allows the Mover to defend it and then the House pronounces itself. That will be a smoother way rather than trying to jump the gun. Mr. Speaker, I would like to get your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The procedure is that, there were two motions.  One was abridging the other, and therefore, we would have started with the motion by hon. Fiona Egunyu, seconded by hon. Mukiibi, and I was going to give opportunity to the Mover to speak to the motion. But before that, a Member stood up and sought a clarification for them to understand and then we proceed, and exactly that is what we are going to do. That she is going to speak to the motion, we dispose of it and see what happens.  Because if it succeeds, then there will be no need to deal with the other motion which was before it. But now, the rectifications have been given to the effect that the purpose here is that the Rules have caused a problem, and then also, the time. Now, she can speak to the motion.

MISS. EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to point out that the draft Resolution 4, when considered in light of the Report which was submitted to this House by the Committee, the Committee itself admitted that it had not completed its work on this particular issue, and it had not interviewed all the people who it would have sought to interview.  It is there in the Report. (Interjection) Mr. Speaker, I seek to be protected.  

As I was saying, the Committee in its Report indicated that it had not talked to all the persons it would have wanted to talk to and it actually asked for more time.  So, in my feeling and in my mind, I am convinced that given the things that are transpiring, the Report is not conclusive. 

I am also looking at the various other resolutions which have been recommended. We are saying that the Ministers who have been implicated and other persons implicated should be investigated by CID with a possible criminal prosecution. Now, here is a case where we are more-or-less passing judgement before even these other organisations do their work. In other words, we are already bending their thinking to what we are thinking in this House. So, I think since this matter has already been referred to the Police, and since it is being investigated by the Criminal Investigation Department, it is better for us also to defer and not to pronounce and pass draft Resolution number 4, because that will be tantamount to saying, hon. Kutesa is guilty, and I think that will be grossly unfair.  

I also move this motion because I still believe and I am convinced that given that a draft censure motion has been passed to the Speaker's office, there is need for rules before some of this is done, because some Members may not come out maybe openly, but people feel -(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, I need protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  From who?

MISS. EGUNYU: From my neighbours.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are so many, including hon. Mukiibi?

MISS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, I am trying to say that if the effect of resolution 4 was to effect the censure of hon. Kutesa, deriving from the draft Resolution 4 is most likely, and I am saying, if that is the case, then we need Rules of Procedure on how to move this censure; and it was agreed at the time of censuring hon. Muhwezi -(Interruptions)

MR. WAMBEDE: Point of order. Mr. Speaker, with your permission, is it is in order for the hon. Egunyu to debate matters that are not even on the Order Paper, and worse still, is it in order for her speculate as to what is going to happen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, there are two matters - matters of amending the rules. Our rules permit any Member by motion to move that certain rules be amended or changed, and that motion should not be lumped with a motion dealing with this particular item on a specific motion. And in as far as I know, I do not know whether this censure issue was presented to the Speaker's Office when we started, but I have no such information.  So, I think we should not address ourselves to this issue of censure.  Yesterday, I informed the Members that it is a bit dangerous provoking people to think about censures when nobody has really thought about it here.  

MRS. EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling. Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out with all humility that as we talk, sometimes we are not very honest to ourselves because signatures are being collected, and I am trying to be as open as expected, and I am pinned to that information because I was approached to sign a censure which I refused.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, collecting signatures is different from presenting a petition to the Speaker. You earlier said that the petition has been taken to the Speaker, and I am saying that I have no such information. Now you are talking about signatures being collected.  Those collecting may not get enough signatures. So, the issue may not arise. I would rather differ that issue of censure; you speak to the motion.

MRS. EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will restrict myself to draft resolution 4 and say that, as eventually I will present a motion seeking to move that the rules of censure and others be put in place, we differ this matter of relieving hon. Sam Kutesa of his portfolio, because the matter is still going to be under investigation by CID so that we do not preempt their thinking and turn it to the thinking that hon. Kutesa is guilty because you passed that resolution in the House.  I beg to move.  

DR. KASIRIVU: Mr. Speaker, I beg to be educated. The first motion was moved, cleared by the presenter and seconder, and this is a second motion. The presenter has cleared the air, we were waiting for the seconder before you pose a question. Now, it seems you are exposing it for debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is true the motion was seconded, but there is no rule that she must speak to the motion. If she wishes, she can, but she has not stood up. So, I cannot say, hon. Mukiibi, please, speak to the motion.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion and one of the reasons why I am supporting the motion by hon. Egunyu, is that the hon. Egunyu's motion is important for the history of this Parliament. The truth remains the same, and the truth does not matter how many people are on this side, are on the other.  The truth remains the truth and what hon. Egunyu is moving is to say, on this matter, allow more time for the Committee to exhaust this matter, and in a family of this House or any family, when there are two positions and one of them says, "I would want more time so that may case is heard", I do not see a problem in saying, if there is a feeling that there is need for more time, let us compare the notes, let us see who is actually right, where there are two positions which we have no time to solve now. 

If the Parliament is to be credible, if this House is to have integrity - I would say that we have moved very well, we are in very good gear to fight corruption, but let us not rush things - let us not hurry.  There is no reason for really rushing, if there is time to investigate a case thoroughly.

If I give an example, Mr. Speaker, when we debate a subject and take a judgement or in a Court, I have never heard of a case which was tried in two days or three, and finalised.  You always find that if there was a jury, for fairness sake, normally the jury listens to both sides and then goes and considers both views and takes a decision. This House is now behaving as if it is a Court, and it is important therefore, for integrity's sake, it is important for credibility of Parliament to say that we give the Committee more time, we give all other investigative bodies that are in support of the move against corruption more time to finalise this matter thoroughly.  So, I support hon. Egunyu's motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to make it clear. We are dealing with the motion of hon. Fiona Egunyu, seconded by hon. Mukiibi.  

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, I want to oppose hon. Egunyu's amendment very very vehemently.  Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to correct the impression that has been caused in this House right from the replies of the Ministers who have spoken. It is not correct to say that we have only looked at three enterprises out of 87. I want to remind this House that why our Committee was constituted was because of the Report of the Joint Committees of National Economy and Statutory Authorities that had actually looked at all these Enterprises in the Privatisation Unit and came up with damning reports about the Privatisation Process. This House specifically put in a Select Committee to look into the cries of the public on enterprises that have caused public concern. Our Committee therefore, thought it fit to begin its investigation with those enterprises that have caused public concern, and UCB was one of them. It is not therefore, correct, Mr. Speaker, to say that we have only looked at three enterprises. This House has a report of the whole Privatisation process.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to say that we have asked for more time so as to interview more individuals is not correct.  Our requests are on Page 58.  It says: "If it is the wish of Parliament, this Committee would like more time to: 1. Complete investigations on UCB Privatisation".
And here we specifically want to investigate the sources of funds that paid for UCBL. Mr. Speaker, here we suspect there is more dirt.

We also said: "we want to begin and conclude investigations on other enterprises the Committee has not had time to deal with."  Mr. Speaker, we have exhausted the investigation on Uganda Airlines and ENHAS.  That is what I wanted to say.

Another issue is to investigate the use of the proceeds of the privatisation. Here also we are asking time because one of the terms of reference that was given to us was to investigate the proceeds of privatisation. Because of the 45 days that we were given, we were not able to look into the use of the proceeds of privatisation.  We hope to tackle it as a separate agenda. But we only pointed out the misappropriation of funds in relation to UCB whereby the Privatisation Unit used four billion shillings to prepare UCB for divestiture. So, Mr. Speaker, this is what I wanted to point out in objecting to the motion of hon. Fiona Egunyu.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, ours is only a recommendation to H.E.  He may see it fit not to consider relieving hon. Kutesa of his duties.  It is only a recommendation - it is an expression of this House that we think hon. Kutesa deserves a rest. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to speak on hon. Fiona Egunyu's motion and I want to link my contribution here to what I said when I addressed the House. Hon. Egunyu's motion is specifically addressed to resolution No.4 and 6.  Resolution 4, if I may read:"That His Excellency considers relieving hon. Sam Kutesa of his Portfolio in Government, in view of the findings of the Committee", and 6 is that "Parliament expresses its concern and displeasure at the role played by hons. Kirunda Kivejinja. Nasasira and Mayanja Nkangi in mishandling the privatisation process." I would like to say that as far as 6 is concerned, it is at the pleasure or displeasure of the House. But I would like to talk to Resolution No.4 and relate it to what I said earlier.  

When this Parliament pronounces itself on this recommendation, yes, the Chairperson of the Committee has said that we are going to ask the President to consider. My problem is with the statement which says, "in view of the findings of the Committee". This has come from the Report of the Committee. Mr. Speaker, I did say that the President has committed himself to investigate all the Ministers that have been mentioned in the Report. The moment -(Interruption)-

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, with due respect, I have listened for two hours to the speech of Her Excellency the Vice President replying to our Report. Before that, Members of Parliament who are supporting the previous resolution that was circulated in the House yesterday sat with the Speaker and with senior Ministers and worked on the initial draft by Members of Parliament, and after two hours, hammered out this censure position between the Government and Members of Parliament. (Applause). Mr. Speaker, 12 Members of Parliament supporting the initial resolution which was harder than this one met with the hon. Minister Rugunda, the hon. Attorney General, the hon. Minister of Finance, the hon. Minister of Security and Minister of Foreign Affairs and hammered out this compromise. Now, is it in order for the Vice President, Leader of Government Business to come here and try to unravel a censure hammered out with our own Government, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, hon. Members, in the first place, when Her Excellency the Vice President stood up a few minutes ago, she was going to speak on the motion by Fiona Egunyu, seconded by hon. Mukiibi. Up to now she has not said whether she is supporting the motion or not.  I do not know whether she was going to clear that position which we have stated, that Fiona's motion was not necessary in view of  - that one I do not know. So, I am not really in position to say she is out of order, and I do not know how much involvement she had in the drafting of this. But I think you better allow her to develop her contribution, then we shall know what she is talking about.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I am really disturbed by the information I have received with a lot of respect from hon. Winnie Byanyima, and I would like to get clarification from you whether the business of this House is transacted elsewhere other than in this House; and if so, what opportunity do we all, as Members have, who may not have opportunity to participate in the meetings elsewhere?  I would like to get your guidance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think an hon. Member on the Floor indicated to us that there has been some lobbying by certain Members of this House, and this is not out of place for lobbying to be done. But the decision of this Parliament is made here and we shall make it - I will just give Members time. So, I would rather say that we allow the Vice President to conclude and then we see how we move.  

(The proceedings were suspended for ten minutes due to a technical problem with the Public Address System)

(On resumption_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have been advised by our technical staff operating our PA system, that these problems which we have had - we had the same problem yesterday and today - are caused by us when we press those buttons when you have not been given the opportunity to contribute. The moment you press them two, three or four times, the the system is strained and then these problems are caused. So, I would advise you that you only press the button when you have been given the Floor.  We proceed.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: I would like to really ask that the Colleagues do listen before they come to conclusions, because there are times when people get up here ...

(The House was adjourned due to technical problems with the Public Address system)
