Tuesday, December 17 2002

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
.
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to report to you and the entire House the nasty experience I passed through just a few minutes ago at the main gate. I support the idea that there should be maximum security in this very important institution of Government to which I am a member.  

When I reached the gate, I stopped. The policeman at the gate used a machine to check the car which I was driving. I identified myself to him, and he is a familiar face to me. However, I do not know whether it was the Parliamentary Commission that came up with this kind of security check! A Member of Parliament has to even open his or her car boot and bonnet for the police to see what that person is carrying.  

Mr Speaker, if the institution I serve cannot have confidence in me, then where else do I expect to be accorded respect? It is like passing through a military roadblock. I am not a Palestinian who prepares himself to go and blow himself up for reasons best known to him.  

The funny thing about it is that when I entered here, many members reported to me that they were actually not told to open their car boots. Why was it specifically Alex Onzima to open his boot? Is it because I belong to –(Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: I would like to inform hon. Onzima that when I was coming into the parliamentary premises, my car was also checked, and the boot was opened. 

Secondly, I want to assure you that because of security, even the American Ambassador’s car is checked when going into the Embassy premises. So I think that for purposes of security, we should accept and be conscious about our safety. (Applause).

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I drove in directly behind hon. Onzima, who is giving that information. I waited for a while, and he was not moving. The policeman knocked on the bonnet of the car alerting him to open it, and I did not know it was hon. Onzima. I thought it was a stranger who does not know our procedure. So, I had to leave my car and walk to the driver, who turned out to be hon. Onzima. 

I said, “Honourable, can you cool down and open your boot?” He was really upset, and so what I did; I told my driver - because I was waiting behind his car - that, “you drive away.” And I walked to Parliament. I left him there.  

It was a bad experience for him as he puts it, but at the same time we need to be responsible as Members of Parliament. Even if you are a member of the diplomatic corps, you must be checked while entering here. That is a security check.

MR ONZIMA: Yes, but the point I am raising is: why does this apply to certain members and not to all of us? If it had happened to every person then I would probably have no problem with this. But to be frank with you, I need an explanation as to why I was singled out from among other people, to have my bonnet checked.  

There were several vehicles that I saw ahead of me which were not checked. So it appears there is some kind of segregation. Mr Speaker, I need your help and guidance, otherwise I am not happy about the way the inspection is being carried out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just heard what happened to you. I cannot right away give you an answer. I would need to be briefed by the people concerned with security checks to find out what happened, and the circumstances that were prevailing, to be able to give you an explanation. Thank you very much.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a separate point. A couple of minutes ago I passed through that checkpoint without hassle. I was from the Prime Minister’s Office with many of my colleagues.  

The information I have is that the four million Euros granted by the European Union as part of the Acholi programme is currently being utilised well on the ground. However, I raise this particular issue because the Kalangala Action Plan has taken over their office based in Gulu. The officer in charge, Fabius Okello, is already on the run. Mr Speaker, when a desperate region like Acholi gets such funds and their offices are surprisingly relocated to the Kalangala Action Plan and the Joint Command Council, it becomes very unfortunate. It is unfortunate to see such established institutions, with their organs for the delivery of services, go to the streets.  

I now beg the Ministers in charge of the Presidency and Disaster Preparedness in Northern Uganda, under which this programme directly run, to at least explain this to this august House. 

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. Something ought to be done to save the fate of the millions who are being given a hand by the four million Euros through the European Union Acholi Programme. These people have been thrown out of their office, which is now the resident headquarter of Kalangala Action Plan. All the way from Kalangala to Gulu! Thank you very much.

MR MAFABI NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the order paper and I remember two weeks, ago the Minister of Finance came here and you ordered him to come and tell us about the problem of the awards by court to some companies and individuals. One week has now passed and we are soon to go on recess. Is it normal procedure for the Minister of Finance to make sure that we forget and not be informed of the problems of these awards?  

Secondly, on top of those awards, others are in place. What does the Minister of Finance plan to do about them? That was a question by hon. Omara Atubo. Thank you.

MR ATUBO OMARA: Mr Speaker, it is true the question was supposed to be answered by the Minister after one week. Indeed when I saw the Minister last week, he assured me that the answer was ready, and he was even ready to give me an advance copy. I did ask the clerk, who is sitting there, and he assured me that this week the question would be put on the order paper.  

This question is unique because it was on the order paper some time back and the minister simply asked for more time to be given to him to prepare. It is not something new. So, I want to support my colleague, hon. Mafabi. This question may go stale and the sooner it is put on the order paper the better.

There was another question on the policemen who were killed, and their due benefits. When I saw the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Madam Kiyingi, she also assured me that the answer was ready and she was only waiting for it to be put on the order paper. Again the clerk assured me last week that it will be on the order paper this week, or today for that matter. If we go on recess, as I suspect we are going to do this week - and we come back as early as late January or February - these questions may be too stale to be of any use. So I urge that the questions be put on the order paper within this week. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Last week when we were debating the Human Rights report, I raised a matter of concern. While we are exporting food worth US $15 million from this country, there are certain Ugandans or people in this country who are dying of hunger. 

I also expressed concern that certain companies seem to be enjoying unnecessary and uncalled for favours from the State, what in political euphemism we call state intervention for export promotion.  

Mr Speaker, thirty people from Karamoja, who had left their place of domicile to go to Mbale to look for survival, died. And they were buried in a mass grave. A number of people in Karamoja are surviving on the WFP handouts. My question is, why is it that through the state intervention for export promotion certain companies, which happen to have serious connections with State House, are enjoying Shs 9 billion in form of a grant to export food, which is much needed for Ugandans dying of hunger? We were assured that the Minister for Trade and Industry would make a statement in this House about that. 

This afternoon I note with great pleasure that we are honoured with the presence of the Minister of State for Trade and the Minister for the Presidency. Could they elaborate on this situation whereby we are exporting food while Ugandans are dying of hunger? There are certain companies getting free money from the state by virtue of their connections to State House.  

PROF. EDWARD RUGUMAYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to thank the honourable member for having raised the question. I am not in position to answer it. Why? Because there are various statements, which requires substantiation and therefore I have to do some research on that. I thank you.

MS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise to seek your guidance on an issue, which was stayed by you in your wisdom. This was in respect to the debate on the Election Violence Report.  

My neighbour, learned brother and colleague, raised the issue of subjudice but as we sit here today, I am aware that the two substantive cases; the one of Winnie Babihuga Vs Winnie Masiko and that of honourable minister Amama Mbabazi Vs Musinguzi, have been concluded. Therefore, I would like to seek your guidance as to when this House will have the opportunity to debate this very important report. (Applause). Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, as I told you, it was not me who raised the matter of subjudice. I preside over the debate. You read reports and debate them and pronounce yourselves on them. I only chair the meetings.  

As you realise, because the chairman of the committee admitted that the report was tainted with matters that are subjudice, I ruled that we stay the matter. I did not seek details and therefore I do not know whether the matters were only concerned with the two cases you mentioned, or the other matters. Since this was an admission by the committee, you will advise me and I will review the decision accordingly. 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I think the issues raised by hon. Awori are very serious. The Minister for Industry and Trade should take the trouble to clear the air before we go for recess, which I understand is around the corner. 

Secondly, I am the vice chairperson of the committee that investigated election violence. I note that my colleague, the chairperson of that committee, is not here. I will advise him to come to the House and substantiate this statement so that this House pronounce itself on that report.  

My third point, Mr Speaker, is a housekeeping matter. I have been watching with great interest the repairs of the lifts in the North Wing, and I was made to understand that the repairs were completed. I am surprised that the lifts are not working.  

After inquiring, I have been advised that they need a stabilizer. I wondered why the repairs continued for over three or more months and people did not think of the need for a stabilizer. The need for a stabilizer arises after the inspector of factories has looked at the lift and the person to advise Parliament on the need for a stabilizer is the lift operator. I just do not understand this. It makes many of us who need the services of a lift to suffer having to climb high stairs.  

To access your office, Mr Speaker, one has got to climb five storeys. I think this is not right and it is not fair. There are many people who are not disabled but are elderly and sick. They need the services of a lift. I just do not understand why the lifts in the North Wing have been held up to this time. I do not know how long it takes Parliament to get a stabilizer. As I say this it appears there is no member of the commission here, yet I think they should have listened to this and given us an explanation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: From the account which you have given, I think an independent contractor has been working on those lifts. It was within his knowledge - after he had done what he did - that there is need for a stabilizer. So the question is; why did he take that long? The Commission may not really be able to answer for an independent contractor. 

What we shall do, however, is to look into this matter so that a remedy is provided. We shall take steps to ensure that lifts are used.  

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a request to the minister responsible for the CMI. They arrested Vincent Matovu from my constituency three weeks ago. He has never seen the rooms of a court. Not only that, but at intervals he is fetched and taken to the headquarters of that unit for caning. I do not know how many punishments he will receive if he is taken to court. Will he again be imprisoned, after such continuous caning?  

My application goes to the minister concerned. The Constitution allows for 48 hours custody before producing a man before court. When it gets to three weeks, then the presumption is that there is no minister assisting the public. We are not living in an emergency situation. Why should a poor man like him be turned into a horse for caning? Every time when they feel that they want to beat up somebody, they fetch him from the CPS. 

This habit of putting people in CPS just for storage purposes is not provided for in our laws. If they hand him over to the police, let them hand him over to the Police completely so that the Police take the responsibility of inquiry and finding out whether there is a case to be answered.  

We have so many small units, which are really torturing the public. I do not know what the Government is thinking about them, and it appears they are given so much power. I am told that some of these people die from the CMI and this is really embarrassing for a state like this one, which we consider to be a democratic state.  

Not only that, but we have so many judges who could handle these cases. Probably this is because some of the Government units are considering the judges to be dishonest. I would be happy to see that this man is taken to court. If they give him a punishment of life imprisonment, then we shall know that there has been a trial, at least. Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the person hon. Nsambu is referring to was mentioned last week in this House. Hon. Muruli Mukasa, on behalf of Government, admitted that they had kept Vincent Matovu somewhere. This is a good indicator that Government is accepting that it has safe houses where it is keeping people.  

Vincent Matovu is feeling unwell, he cannot access medical care, and he is encircled as if he killed somebody. He is just a mere editor of a newsletter “With a DP voice”. Why are you keeping him incommunicado? This voice we are raising, with my colleague hon. Nsambu, is to urge Government to produce Vincent Matovu in a court of law. If he has any case to answer, he will answer it. We are worried about his life! If he dies in the cell this will be a serious matter.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Nankabirwa Sentamu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I have noted the concern of hon. Nsubuga Nsambu who is worried about his constituent. I was not aware myself about one Matovu, who is in Makindye. 

I want to request hon. Nsambu to liase with me - because when he contributed he addressed himself to the minister in charge of the CMI. CMI is under the UPDF. So, I request that I liase with the honourable member so that I can be in a better position to advise him.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues in this House that as Members of Parliament, you face a number of cases like hon. Nsubuga and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s. In my constituency in Otuke, because of the war situation, I have quite a number of civilians being arrested and detained by soldiers. 

When you are a Member of Parliament and a politician and you are faced with this type of situation, you have three options. The first option is this political step, which hon. Nsambu has tried to use by going to the minister, the Police and the Government organs. That one, in my experience, tends to be slow and rather unsuccessful.

The other two steps, which I have used, are much faster. One; you go to the Human Rights Commission immediately. They do have the legal power, under the Constitution and under the law that governs them, to deal with this matter expeditiously. Within less than a week they could even have this person released.

The second, as hon. Nsambu knows, for he is a lawyer, is to use the application of habeas corpus in court. I have done it in my own case, and even today in the High Court in Kampala, I applied for habeas corpus for a person in my constituency called Paul Opuno. It is miscellaneous application number 143 of this year in the High Court in Kampala. 

The person was arrested on the 7th of October in Otuke on the allegation of collaborating with rebels. He is a civilian, a grade three teacher and he has disappeared into one of the barracks in Lira. Nobody knows where he is. I have applied to the High Court for habeas corpus. He is fixed for appearance on the 7th of January, in Lira. The judge is going there for that case and we shall see what happens next.

So, rather than using this political pressure of going to beg a minister or somebody else involved in the arrest of this person, try to use these two other people. (Laughter).  Thank you.

MR ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the point of the situation in Karamoja. I am requesting the Government to act very fast to assist the people of Karamoja. The situation is very alarming and it is jeopardizing the lives of people. The papers reported that 30 have died so far. These are the few who had managed to walk on foot up to Mbale. Otherwise the community as whole is moving away. Many are going to Kenya, and others are now trying to go the neighbouring district. 

Last week, the Minister gave the impression that Government is assisting the Karimojong. This is a project, which is funded by WFP to assist school children and also the organisation of Sisters of Charity in Moroto are feeding children in the centres, but the masses at large are on the run. For three years, we have never had any rain. This is the situation that is very alarming. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I kindly request the Government to come in and assist the people of Karamoja as an emergency. Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I must congratulate you for leading us this far, and I understand we are about to go for the Christmas recess very soon. 

My problem remains standard, and my people of Bulamogi are not sharing in the national cake at all. Even the little that is there can still be shared. I have very many times stood up in this House and shouted hoarse to the Prime Minister hoping that he will wake up and listen to the problems of Bulamogi. It appears we are not being heard -(Interjections)- it is a pity if I am eventually overwhelmed by the people of Bulamogi and they have -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to inform my honourable friend that among areas, which are sufficiently endowed with such resources, is his area. It has a whole Vice President, Dr Speciosa Naigaga; it has the Deputy Speaker, the Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga, it has the Chairman of Public Service -(Laughter)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I do not think it is part of our practice to be irrelevant. The honourable member who was on the Floor was talking about his constituency. Is the honourable member in order to engage this House in irrelevancies that are in no way connected with what the member on the floor was advancing?

MR SPEAKER: Order! Order! I just want to stop the hon. Member for Lubaga South because hon. Gagawala Wambuzi had not developed his point, so I did not see how somebody would give information on something that had not been made clear. I was following him and I think he is talking about his district. 

He also wants to break away from Kamuli District to have his own district. That is the district he was talking about. He was not talking about Busoga but he was talking about getting a district. So that information was not helpful. (Mr Isoke rose_)Yes, what is it?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, it is not about Kibaale, it is about the Karamoja region.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are not receiving this centralized service and we see things passing us continuously, year in year out. It is very important that I, as a Member of Parliament for Bulamogi, air what is hurting my people.

What is hurting my people is that they expected that as soon as His Excellency the President became President - on this particular term - he would pronounce Bulamogi a district. The last budget was passed, no good news. This budget has been passed and it is now left with six months, no good news. But the situation is coming to panga level. People are almost getting to the point where they want to cut each other up with pangas because they are not seeing a way forward on this.

Mr Speaker, I am asking that the Prime Minister -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have really followed your concern, not only today but also on many other occasions in the past. I think what you have to do is to get familiar with the provisions of the Constitution. See how a district is carved out of another district, because currently there is the district of Kamuli and you want to carve your district of Bulamogi from the district of Kamuli. 

The procedure is well laid down in the Constitution and in the Local Governments Act. You may start with resolutions from your district. The present district of Kamuli must get involved and they agree that another district be curved out of it, then the resolution will state that. However, this Parliament may not be of use to you at this moment. It will only come in when the minister comes here, after the process has been completed down there, so that we make a resolution and authorize the creation of the new district.

So what you should do is to work with those concerned in Kamuli, Bulamogi and the Ministry of Local Government, and then the issue will come up. I do not see what assistance we can really give you here. You go on advocating for the creation of this district, but use the stakeholders down there.  

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you for the advice, Mr Speaker. I think there is need for the Committee on Government Assurances - because the people want to be assured that they are getting services –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The President cannot just come up and say, “I have created district so and so”; he cannot. He must also follow the steps given. You are assuming that sometimes the President says, “If this is your request, we shall grant it.” But the process has to be followed. So I advise that you follow the process and then we shall give you support. I think these members will give you support.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have a short piece of information to give him. He says the people of Bulamogi are shouting themselves hoarse; they will continue doing it until their voices go. We have already told him that he went through the procedure but the district is not in position to be granted. The position is that much as their people have gone through the proper procedure, the Ministry of Local Government is in no position now, or in the near future, to grant the district and the reasons are there.  

He is complaining of the decentralized services. The money has been going in, but then it is a problem of the leadership. It is the voters who are voting the wrong people into power. Therefore, the services are not going to them and we have told him so, and that is it. They are not going to get that district now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us end this debate. Let us hear the minister on the Karamoja issue.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, I want to respond to the Member for Bokora County, Moroto District, concerning the food situation in Karamoja and the delivery of other services. 

As Government goes to the rescue of the people living in Karamoja, my ministry is concerned with the delivery of water in Karamoja, in particular the excavation of valley dams and tanks. Our teams have withdrawn because the population has become hostile to the contractors. I want to use this chance to request my colleagues, especially the hon. Pirir Samuel, to talk to the people to allow the contractors –(Interruption)

MR ABURA PIRIR: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. Yes, the project for tendering dams in Karamoja was done in a way that the people did not appreciate it. One; the contractors went there on their own. They left the site, which the people had proposed and they did sub-standard work for only one week and they came back. 

In Matheniko the two dams they attempted to construct in the first rains were all washed away. So the people are really protesting. Why is the Government wasting money, Shs 700 million per dam and nothing is on the ground? To prove this, let us go on the ground and see what was done. The Government just goes there, gives a tender to somebody who works for seven days and comes back. Thus people are really saying that money is wasted for no project in place.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 42 of  2002 to the Minister in charge of the Presidency:

Lt. Col Katirima (Army Representative) :The National Honours and Awards Act which established the following among other things:

(a) A Presidential Awards Committee
(b) A chancery
(c) A Chancellor etc.
Was assented to almost one and a half years ago and has since then not been implemented.

(i) When are these institutions to be put in place to implement the Act?

(ii) When are potential winners expected to receive their awards, decorations, medals and orders as per the law established?

(iii) What will happen to the would-be winners who have fallen/died at different times since the colonial period?

(iv) Who are the potential winners of the awards, decorations, medals and orders?

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. It is the National Honours and Awards Act 2001, which was assented to by His Excellency the President on June 2001.  

The act provides for the creation of the Presidential Awards Committee, the chancery and the recognition of titles, honours and decorations.  

Mr Speaker, as to whether the institutions have been put in place, the operationalisation of the institutions has already been started. I have had consultations with my colleagues and in turn we have already presented to His Excellency the President proposals for the members to be on the committee, and also two names for the possible chancellor.  

As I speak today, we are in the process of appointing the chancellor, and the names of members to be on the Presidential Awards Committee are being considered by the President.

Mr Speaker, suffice to say here that in spite of the operationalisation of the institutions, the President, under this act, can continue under advice to give medals to those distinguished sons and daughters of this country. This can be regularized as soon as the committee is in place.

As to when potential winners will be awarded these medals, very soon the chancery will be in place and the awarding process will start. 

As to what will happen to those gallant colleagues who have either died or fallen during the process, under section 18(i), the President is vested with the discretionary authority, exercised through statutory instrument, to make regulations prescribing for all matters reasonably necessary for the purpose of the Act. Post humus awards are such a matter, which will be accorded due attention.

Who are the potential winners of these awards? According to the schedule of the act there are two categories of people who can access these awards. One, civilians who can be decorated and given medals in all fields in this country. Two are those military decorations and medal awards, which can be given to either fallen comrades, or gallant soldiers who are still alive.

I want to take this opportunity to thank very much hon. Katirima for raising this very important question. I hope we shall continue working with him in order to see that this important phenomenon is operationalized. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourableMinister for the answer he has given. I would like to seek further clarification from him basing on section 16 of the Act, which states that the funds of the chancellery, which the honourable minister is talking about, to be established shall consist of: 

(a) Funds as may be appropriated by Parliament 
(b) Gifts, etc.

I would like to know from the honourable minister whether he has made arrangements for the funds of this chancellery. When is it to be established bearing in mind that we are now in December and the financial year would just end in about six months from now. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is almost 17 years since these civilians in Luwero and elsewhere participated in the struggle to bring about the sanity in this country that all of us are enjoying today. These civilians who took part in the struggle are dying, much as the minister has said that those fallen gallant soldiers and civilians can be awarded. But it is more pleasing when you actually get your award while still alive. Could the minister tell this House and the nation where the delay is? For example in Nalubale there are about 2000 in the store somewhere. When are they going to be given out? 

MR MICHEAL MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for attempting to respond to this very important question. 

There are many concerns in the public about the criteria of awarding these decorations, medals and orders. In the past most of these awards had gone to ex-combatants who participated in the Luwero bush war. You are aware that it was not only the National Resistance Army, a rebel movement that participated in this liberation war. There were other forces for example FEDEMO, Uganda Freedom Movement (UFM) and the other movement called UNRF lead by Gen. Moses Ali. (Laughter). 

Apparently, the orders and decorations seem to be lopsided. They have only gone to those veterans who participated only on one side. The question is: are there any plans to decorate Brig. Gen. Moses Ali who contributed to that war effort? 

Secondly, the leader of the Uganda Freedom Movement died one year after the National Resistance Movement captured power. No one mentions him in the struggle to liberate Uganda. Has Government got any plans to recognize and award the late Dr Andrew Lutakome Kayiira for his contribution towards liberating Uganda? 

Lastly, are there any plans to also award the late leader of FEDEMO, Mr Nkwanga –(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform you that somehow it appears it is not only the Nkwanga’s and UFMs who have been left out. There is a substantial force that liberated this part of the country from Eastern Uganda, called Zanzasi Task Force, and another one called –(Interjections)- do not force words into my mouth, please. There is another force, which was called Elgon 13 all these ones –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not really modify the question to include all the others so that we get a full answer?
  
MR KIBAALE WAMBI: The question is that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If he answered him then I think the answer would go to any other organisation that ought to be recognised.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was additional. Many forces that liberated this country have not been recognised, like the ones I have mentioned. Thank you.

MR MABIKKE: Finally, Mr Speaker, I think all Ugandans would be interested in having all the gallant sons of Uganda recognised and awarded medals. In addition, we want those people I have mentioned, the ex-NRA combatants, to be awarded. I think that Government must start thinking seriously about awarding illustrious sons of Uganda like Milton Obote, Benedict Kiwanuka and all the other gallant Ugandans who have contributed to the well being and building of Uganda. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see, with supplementary questions, we are not debating the issue.

MR TOM BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the question on the floor about awards and honours. However, I have a query, which I think the House should consider. It is about Parliament and Cabinet. Ever since His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni came to power, I have never heard of a ceremony honouring a minister or a Member of Parliament. I wonder whether honours and awards are for people who carry the barrel! Politicians never contribute. As a Member of Parliament, I am requesting that the award and honour, which may befit us -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I was at Kololo the other day when they honoured Wapakabulo, and he is a minister and a politician. So, politicians and ministers have been honoured. Thank you.

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member may not be very much informed. We are politicians but in many combats. He does not know Mr Wapakabulo very much. What I am saying is that for us as Members of Parliament, after finishing our term of office, if we can be exempted from paying graduated tax -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, only answer the questions.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Hon. Katirima wondered whether we have funds. Yes, although we are speeding up the process of putting the chancery in place, because of the budgetary constraints, we shall be budgeting for this activity in the next financial year. However, we have also examined the possibility of going in for a supplementary should the financial situation improve.

Hon. Kayongo, 17 years of ending the struggle in Luwero and people were dying and they have not yet had their medals. As I said, this Act is very clear. Even before it was put in place, you could award medals and many people have got the medals. So I think that in the next ceremony, some medals will be awarded, especially those that were not awarded previously.  

As to hon. Mabikke, people are concerned about the criteria for awarding the medals. I want to make it absolutely clear that the law does not only limit itself to first of all awarding combatants, but also civilians who have excelled. I think they are many who have excelled in their fields that need to be recognised.

As to who should be awarded medals, this is being normalised. There shall be a committee to which proposals of who to award will be going. I would ask hon. Mabikke that when that time comes, let him nominate as many of the people he has mentioned here so that they are considered for being exceptionally very good and therefore awarded the medals.

Hon. Bagalana, well, I think Members of Parliament and politicians also fall in a category. If they have done very well in their field, they could be awarded. But as far as tax is concerned, Mr Speaker, I have no comment. Thank you very much.

Question 50 of 2002 to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): The Industrial Court was established under section 4 of the Trades Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act Cap. 200 Laws of Uganda to help in the resolution of labour disputes. Section 25(3) of this Act states that ‘Any expenses incurred in carrying this Act into effect shall be paid out of the Consolidated fund.’ It is therefore clear that any expenditure of the Industrial Court qualifies to be classified as ‘statutory expenditure’ of Government.

Unfortunately, the Minister responsible for Finance has refused to respect the law and continues to treat the funding of the Industrial Court as a simple budget expenditure matter, which has resulted in insufficient and intermittent disbursement of funds to the Industrial Court making it inefficient. For example, all monies that have been voted in Financial Year 2002/03, for office expenses and allowances of the Industrial Court panellists and support staff, have been frozen. This means that the court cannot sit at all during the remaining period this financial year.

Could the honourable minister clarify the following to the House:

(i) Could he state whether he is a law abiding public officer? If yes, why has he in the performance of his duties refused to charge the expenses of the Industrial Court on the Consolidated Fund as required by the relevant law?

(ii)Is he ready and willing to cause the reinstatement of the frozen budget to the industrial court?

(iii) Is he ready to ensure that henceforth all expenses of the industrial court are paid out from the consolidated fund?

(iv)Is he aware that the incessant breach of section 25(3) of the Trades Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, brings him under the purview of Article 118 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the honourable member for asking this important question. I wish to say that this question would not have arisen if there were no misconception on the interpretation of the law. This is in regard to section 25(3) of the Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act Cap 200 of the laws of Uganda.

Apparently, the Ministry of Finance thought that when there is a provision that money would be paid out of the consolidated fund that does not necessarily constitute a charge on the consolidated fund. That was the understanding of the Ministry of Finance. Therefore the Ministry of Finance treated such payments like any other salaries and allowances, which can be adjusted.

I only noticed the mistake this afternoon, when in compliance with our Rules of Procedure I gave my answer to hon. Martin Wandera. He brought to my notice an interpretation from the Solicitor General whereby that clause was interpreted to say that that provision really constitutes an express provision. The payment is a statutory payment.

In other words my answer was rather misconceived also. I wish to apologise for that. I have told the honourable member that in light of that development I have to get a new approach. It is unfortunate that the contents of this letter from the Solicitor General were never brought to our attention. I do not know for what reason. In light of that development, allow me to answer these questions as follows: 

The question is whether the Minister of Finance is a law abiding public officer? Definitely. The answer is yes. We are very much law abiding officers.

The second question was whether we are willing to cause the re-instatement of the frozen budget of the Industrial Court. First of all I wish to state that the budget was not frozen. However, I understand that there were some re-allocations that reduced it downwards, which would not have been the case if there were no misinterpretation of the law.  

While I regret the misinterpretation of the law, I wish to state that at this juncture, it may be rather difficult to reinstate the budget to its lawful status as a charge on the Consolidated Fund and therefore a statutory payment. But I undertake that next financial year, that court will be accorded its proper status.

As for what will happen to the amount that was passed by Parliament, my answer is that subject to the availability of resources and to our interacting with the line ministry, we shall see to it that provision is made in this budget to enable the Industrial Court to operate efficiently.

The other question was whether we are ready to ensure that expenses of the Industrial Court are paid out from the Consolidated Fund. In light of the express interpretation of the Attorney General, we have no alternative but to abide by the law. And with effect from next financial year, we shall have this vote charged on the Consolidated Fund.

The last one was whether I was aware that breach of section 25(3) of the Trades Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act brings me under the purview of Article 118. Yes, I am very much aware. I wish to say that in the execution of our duties, we know that if we do not comply with the law, that provision could be applied to us. 

But as I said earlier, we are law abiding. While we do not do anything unlawful, we do everything in good faith. And we know that if we depart from that practice, provisions of Article 118 could be evoked against us. So, whatever we do, we have them in mind and we consider them. But of course we are not fearful of the provisions. So, honourable members, Mr Speaker, I regret the misinterpretation of the law and I undertake that this vote will be put in its proper perspective. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. First of all, I would like to say that it is true I had a discussion with the minister before, when he gave me his response. Being a wise man, he realised he was heading for big trouble, because technically he found me in “V formation”. And if he had entered my ambush, it would have been a nasty experience.  

However, I wish to say that it is not true that the Ministry of Finance was not aware of the proper interpretation of section 25(3). The minister agrees with me that the Solicitor General addressed the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and Planning, who is also Secretary to the Treasury, on the 24 August 2001. So a year later, for the ministry to say that they had misconceived the meaning of this section, I think is not to take this House and the advice of the Solicitor General seriously. 

I would like to get the assurance of the minister that this time the ministry is going to keep with the provisions of the law, and in particular with the advice of the Solicitor General.

The other question is, in circumstances where your officers mislead you - they have information and they choose to tell you what they want - are you going to take disciplinary action against them? Will you advise this House about what steps you are going to take when an officer has information and he misleads you?

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also share the concern that the hon. Member for Workers has expressed. Drawing from this situation, I wish to be educated about Government’s operations. For instance as the situation appears to be now, a whole department has not been operational for a whole financial year. How will the situation of redress come in? 

Are we going to have the operations of this financial year carried into the following financial year so that funds are given to this department? I want to find out.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you very much, hon. Martin Wandera. Definitely, as to what action to take on the officer who gives misleading interpretations, it all depends on whether that misleading information was deliberate. As I told you, the officer may not have been a lawyer. If we however find that he deliberately misled, there are remedies under the Public Service Regulations that can be evoked. I will investigate that. But of course I do not have any reason, whatsoever, to think that the officer could have misled the minister deliberately.

As for what will happen to the operations of the department, first of all I want to say that the department has not been un-operational. It has been operating but on a minimal level because, as I said, the resources it was allocated were readjusted downwards. In that event, we cannot undo what has already been done. We shall just hope that if we reinstate its proper budgetary perspective it will be able to carry on its work. If it has any backlog, it will be able to fulfil its mandate in the next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: The question has been disposed of. There was a matter, which was raised by hon. Otto, and I understand the minister was –(Interruption)

MS SSENTONGO NABULYA: I have further clarification, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On the question of the Consolidated Fund?

MS SSENTONGO NABULYA: Yes, Sir. Thank you very much. I want to get proper clarification from the honourable minister in regard to the support staff who have been working all along with no pay. There is no worker who goes to get employment and works for no salary at all. You are just promising, but we must be assured about what will happen to their salaries and other remunerations attached to their benefits as workers of the Industrial Court?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I know as a fact that whatever the readjustments they have not at all affected the wages and salaries of the employees of the Industrial Court. They have been paid their salaries and –(Interruption)

MR MARTIN WANDERA: I think the minister had started very well by conceding that there was a mistake. In our informal discussion these are some of the things that were put to him. My colleague is not lying; it is true. The support staff are working without any salaries. There is even no provision for rent for the Industrial Court. So, these are serious matters and should be treated as such. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, salaries and wages are entitlements. If it is true they have not been paid, definitely they constitute arrears, which will have to be paid.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME (Mr Agard Didi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to answer a question raised by hon. Otto of Aruu County about the presence of Kalangala Action Plan in the offices of the European Union. The offices referred to are the offices of the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme in Gulu.  

It is true that the Acholi Programme, which is housed there, is funded by the European Union. Members will recall a statement last week attributed to the press, with a caption, “Kalangala Action Plan storms…” and it depicted Maj. Kakooza Mutale walking to Gulu. Given these days of El Nino and the rains, it is possible that this Kalangala Action group found themselves in our offices. You know Shakespeare says, “Misery acquaints a man with strange bed fellows” so naturally, we could not throw them out.  

We have got communication to the effect that they are still occupying these premises, and we have written to them saying that we hope this is temporary. These offices are required for housing the new project, which is Northern Uganda Social Selection Fund, due to start early next year. They will be based on these premises. So I am going there on Friday. If they are still there, we shall see how to negotiate. I thank you. We shall try to get them out.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE MINING BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to present the Mining Bill, 2002 for First Reading. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the certificate?

MRS SYDA BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the certificate was attached to the copy that was sent to the clerk.  It is available.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a copy?

MRS BBUMBA: Unfortunately I did not come with one, but it is available in the clerk’s office.

THE SPEAKER: Well, why do we not believe her? The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE NOTES WITH APPRECIANTION THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 21ST NOVEMBER 2002 BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT REGARDING THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY IN GENERAL AND NOTHERN UGANDA IN PARTICULAR

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand to move a motion that this House notes will great appreciation the address delivered to Parliament on Thursday the 21st of November, 2002 by His Excellency the President, regarding the security situation in this country general and in Northern Uganda in particular. I beg to move.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, according to the order paper, this motion is supposed to be moved by the hon. Minister of Defence. I am wondering if there has been a Cabinet reshuffle -(Laughter)- and hon. Bukenya moved from the Presidency to Ministry of Defence. Could we be clarified? He has not given any background as to why he is moving this motion. 

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, there was no reshuffle. I am simply standing in for the Minister of Defence.

THE SPEAKER: Could you speak to your motion, please?

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, first of all I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President for giving us a detailed account of the security situation in Uganda, especially issues of security in the north.  

The situation in the north, as regards security, is a very important one. It requires all of us to work together and solve this issue once and for all. I was very grateful that the President could share his views on this issue with us in Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, the President touched on a number of issues in as far as security was concerned.   Indeed he ably elaborated on the rebel activities in Uganda since 1986, and the genesis of these activities. He also gave us a very extensive explanation on the Kony war and how it differs from the other rebel activities. He pointed out the barbaric actions that Kony has inflicted on the people of northern Uganda. 

He also brought in an element of the security threat from our neighbouring countries, which I think was so crucial, because as we make decisions in this House we need to definitely know how our neighbours work with us. 

I was particularly interested in the factors that he perceived led to a number of rebel activities in Uganda. First of all, the continued support of Kony, including support by Sudan then, who gave a safe rear base to Kony. He also mentioned that these rebel activities have persisted because of the poor road infrastructure, particularly in Acholi land. He did mention programmes by Government to address the issue of the road infrastructure.

Mr Speaker, he also pointed out the mistakes that have been committed by some of our commanders, particularly in the northern region. This is an issue, which I thought was very crucial, because sometimes when you admit to mistakes of your own it is easier to address them. 

The major issue that was mentioned was the under spending on defence on our part, and indeed he gave a number of examples of different countries that spend money on defence, as per their GDP. It was very clear that our expenditure on defence was far below the requirement based on the situation in which we are.

He also mentioned, at length, the difficulties in the terrain in Acholi land and how it has affected the fighting of rebel activities out there. 

I was particularly gratified with the fact that there was mention of a strategic call for national defence and security, in which even our own partners in development have been involved, particularly in making sure that our defence and defence requirements are not a cocoon defence system but will be open to scrutiny by not only ourselves but also our development partners.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the need to spend more money for the security of our country cannot be underestimated. Therefore, as we debate this particular address to Parliament, we need to also consider how we can support Government in increasing expenditure for defence in order to strengthen our capacity and capability for both internal and external aggression.  

I would like to sit and hear more from my honourable colleagues, because this is a very important topic of discussion. I want to rest my case here.

MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion for bringing it. But I note that the motion differs from what the President spoke about.  The President spoke about the security situation of Uganda. I wonder why the mover found it necessary to talk about the security situation in the country in general and Northern Uganda in particular? The intention was to talk about security in Uganda in general. But I think I know the reason why. After reading the speech, even the minister found out that in the whole speech, the stress was on the north in particular. I think there is reason for that, and it is understandable. 

I would also have been more pleased if the whole situation in the country was actually dealt with in greater detail. I appreciate the emphasis that was put on the north, but I note that we did not get sufficient explanation about the situation in Karamoja, for example. This is an area where we always hear about cattle rustling, but we did not get sufficient explanation as to the state of security in that area now. 

What has happened to this disarmament exercise?  How has it faired? Since that exercise began, how is the situation in that area going to improve? That was not dealt with sufficiently. 

I also have a feeling that besides that military situation, we should talk about internal security as well. There is a situation that developed in Uganda regarding crime, which caused the Government to create Operation Wembley. Crime had reached such a rate that everybody felt threatened, and this body was created. It is more or less an ad hoc organisation. One would have wanted to find out the status of that operation. Is it going to be legalised? Is it temporarily extra-judicial? How successful has it been and for how long is it going to continue in operation?  

One would also have wanted to know what has happened to the people who were arrested under that operation. How are they going to be handled? How will this matter be handled in the end? What lessons have we learnt from that exercise?  

I also feel that in this country we have downplayed the problem of drugs. There is drug abuse and drug trafficking in this country. How is it related to the security of this country? We are in a big problem! The use of mairungi, opium and other narcotic drugs all over the country is going on as if nobody is watching. 

We have perhaps taken little interest in drug trafficking through Entebbe Airport. Once in a while people are arrested but we are in danger now because most of our young men are involved in smoking these drugs, and they are using them openly! When you go out to leisure places or to places of unorthodox employment, the use of drugs is extensive. 

My fear has developed because the issue has deepened. This habit is going into our schools and is affecting our children. The crimes coming out of abuse of drugs are rampant. I cannot forget the incident of that man who got a panga and hacked several children to death because he was using these drugs. What are we doing to handle this situation, because it actually affects our security situation? 

This worries me because it is most likely that our security agents are using them also. If the use is so rampant, what guarantee do we have that the very people we are going to use as our security agents are not using these drugs too? I would have been pleased to see this situation being addressed so that we look at security in a more wholistic way rather than that aspect only. It is important but we should not disregard these other aspects. With these remarks, I plead to associate myself with the remarks of the mover of the motion.

MR ATUBO OMARA (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I also want to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President for addressing Parliament and therefore the whole country on this very important topic of the security situation of Uganda. 

The President’s address was definitely not intended to be a total pronouncement. I am sure that giving us an opportunity to debate it, under rule 34, is intended to enrich that statement, so that together with the President we can make Uganda a happy, stable and secure place to live in.  

I do not believe that it is only the responsibility of the President, the UPDF and the present Government to ensure the security of Uganda, but for all of us. So when I speak, Mr Speaker, I do so as a Ugandan; as a person who is thoroughly interested in peace in this country. I do so as a person who comes from an area that is currently very insecure and has been so for the last sixteen years or so. That is Otuke. It is suffering from the hands of cattle rustlers and because of the rebel activities. Currently, as a Member of Parliament from that area, I cannot even carry out my work.

Mr Speaker, the address of the President starts on a rather fallacious note and also concludes on the same note. It concludes on a mistaken note and when I say this, I really want to be understood. I want to draw the attention of this House to this paragraph. The President wanted to explain the genesis of our crisis and he says this on page one:
 
“By March 1986, a large number of Uganda soldiers of the Uganda People’s Congress dictatorship that had been finally defeated entered Sudan with six helicopters and about 11,000 pieces of other weapons”. 

Mr Speaker, I want us to be truthful to this country. I want us to be analytical because this is going on record; our children are going to read it.  There are those who were born after 1986. They need to know the truth and I think it is the responsibility of a person holding the highest office in this country, the President, to give us the correct history and analysis.  

In 1986 there was no such a thing as a UPC having an army. There was no such a thing as the UPC army being defeated and there was no such thing as UPC dictatorship entering Sudan with 11,000 soldiers and six helicopters. I am sure what the President meant was that the Tito Okello regime at that time, with the remnants of the UNLA, was finally defeated and did enter Sudan. But to try to tie that statement to UPC! However much the President detests UPC and Obote, I think he’s got to tell the truth to the nation and to us. I therefore, stand here in my own right to correct this statement.  

Mr Speaker, the President seems to think and therefore concludes on page 21 that: “Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate that Uganda will create a strategic core capacity that will guarantee peace for its people regardless of the goings on in the region.”  

Possibly because of the nature of our Government and that of the historical NRA/NRM, we tend to be militaristic in our approach to the issue of peace. I am one of those who believe that as long as you approach the issue of peace in a militaristic sense, you are going to create more war.  

The President believes that we should give the Army more money. We have been giving them money since 1986. If you look at our statistics of military expenditure of 1987 and 1988 at the peak of the war, which was covering even a bigger area than Kitgum and Gulu now, we were spending more money. At one time - leaving aside the donations from foreign countries - the budget for defence even went as far as 30 to 40 percent of our national budget. It was very high, much higher than what we are saying now. 

We have been giving the Army enough money. The problem is not money and I would really like this House to take this statement seriously. The issue is not money. The issue lies somewhere else: in the efficiency in the Army, in the manpower in the Army, in corruption. 

You have heard of a military officer disappearing with US $1 million in his handbag. I cannot understand what sort of Government this is. What sort of army is this, which allows an individual to carry US $1 million in a briefcase? A Government! An officer not being guarded; that is lack of accountability and so on. A person disappears with US $1 million and nobody knows what happened! 

You know because of limited time, if we were to come up with statistics, how many paymasters have disappeared from the Army with colossal sums of money? How many have died under mysterious circumstances? It is shocking. I would therefore like this House to go beyond just giving money to the Army and look deeper. 

And in my concluding remarks, the President also did not address the root cause of this war. You see, any doctor will tell you that - even animal doctors like Prof. Kagonyera - will tell you that in treating a disease you must get the cause. We are having problems. Unless we address the root cause of these wars, we are not likely to solve the problem. 

I venture to suggest to this House that one of the root causes of the problem, which even the Movement in their early Ten Point Programme said, is that Uganda’s problems are political. In the book they wrote when they were in the bush, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the NRM say that the problem of Uganda is political. It is not these officers, generals and corporals. 

I have not read it yet, but the National Political Commissar is here. I understand you have now revised the Ten Point programme to the 20 Point Programme. Possibly this political thing is no longer there because you keep on revising these things and updating them. 

If we say we are addressing our war problem militarily, I must advise this House that there will be no peace. Even the Second World War, the First World War, and all other wars in this world that have been fought by simply looking at it in terms of the guns, have been addressed politically. Thus they created the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. All these were terms by the world to end wars. 

Honourable members, unless we look at this issue politically, like respecting fundamental human rights in our Constitution, opening up political space and allowing people to compete, we will not win. For example in Kenya, if the Odingas had been locked out of KANU, and he disagreed with the candidature of Kenyatta, and there was no fallback position for the present opposition leadership, the alternative would have been war. 

But in Kenya today you move from KANU. If KANU does not sponsor you, you move to NAK, if NAK does not sponsor you, you go to all the others, Saba Saba, FODASIRI. If KANU said we are the only Movement in KANU, if we do not sponsor you, you are not our official candidate, what next? You will have a situation where you are locked up, tempers will rise in the country and you will end up with the Kizza Besigye situation. 

So, I thank the President for giving us the opportunity. However, I think this statement is very insufficient. I ask the members to look beyond this. For example there is now this word “terrorism.” It is very current; you can call anything terrorism, it is lovely. If you want to get American aid, if you want Western support, if you want to be their darling; call any group in your country, terrorists; lovely. Kony was never called a terrorist until about two years ago, until the American thing started. We are imitating the rest of the world by calling Kony a terrorist.  

Finally, I want to draw the attention - (Prof. Kagonyera rose_) just hold on, I have very limited time. I want you to read this Iron Fist very carefully. There is this paper or book about it, and this is the first issue. There is a second issue. I want you to read them very carefully and analyse what these army people are saying about the war in the north. I just want to read you page five before I sit. This is the main actor, General Kazini, being interviewed. He has this to say.  

They ask him: When do you think the war will end in the North…?  

He says: “Come December 31st, as I told you, there will be no LRA anymore.”

Interviewer: In summary are you saying that victory is certain?   

Army Commander: “Quite sure of course.  What next will they do with no bases in Uganda, with no bases in Sudan and faced with the vigour of the UPDF to destroy them, this is the end.  They no longer have the abductees.”

They have abducted 1,000 from Otuke in the last month. No recruits! I am saying it is wrong, as they had been deceived to expect Opoka. So what will the LRA be in the next two months? This is December, we are about to go for Christmas, and nothing at all has been done.  This is the sort of statement used when playing with words. People like Kazini should be told to respect their deadline and I hope that he will resign by 31 December this year, so that we have army commanders who can do the work. Thank you very much. I thank the President for his statement.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was almost tempted to move that we are debating a different speech from what His Excellency the President delivered. I have got the official recording in the Hansard of what transpired that day and almost a whole page was left out. In fact I would like to beg your indulgence to seek for clarification from the honourable minister who moved the motion as to why almost a whole page was left out.

THE SPEAKER: Left out where?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Left out of this speech of the President. It is different from what I have in the Hansard. Which one should we debate, the Hansard one or this one?

THE SPEAKER: You debate the Hansard of course, because you are referring to an address made on that day in Parliament. I think the other one was for convenience, but that is the debate we are dealing with.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you Sir, for your clarification. Of course -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: I note, Mr Speaker, in the Hansard of 21 November that hon. Kazoora contributed on this same motion. Is it procedurally correct to go ahead with his contribution when some of us have not said anything?

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a valid observation. I wish I remembered that. But now that I gave him the space, I will just give him three minutes to make whatever contribution he has. 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that on that day there was no debate. You just requested members to put some clarifications and questions. There was no debate at all, and I just put a question.  

Mr Speaker, I wondered what the President wanted Parliament to do with this address. Apart from narrating what has been going on, he did not tell us to do anything. Even in the conclusion I thought he would have said, “because of these four variables I have mentioned, I am requesting Parliament to do the following.” So, up to now I do not know what the President expects Parliament to do. 

If he wanted Parliament to authorise more money for defence expenditure, I would like to refer to page 19 of the booklet. The top of page 19 says: “Fortunately Ugandans are hardworking, the still parasitic international order notwithstanding. When it comes to our security, there is nothing we cannot afford as was shown by the recent Cabinet decision to allocate more money to Defence.”

My point is, Cabinet sat and decided to allocate more money to Defence. And this was my concern in speaking to the President on that day. I said that he has consulted all these groups and finally he remembered Parliament. I thought that as stakeholders and serious citizens we could also have been brought on board, and I do not think we would have refused to do that. But for purposes of institutions working together, that would have been neater.

Also in his speech he is talking of buying more equipment. It is unfortunate hon. Rwakakaira Butime Tom has just walked out. I have always wondered, Mr Speaker, why a leader who has been able to organise a rag tag army from scratch to a national army, an army fit for the sitting Government, to fail to do that all these years! 

I was quoting hon. Butime because we used to be told in those days that you do not need this heavy weaponry to win this kind of war. In Luganda they would say, “ebyo bigoba nkima.” That those just scare off the monkeys, and that what is important are these small riffles where you shoot the person you are aiming at. I do not know if military science has since changed.

Mr Speaker when you look at the variable the President talked about, of the problems in the Sudan, those have changed. Now Sudan has given us the authority. The roads the President is talking about have been done. Money; he saying we can get this money. So what is the problem?

When you talk of terrain, and the commanders on the frontline know, if you are fighting, naturally you must make it extremely difficult for the other side. You cannot make it easy for them. I asked in one workshop that if they talk of bad terrain, the tall grass, the Imatong Mountains, where else do they want to fight from? Do they expect that they are going to fight in Kololo Airstrip? Can that happen in any war situation? It cannot. Certainly any side must make it and we used to make it. 

This is why I am surprised that today the language is actually changing. That is why I probably would like to agree with hon. Atubo that perhaps the problem is not money. I would sincerely be convinced that the problem is not only money but also some other associated evils in the whole situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZAALE (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t worry, this debate will continue even tomorrow.

MRS ZIRABAMUZALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to join others who have already spoken to appreciate the President’s address to Parliament, an address that has enabled many of us to answer questions about the war in the north. A number of times when I go home I am asked about what is happening to the people in Northern Uganda. I had a few clumsy answers but now that I got some more information, which is even written, I have been able to give some answers to the constituents. 

My concern, among others, is the children and women in the Northern region. They have fallen victim to many things during this long war of seventeen years. Children, more especially the girls and women, have been raped, defiled and the eventual result is that they are becoming HIV-AIDS victims. Some others have become pregnant; pregnancies that have no fathers, and therefore we are going to have children who later on are going to become a nuisance to the nation.

This situation calls for an urgent end to the war using whatever methods we shall have decided to use. If a peaceful method is used, that would be great because we will know that less people will be involved in the killings and more people will be saved from the same. 

This war has claimed very many lives of young men and women, who are energetic enough to build Uganda. It is high time we called it a bad war, a very infectious war and we bring it to an end. If it continues we are going to get another war from the spread of HIV-AIDS. This is a war that we have already started fighting and are unable to stop, but when it is combined with the Kony war, those who run from the affected areas will go and join in the areas that seem peaceful and the spread will be too much. What we have already spent on HIV-AIDS is already too much and is not from our pockets but from the pockets of those who come to our aid. I pray that we use every means that we can so that this war is put to an end. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for having taken time and informed the nation about the security situation in Northern Uganda. 

My worry is the utterances always made by people who are in Government. For example after Bamuze and his team sat down with Government officials, Bamuze stated whatever he wanted about what should be done for the rebels to leave the bush. Ofwono Opondo in his office in the Movement Secretariat says Bamuze is not on the ground and he does not know the developments in the area. That means Bamuze is talking out of the blue, he does not know what is in West Nile. 

If Bamuze reads this in the newspapers, on a plane taking him from Kampala back to West Nile after having the talks with Government, this discourages him, I am sure. This discourages the rebels. That means that Bamuze may take Government as not being serious so he could as well go back. 

If Ofwono Opondo, from the Movement Secretariat, sees him as not knowing what is taking place and then Government keeps quiet about it, it says something to him. Government does not also react to tell Bamuze within the very media that, “Please, though Ofwono Opondo said that for us we are still serious with what we talked about.” That also discourages people maybe like Kony to come up and talk.

Another worry is the issue of giving deadlines. I would suggest, if possible, that let the Army officers and the President himself keep the deadlines to themselves and not tell us. To people like me who are not in the Army, seeing our brothers and sisters dying in the North while these people come up to give deadlines and things do not happen as they say, we lose confidence in them. We see them as liars. Today is 17th of December. Kony is still active in Northern Uganda. I do not know what miracle will happen between today and the 31st of December. We will then see what will become of Kazini’s deadline –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you hon. Lumumba for giving way. It is not only about deadlines, but also some hanging statements like “Kony escapes by a whisker.” “Kony’s Kaunda suit captured.” “Opoka trapped in Pader.” What do these statements mean to the public? You say Opoka is trapped in Pader, the following morning you say “Opoka escapes into the Sudan.” It keeps the population suspecting and it is like rumour mongering. Thank you.  

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you for that information. Those words I am sure do not make the community look at those people who say the words as people who are serious. In fact we look at them as people who are taking the war as a hide-and-seek game. If I am looking for Opoka and he is among the rebels and you say he is now trapped here, just get him and bring him. Parade him for people to see that this is the real Opoka. Some of us do not believe it is Opoka. Why do you not get him? 

If you have trapped him, why should he run out of the trap? How can you tell the difference between a Kaunda suit of Kony and that of another person? All men here are putting on suits. If they removed them and put them outside there, unless their wives came, it is only their wives who can identify them. No other person will be able to say this is so and so’s suit.  

The President said that they are not so well conversant with the Imatong Mountains and he said the weather is not always good especially during the rainy season. They are not so conversant with fighting in that tall grass. Mr Speaker, are we going to fight only in the short grass? The President said they will be able to fight Kony in January when it is the dry season so that they can easily move when the ground is not slippery and by March, it will be no more. Are we really going to follow that deadline? This is the head of the nation, the person who is in charge of keeping all of us. If it does not happen, my colleagues, what are you going to tell the people?  

Mr Speaker, insecurity in Northern Uganda brings about conflicts in that area. The President talked about the security situation, how is he going to handle the effects of insecurity in that area? It is a big issue. 

Though my colleague has talked about AIDS, we have the issue of orphans. I know we have the Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation, with an office for the same. But do you really have a programme in place to handle the effects of the war in Northern Uganda? It seems you are looking at the roads and the schools only. How about the people who have been traumatized? You think bringing those people to train them in Luwero is a solution? Is that all?  Do we not need more? 

I suggest that you have a programme to handle those traumatized people. How are you going to manage that big load of orphans? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I wish to thank His Excellency for the address. It was so detailed although some of my colleagues said that some of us had no detailed information on the war in the north.

When I read this Hansard - there are no pages marked but I think it is the presidential address - I find that the variables that His Excellency gave are the factors that have delayed the war. It is in this Hansard! Mr Speaker, I would say he forgot one important thing, which is the support of the local people to these LRA rebels. 

Since NRM came to power we have had so many rebel groups. We have had ADF, we have had insurgency in Teso, we have had Itongwa in the central, and now we have UNRF in West Nile. At least all these groups have been dealt with to a certain extent. But why is it that in the north, and in particular the Gulu sub-region we have had this war that has continued up to this time, 17 years now? I think we should not avoid saying the truth. We should address the problem sincerely. There is nothing I can say but I want us to be serious on the issue. Why do the local people support the LRA, why do they support Kony? 

One colleague said that the problem is political and I think I agree with him. But let His Excellency and the Government address this problem otherwise the rebels will go on until perhaps the end of the Museveni regime. We know the history of the Luwero war. If those people had not supported NRA/NRM, I do not think the war would have been won. But because they supported them it was won. I remember reading the newspaper one time that Museveni was hidden somewhere on the roof of a house, Obote’s men came but he survived because Lutamaguzi shielded him. This is the same thing in the north. We have to address this problem. 

Another issue, they tell us that in the north there are no –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are comparing the situation in Luwero with the situation in this area. Is that your position? 

MR MUTULUUZA: These were rebels just as the LRA are. If the LRA are being supported by the people there then they are the same, as we supported the NRA and they succeeded. 

They tell us that in the north actually there are no offices like those of the RDCs. Some are on an indefinite leave, some stay in Kampala but they work there and yet these are the people who would address this problem in the north. So, I think let us be serious. Let us address the political problem in the north and that is when we shall be able to get rid of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the political problem?  Because we want to find a cure for it.

MR MUTULUUZA: This is what we have to research and address on –(Interjection)- it would be one of them. I thank you.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Kampala Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think the war in the north is very unfortunate. When this august body debates this war, we should be very mindful because everybody in Uganda is concerned. Anybody who loses a brother, a relative or a friend is affected. Therefore when we are debating this we should also look at our history, and when we do we should be very sincere. 

It is unfortunate that any part of Uganda should have an insurgency. The history of the armed forces in this country is clearly spelt out. Right from 1898 when the first Uganda Rifles were started up to the time we got independence and we inherited an army, which was been Kings African Rifles. Thereafter, the mutiny of the Army in 1964 took place and the subsequent army in this country was used by different people. The army, which had been started by the colonial masters, were supposed to protect them from the natives. When we got independence, we never asked whose army we had inherited. These armies continued to protect those who were in Government. 

By 1971 the Army had taken over power and ruled this country for eight years, under a decree, and a lot of our people suffered. So when we are talking about insurgency in this country, we should not only look at what is happening now. We should also look at our history and have that perspective clearly implanted in our mind that we should not allow any of these to escalate into what we have seen before. Our history is very clear and it is important that we try as hard as we can to find solutions to the problems we are having in the north.  

It is on record that a lot of groups have sat on a round table with this Government and they have come out and they have stopped fighting the Government. The leadership of some of these groups are in this Parliament. It is also clear that a lot of effort has been taken to sit on a round table with some of the groups that are fighting now. By sitting with people who are concerned –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, all the members of this Parliament would like to have sustainable peace. Hon. Babu is making a very important statement, especially when he says that some of the leadership of those people who were fighting Uganda are here.  It could be Lukyamuzi! Is it in order for him to insinuate without justification or clarification?  Would you point out those people? We have a name to protect as Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not think there is need for those details. I know that there are members here who said that they were rebels but they discarded that. I know them and they are not ashamed to be named. They are here and it is on record. I, however, do not think we need to go into the details of that because it is a fact. They were rebels but they reconsidered and now they are working for national unity. So, proceed.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Definitely, hon. Lukyamuzi was not one of them and I do not think he has the capacity to be one of them. (Laughter).

The reason I am sad and disappointed is that I think in this House we should now find a way forward. We should try and advise this Government on what methods we should use to get permanent peace in the north. And it is important that we should stop innuendoes, accusations and counter accusations and come out clearly with a proposal on how we can find that peace. 

If we do, we were talking about medals a few minutes ago, I think we should get medals, and it is that agenda that we require. That agenda should be brought to us and a programme of action be followed. Be it sitting on the round table, be it fighting, be it whatever method, let it be a multi-pronged approach. And those who are talking because they want to be heard, you will not stop them. They will always talk and they will talk and now with FM radios, they will even talk more. But if we have a programme of action and we are clearly quoted as being sincere in trying to find peace in the north, then and only then will we be respected.  

I wanted also to say, Mr Speaker, that this is not the only country that has an insurgency. There are other countries that have had these wars for years. Northern Ireland for example, has had war for years and one of the biggest powers in the world has failed to put that insurgency down. There are others in other countries. What we should do, let us not deceive ourselves. We have a problem on our hands and we should find the solution to it. 

We need to join hands with Government, and this is the time when we must not be partisan. This is the time when all of us should join hands like the other day when we contributed to the children in the north. We should join hands and say, “these are the only means we can use to end this. This is the only route we are going to use to find solutions to peace in the north so that our brothers and sisters can be proud that our Government and our people are with us.” But if we continue to increase the differences, if we continue to use provocative language, if we continue to use different methods, we are not going to go anywhere. 

Any of us who have got our own plans, yes, I agree that some of us have got our sentiments, but we must rise above our personal sentiments now. This is the time to try and bridge these gaps between us, especially on this topic. After that we can come and start politicking, but this is a very serious situation.

Mr Speaker, the problem in the north is not small.  It has been going on for sometime and I think it is clear that all sorts of avenues are being used to try and find solutions. There are even people from that area who have been involved in trying to find peace. We should encourage them. We should also encourage His Excellency the President and thank him for his speech, but encourage him to try and find other avenues to get to peace in the north. 

This business of allocation, it is simple. In Government if a ministry wants money allocated, you apply to the Ministry of Finance and they re-allocate this money to another item. But if this re-allocation is big, you then go to Cabinet and Cabinet requests finance to re-allocate this money to another item. And I am really happy that the President eventually came to this very House and told us that this had been done. We must sometimes accept that there are certain procedures, which are standard and we follow them that way. 

The President must be thanked for having even gone to Cabinet. He could have written to the Minister of Finance to re-allocate instead.

I would like to end, Sir, by thanking you and hoping that this august body will sit down and reflect on the picture of this war and try to find an action programme, a programme that is going to make a difference, a programme that is going to be acceptable to our people in this country.  Thank you.

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the President for his speech and efforts to analyse the problem. I would also like to join others who have spoken, crying out for a way out.

I continue from where hon. Babu has stopped. The problem is not small. I think we have under-estimated this problem. We have given dates without estimating the gravity on the ground. Kony has not been predictable. We may describe the environment he operates in: physical and political, but there may be other dimensions that we have not analysed. 

I am therefore calling for a thorough study. There have to be people sitting down checking records, interviewing people, applying anthropology, applying social psychology, applying social psychiatry and doing all  it takes to understand the mind of Kony. We are addressing the military side, but there may be a psychosomatic problem. When people in certain positions get into that kind of grip, when there is that metaphysics and so on, we have to deal with that problem a lot more than I think we have done. That is a cry for a thorough study, and it will take little longer than we think.   

I certainly join hon. Lumumba for feeling very unhappy about the pronouncements: “No more rebels in Pader.” If these people could cross the border in one minute, how can you say there will be no more rebels there?  

DR NABWISO: I am seeking clarification from Prof. Kabwegyere, who was at one time Presidential Advisor on the Great Lakes Region. I believe he had a lot of time to study this situation. May I know if there are some papers or write-ups that he has given to the President, which we could share and try to understand this problem, instead of having another study?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, there are papers I have written in my capacity as an advisor, which are only available to the appointing authority. But if we are talking about what I did, I can tell you what I did. It was more than just advising the President because I am about to call for a different method. It may not be fully thought out now but it could be looked into. 

Our President has been in Gulu for a long time, sitting there in the barracks, relating with military commanders and so on. I want to call the leaders from the rest of Uganda who can join him to do so. We are going on recess, Mr Speaker. I would prefer that those who can be in Gulu as well, while the President is there, should join him.  

I have been looking at an approach that was used by the NRM. It was politicising the population to win them on your side, and they become your anchor and territory of operation. I am not sure, and I could be informed here, that on the ground we have a peace movement organised seriously by the local leaders. Are they there with the MPs, the LC II chairpersons and so on, talking peace in villages and even in camps where the people are organised in order to fight this enemy? (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Prof. Kabwegyere that we have institutions in this country that are empowered to do that type of work. We have the secretariat and surely that is part of their work to go down and mobilise. If you are implying that the secretariat has failed to perform, that is a different matter. It is part and parcel of Government and it should be able to move up. 

Actually what you are saying is that they should join the President, and they should go there and mobilise. That is their work.

MR NYEKO: Further information!

PROF. KABWEGYERE: No thank you, I am getting derailed.

THE SPEAKER: Prof. Kabwegyere, hon. Nyeko is the Secretary of the Acholi Parliamentary Group.

MR NYEKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance. Prof. Kabwegyere was asking about institutions that are there for purposes of building peace. I would like to mention a few. We have got what they call the District Peace and Reconciliation Team, which is funded by USAID for the purpose of spreading the gospel of peace in the district. It is available. We have also got the institution of the traditional chiefs of the Acholi who move together to spread the gospel of peace and tell people to join hands with Government to end this rebellion. 

We have got the NGO follow-ups: all the Non-Governmental Organisations in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader in particular, have their forum for the purpose of peace. All these institutions are in place. I wanted to give that information for your benefit. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you. That information I take but I reject the argument presented by hon. Sabiiti of saying that there are Government institutions that should do this job. This is not the job for Government alone; it is for all of us. And this must not be taken for granted that Government should do this. I have heard people say, “Do not do this because it should be done by Government,” when you are supposed to do the job.

However, Mr Speaker, my worry goes beyond this point - if I could be allowed a little more time. My worry is that we are not only talking about war mongering but we are now going into a war mania. There are people who now think that peace is not a goal to pursue but it is war to be pursued.  

I have read Dr Besigye’s approach to Uganda’s future, and I find that very worrying because we already have enough war here. If the conditions of the war are now so glaring, according to Dr Besigye, that now war is the answer and the little peace that we have is no longer necessary, then I am worried. It is also among Members of this Parliament, and on radios. People are saying only war will help us yet war has not helped us in the north. War did not help us in the West when it was there, and one is not sure that in the mountains there are no people waiting to attack us again.  

My worry is that this country must be advised away from this course. I am going to be very frank here. Reading what Dr Besigye said and reading the pronouncements that I hear on radios and so on, I am worried because to me Dr Besigye is not an alternative. I have seen war cannot be an alternative to what we have now. Perhaps what you need to do, if you have that vision and you are that saviour, is to provide us a programme of peace. Hon. Mwondha was asking for it when hon. Babu was talking. He said, “Give us an answer, give us something to do.”  

That is why I am saying that let us do more research. Let us do more mobilisation, let us go and sit in with the President; let there be harmony between the leaders at all levels in the area and the whole of Uganda; let us support a cause together because without that we are doomed. War can be a culture and people will fight and fight.  

South America has had hundreds of years of war. It became a way of life and by the way it is true for human beings that after a certain level of pain, they no longer feel pain that much. The first cane is painful and the second one is less painful. When you go on for one hundred canes the person will just take it. Somebody has just passed on this note saying, “Museveni is a product of war.” But being a product of war does not mean that war must go on forever.

My understanding of the Resistance Movement was to resist war. But now if it becomes a perpetuation of war that we are fighting in order to live, that war is a tradition. If it is a way of life then peace must as well be forgotten. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATURAMU HOOD (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues who have thanked His Excellency the President upon his address to the nation about the security situation in our country. 

The lingering question to all of us is when shall Uganda end war and be free and therefore start progress and developing this nation? Mr Speaker, Government and individuals in areas that are infested with insurgency have made a lot of efforts in the past. It is true that in areas like Teso they resolved that insurgency must end. In this area before Government instituted the Amnesty law success had been registered.  

The question today is: if Government has instituted an Amnesty law to allow anyone to come out of the bush and join Government in its efforts to develop the country, why has this law not been as effective as we thought?  

This is also a lingering question in this country.  Do we feel that there is inefficiency in this law that needs to be attended to? Even if it necessitates an amendment or several amendments, it can enable people to come out of the bush. I believe that this Government can put in whatever it can to make sure that Uganda can have total peace. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to address myself on the question of camps. Indeed it is true that there is a lot of suffering for our people in Northern Uganda who are in camps. There cannot be sufficient social amenities availed to them. There cannot be sufficient health care accorded to them but we highly sympathise with them. That is the reason we are saying that the war must end as soon as possible so that the suffering of our people can be done away with. 

One school of thought alluded that camps were created in order to deny the rebels or the leaders and the sympathisers a catchment area for recruitment. There is no way you can undertake to do something and you do not put in place a mechanism of evaluating what you have put in place. At this juncture I appeal to Government to evaluate the level of recruitment into rebel activity before and after the creation of camps. I think that will explain to the nation that there has been either a positive trend or a negative trend in that direction.

There is no country that can prosper without tranquillity and stability. Uganda has suffered a lot since independence in 1962. Therefore there is need to look for alternative ways that are different from what we have already applied to end this war. It is not only Parliament that can contribute to this noble task but we appeal to all peace loving Ugandans to make a contribution about what they think should be the best alternative.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving me the opportunity. You have posed a fundamental question that we need to look for alternative means to end this war. Some of us think one of the alternative means of ending this war is national dialogue on the political question of this country.  

The Government and all the people of Uganda should know that you can try peace talks but whom do you talk to? While pursuing the military angle, pursuing the peace talks through churches and pursuing the peace talks through the Government presidential peace talk team, there is need to have a national dialogue on the political question of this country. 

It is very important for us to talk of initiating dialogue with Ssemwogerere who is here in Kampala. To initiate dialogue with Rwanyarare who is here in Kampala than only to initiate peace talks and dialogue with people who face you with guns. You should initiate dialogue with those who are ready to talk to you. They are the people who command the population and the given constituency in this country. Those are the catchment area for rebel recruitment if we may need to know.  That is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are mainly dealing with the situation in the north. There is a member for Mawookota North who talked of politics without giving us the details. Do you not think honourable member that if you know the political reasons for this war, you mention it here because just talking political dialogue will not do? 

If you are sincere, is it not time you said that Kony is fighting this war because of this political reason so that it is addressed? Once these are known perhaps the solution will be found. Why do we hide? If you know the reasons please say, “this is the reason.”  

I think it is high time we were candid. If we are to find a cure, we have to be candid on what we are saying instead of hiding and saying “political reasons”. Political what? Is it sharing positions, is it political parties or what? We need to know in order to find a solution. I do not want to contribute but that is what I have discerned from your contribution. The honourable member from Mawokota stopped there and another member is talking about political dialogue also.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am speaking after being informed from these two aspects. One, if one is to look at the Kony war, we have also to look at other wars that this country has gone through –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us deal with the Kony war because at the moment we are preoccupied with the suffering of the people in Acholi land. Let us deal with that one and then we shall go to the ADF if it is there. The big war is in the Northern region.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. From the Kony war, I am informed by these two fundamental issues. One, in 1996 when Dr Paul Ssemogerere stood for President of this country, he got maximum support from a region that seems not to be co-operating with the current Government. That shows that he has support of that population.  

Two, in 2001 when Dr Kizza Besigye stood for president, he got maximum support from that area. Which means the people of that region may not be directly co-operating with the rebels but that area may be fertile ground. Those people may be a bridge. Once a bridge is there, people use it to cross over. You must be ready for people to use you to cross over. But these two factors indicate that among other causes of war in Northern Uganda is the political question of this country, that is, a demand for alternative means of accessing power, and that might be multi-partyism. Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would be doing a disservice to myself if I concluded my contribution without suggesting what I feel would be a solution to the insurgency in this country. 

Before I make my suggestion, I wish to commend the head of state, Government and the people of Sudan for offering us one of the many avenues, which we are looking for to end insurgency in our country.  

We have in this country resolved to democratise and build democratic institutions. I believe that this insecurity will deter all those avenues to create democratic institutions in this country. One school of thought says that if you fight a battle, during the course of fighting you must put mechanisms of how you can cope with the consequences of victory.  I am stating that the democratisation process in this country can be diverted and therefore all the efforts that have been made just as we are sitting in this Parliament we can see them passing through our fingers. Uganda will indeed have lost.

I am going to propose what may look a very difficult and insurmountable solution. But since we all want to bring back peace and tranquillity in this country, I would propose that the suffering that has been afflicted to the majority of innocent people of Northern Uganda could be addressed expeditiously. Let us create a free area where they cannot be endangered, and where Government can take expeditious fights against LRA and end this war.  

Government has made a cut on the budget of 23 percent from every ministry. In my view this is an item that can be looked at in making budget lines for this money. All Ugandans in the north of the country where the insurgency is rampant should be given a very peaceful sanctuary in any part of the country. All welfare provisions should be put in place to cater for them – (Interjection) – Mr Speaker I need to be protected from hon. Lukyamuzi.  

I am suggesting this because I feel that this is an area that has been mixed up with peace loving Ugandans in the north and those who are supporting the war. It is therefore time that we had our Ugandans prepared to perceive and be resilient for some time when arrangements to end this war are being put in place by Government. I believe, Mr Speaker, that this can be a tangible solution to end this war. Mr Speaker, –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Point of clarification, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No that is the end. I think we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. We shall continue with the debate tomorrow. However, you have heard from hon. Katuramu that the peace loving people should be removed for some time and be taken elsewhere, and they leave those who can deal with – (Laughter). The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)





  



