Thursday, 18 December 2003

Parliament met at 10.31 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the first business of the morning is to elect members for the Pan African Parliament. So, I want to just run you through what we are going to do.

The ballot paper:  
The reporting officer shall issue only one ballot paper in respect of all the candidates, and I would like to display the ballot paper. The yellow side is for all gender candidates and the blue side is the women candidates. 

This is how the ballot paper is going to look like. It shall contain all the names of the candidates arranged in alphabetical order in each of the groups A and B, with an empty box beside each name.

Voting procedure: 
Members of Parliament shall elect five members to the Pan-African Parliament from amongst themselves. Voting shall be conducted under the general supervision of the Speaker. Therefore, the bulk of the work will have to be done here in the Chamber.  
Only one ballot box will be used in the voting, under this rule. Prior to the commencement of voting and in full view of the House, the Speaker shall cause the box to be demonstrated as being empty.  

On receiving a ballot paper, each member shall tick in the empty box beside A, four names of the candidates irrespective of gender, for the all gender members, and one name besides B for a female candidate for the women members. Any ballot with more ticks than one as provided in sub-rule (4), shall be treated as invalid and shall not be included in the counting. 

So, honourable members, on the yellow side make sure there are only four ticks, on the blue side make sure there is only one tick. If you have five ticks it will be an invalid vote. 

Any voter who spoils his or her ballot paper may surrender the spoilt ballot paper to the returning officer and obtain a replacement. The counting will take place immediately after all the ballots have been collected. I will appoint four non-voting members to act as counting agents for all the candidates. 

The counting of the votes shall take place outside the Chamber in a room, which I will designate for that purpose, but within the precincts of this Parliament.  

Honourable members, when you receive the ballot you will go outside, tick, and then come and place it in the ballot box in my view and the view of all the colleagues. When we finish voting we shall continue with other business while the counting is being done. 
We shall then await the results, which I shall declare immediately after the conclusion of the counting.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This appears to be our last day here, at least as far as we are concerned. Maybe we shall be soon –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, I am in charge of the programmes of this House, do not interrupt the voting. This is now a polling station. 

(The Empty Ballot box was shown to the Members)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you satisfied that it is empty? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a request from two members of this House to be allowed to vote early so that they can go for some other business, the hon. Beatrice Byenkya of Hoima and the Minister of Agriculture, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. The rest will vote in the order of the alphabet.  

(The Voting process started at 10.36p.m.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any eligible voters who have not voted? After hon. Ahabwe has voted, we shall have to end the polling. Hon. Odonga Otto has arrived; please take your ballot. Hon. Kiwanuka and hon. Rugumayo you are the counting agents; you will be assisted by the clerks. I am required to appoint four but I only see two.  

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, for true democracy and real fairness, I wanted to propose that each of us the candidates have an agent there – (Applause)- because these things, you do not know, you cannot be sure. Among those counting we have the Executive as you have read, who is our representative as the Legislature? Because these things, my friend – (Laughter). We should have our agents there. I wish to propose.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, hon. Matembe you are a member of the Rules Committee. The rules we passed last week state like this: “Counting of votes: Immediately after all the ballots have been collected, the Speaker shall appoint four non-voting Members of Parliament to act as counting agents for all the candidates.” 

These are the rules that came from your committee and this is what we passed. They are going to be assisted by the clerks; these are the non-voting members whom I have appointed. The box will be escorted to the South Committee Room where the counting will take place. So, the two non-voting members and six clerks will go and do the counting.  

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, the other day you announced that voting will go on between 10.00 a.m. and 1.00 p.m. and it is not yet 1.00 p.m. It seems - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if everybody has voted, why do you want us to keep the box here? I have asked if there is anybody who has not yet voted and nobody has said they have not voted.  

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think to allay the fears of my friend hon. Matembe, we now rely on the impartiality of the clerk assistants. 

However, before we go to count the votes, we saw the only politician on that team, hon. Prof. Rugumayo, trying to consult you quietly. That, to some extent, gives some unrest to many of the candidates. 

Could we know what that consultation was all about – (Laughter) - because we are taking decisions on a very important matter, which affects the lives and the feelings of these candidates? We wish to be clarified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister was just saying, “Should I remain, or you are going to change?” That is what he was asking me. So I said, “I have already appointed you”. Hon. Francis Mukama, you have not yet voted. Okay, honourable members, let us give it another ten minutes and then we should continue with other business.
MR KALULE SSENGO: The rules provide for voting between 10.00 O’clock and 1.00 O’clock, and there are some names you have read and the members were absent like hon. Okulo Epak, hon. Katirima, even hon. Tumwine. Now, I am assuming that these people could be travelling towards Kampala. What if they arrive five minutes before 1.00p.m, shall you have not broken the regulations?  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is it not fair that we should know how many people have voted so that at the end of the counting, we are sure no extra ballots have gone in? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the voting, the counting and declaration should all be done between 10.00 a.m. and 1.00 p.m. But if you are prepared to sit here for the whole day, I do not mind, and I am used to it. (Laughter). Yes, because I do not know where the members are, they have not told me why they are late. I gave notice of this election since Tuesday.  

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to seek clarification. I do respect the regulations that we make and we must live by them. But there has been a very strong word in the corridors of Parliament that the Executive sat and agreed on the specific number of names that should be nominated and elected. 

Right now you are appointing the members who have no voting rights so that they can superintend the exercise of counting votes. If it is true at all that the Executive ever had such a position, I wanted to seek clarification from these members how this would influence their impartiality when they are superintending the process of counting votes. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are seeking it from whom?

MR DOMBO: I am seeking it from the Chair and from the members who have been appointed to superintend the counting of votes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo, you cannot seek that from me. These are the rules you made yourselves! They are the rules I am following.  Hon. Kasigwa and hon. Banyenzaki have arrived. Pick your ballots.
MR DAVID WAKIKONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect your decisions but as we have done before, and because there are fears among colleagues in this House, I suggest that you allow the counting to go on right here – (Applause) - so that we all watch, like we have done before. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The rules you have just cited enumerate the kind of people to count the votes. The rules are silent on who should observe the counting of the votes. So, we are using that particular extension to allow you exercise your discretion to allow members watch the counting, not carry out the actual counting.  

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I think we have done it before. In order to allay the fears of members, and since we have enough space at the front, we better really have these votes counted from here. Otherwise, we are likely to get so many petitions from members who are not satisfied.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we are going to do two things. We shall continue with other business while the counting goes on here. (Applause). We have business to finish. So, since you want this thing done here, you do it here while we speak other things. 

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to officially move a motion that the votes be counted in the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made my decision; the votes will be counted here and we will continue with other business. 

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Speaker, whereas we have taken note of your wise counsel and ruling on the issue of voting, our humble wish is, if possible, names on the ballot papers be read out one by one. The names should be read out loudly. It will not take time.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you mean by reading them out one by one? Do you mean the contents of each ballot paper?

MRS AKWERO: The ticked names should be read out.  

MS JESSICA ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I agree with your wise ruling. However, since some people are still coming in to vote, maybe we give some few minutes to allow those who are still coming a chance to vote. Now we can go on with other things on the Order Paper and then we can resume the counting later. That is my amendment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akwero, I am finding difficulty with your proposal. You know, if we are going to read all the names, I do not know what time we shall take. It means we shall not do any other business. If they are reading names there, how shall we be discussing here?  

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, can I request that we continue with our normal business between now and 1.00 p.m. so that those who arrive within the prescribed time can go on voting? Then at 1.00 p.m. we can stop the debate and we begin this exercise. We are prepared to sacrifice some extra hours at the end so that this exercise is smoothly concluded. I thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the beginning you had ruled that the counting takes place somewhere else, and the candidates had proposed that you nominate observers. They would choose observers instead of the whole House being observers, because this counting is not a simple process. They are going to read out the votes, tally them, then at the end count the tallies. 

So, if you could assign a few of our colleagues to observe on our behalf, somewhere not here, then we continue with the rest of the business, I think that will make our life simple.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want any suspicion about this election. If members are not comfortable with counting in the South Committee Room, the counting should be done here. And if business is going to suffer, there is nothing I can do about that.  

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA: Madam Speaker, just to supplement hon. Akwero’s proposal, I am just wondering what use the votes being counted here would be if the names are not being read to all of us. What are we observing in that particular case? What comfort are we getting from observing, just seeing papers? We definitely need the names to be read out and we register them in our heads. I thought that was the reason for observing.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the ballot box will be closed at 12.30 p.m. Let us proceed with other business. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 1 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04

11.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to present for consideration of Parliament a motion for the approval of the supplementary expenditure schedule 1 for the fiscal year 2003/04. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, it reads:
“Whereas Article 156 (2) (a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, and Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act allow for supplementary expenditures by Government; and

Whereas under the said law, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required shall be laid down before Parliament for approval or authorisation;

Now therefore, be it resolved that Parliament considers and approves supplementary expenditure schedule 1 for the financial year 2003/04 amounting to Shs 53.74 billion as per schedule attached to this resolution.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, this is a surprise. I have just seen this paper. It is an ambush, actually. But the Minister called me in the morning and informed me that he was bringing papers to Parliament. 

You remember we had so many haggles with the policy statement and budget. I would suggest that we be given time to look at this document so that we can inform the House appropriately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I commit it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and you report back. As you know, we are about to go on recess so you may have to work a bit faster.

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF ACHOLI PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

11.57
MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. On Wednesday, 19 November 2003 the Chairman of the Lango Parliamentary Group, Dr Okulo Epak, presented a statement from their group to Parliament on the unfortunate insecurity and humanitarian situations prevailing in the Lango sub-region.

In concluding their statement, the Lango Parliamentary Group reiterated that until Government is in position and has laid out a sound strategy and programme to protect their people and their property, and sufficient and timely humanitarian support begins to flow to the internally displaced persons in camps and those living with hosts, they were temporarily withdrawing their active participation in the programmes of Parliament. Thereafter, members of the Lango Parliamentary Group withdrew from the Chamber of Parliament.  

Upon the withdrawal of the Lango Parliamentary Group, Prof. Ogenga Latigo while expressing the sentiment of all members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group (APG) stated in Parliament that, “the statement by the Lango Parliamentary Group as presented puts we from Acholi, who are part and parcel of this conflict, in a very difficult situation. We will also come when it is possible for us to make a contribution to the debate of this statement.” After this contribution, we members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group also walked out of the Chamber.

Honourable members, when we walked out, a good number of you demonstrated your solidarity and practical understanding of the difficulties and suffering that our people are enduring in the hands of the LRA insurgency. You also expressed the urgent need for Government to protect our people and provide adequate humanitarian assistance to them. 

By your eloquent contributions and loud and clear support, you encouraged and joined us in our walk-out. You became part of us in our people’s suffering. 

We would like, therefore, to take this very first opportunity to laud and salute you our honourable colleagues for your solidarity, patriotism and nationalism. By your action you have strengthened our faith in the future of this country. Thank you so much. 

We must also applaud and thank President Museveni who emphatically supported the walk-out in spite of the negative voices from some prominent but parochial and shortsighted political leaders.  

Madam Speaker, it is only an honest and true understanding of our position and action by all Ugandans that will go a long way in building rapport and a common agenda for a way forward, and eliminating mistrust and mutual suspicions.  

Honourable members, at the time of the walk-out, the Acholi, Lango and Teso parliamentary groups were due to submit reports of the mobilisation tours made to their respective sub-regions. This tour was championed by none other than the Speaker of Parliament himself and was funded by Parliament.  

Honourable members, we have presented to the Speaker our first report of the Acholi sub-region entitled, “Acholi Parliamentary Group Mobilisation for Peace Tour of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader districts of Acholi.” 
In that report we outlined what we did during our tour, our message to the LRA and the people of Acholi and Uganda in general, our findings on the situation on the ground and the way forward for peace. We shall lay on the Table a copy of this report and also post the report to your e-mail addresses for easy access. So, I lay on the Table a copy of the report.

During the mobilisation, our message was loud and clear. We, among others things, first condemned the atrocities being meted by the LRA, not only in the Acholi region but also in Lango and Teso. We highlighted the urgent need for all the Acholi to rally together and join hands with the Government and other Ugandans to bring this suffering to a quick end.

We assured the people of the attention and concern now being given to the conflict and their suffering by Government, the Parliament of Uganda and the international community. We told them about the wish and desire by all to see that the conflict is ended peacefully and expeditiously.

We assured the people and LRA of the commitment of Government, Parliament and the international community to peacefully resolve this conflict. We told them about the Government and APG’s commitment to the security, safety and rehabilitation of LRA abductees and fighters who heed the peace call and come out voluntarily or surrender during battles.

We passionately appealed directly to Joseph Kony to appreciate the suffering this war has brought on the people, and to relent and come out boldly to end the suffering of the people.
 
When receiving our report, the Speaker expressed his personal sympathy and pain and that of the entire Parliament at the suffering the people in Acholi have endured for nearly 17 years now, and his hope that the suffering will end soon.  He also committed himself to doing his utmost to reassure the people of Parliament’s understanding and support. 

In this regard, the Speaker at that time indicated to us that he would appoint a select committee of Parliament to investigate the security and humanitarian crisis in Acholi, Lango and Teso.  Honourable members, we are happy that the select committee has now been set up and it has begun its work.  

While receiving our report, the Speaker also appealed to us, the Members of Parliament who walked out, to return to the House because our concerns have been noted and were being addressed.  Honourable members, we took note of the Speaker’s appeal. 

As we rejoin Parliament, allow us to acknowledge and appreciate the understanding demonstrated by the honourable Speaker, his deputy and you, honourable members. We acknowledge all efforts of Parliament to ensure that this senseless and highly destructive LRA insurgency, and the humanitarian crisis in North and North East Uganda get the highest attention of the state and are brought to a quick and permanent end. 

The entire people of Acholi thank you for your recent material assistance to them and your firm commitment to alleviating their suffering. 

Honourable members, our walk-out was to draw the attention of both the Government of Uganda and the international community to the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in our sub-regions. Both have responded to us, although the challenge is really great. 

On the side of Government, the great reshuffle of the leadership of UPDF and the declaration of ghost soldiers who for long formed a large part of UPDF in the North, although probably only coincidental to our walk-out, was most timely. Our long time cry that the Army was thin on the ground and that some people were benefiting from the war has been heard. We thank Government for this move.  

Honourable members, we are also witnessing progress in the field. The UPDF have been deployed in strategic areas that were highlighted in our report. For instance, UPDF units are now in Olung, along the very insecure Patongo-Kalongo road and the remote sub-county headquarters both in Agago County. There is also maximum co-operation between the UPDF and us. We commend the efforts of those officers and men now serving in our sub-region.  

In spite of the progress, however, much still needs to be done. In particular, more guns and logistical support should be quickly availed to the LDU units in sub-counties especially along the Uganda-Sudan border, for example in Agoro, Lukung and Palabek, and also the Acholi-Karamoja in Adilang, Payimul, Namukora, Oromu. 

In order to strengthen security, Government must also urgently improve the humanitarian conditions and welfare of the UPDF mobile patrol personnel. These personnel are making incredible sacrifices and are enduring great physical stresses as they track the LRA. Honourable members, we must recognise the gallantry of these great Ugandans.  

There have also emerged atrocities meted out by the LRA on the people in Lira and Apac, and tensions between the Acholi and Lango communities mostly fuelled by rumours and idle talk. We members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the Lango Parliamentary Group shall, as we have done before, do our part to diffuse the situation. 

We have, however, asked Government to come out strongly against those who seek to tribalise the LRA insurgency, to avoid tribalising the local militias.  We also ask that all units of the Arrow Group in Teso and the Rhino Group in Lango be commanded by UPDF officers as is currently the case with the home guards and LDUs in Acholi region.  

Honourable members, the international community has also responded significantly to our concerns. In the last three weeks, we have been invited by various missions to discuss how they can help. A number of countries and agencies have announced further assistance to our people. 

The World Food Programme leaders have undertaken on-the-spot assessment of the food supply in some camps. The European Union head of delegation, the United States Ambassador and United States ID Director and other diplomats have also visited the Acholi sub-region. Most importantly, as reported in yesterday and today’s Monitor newspaper, there is hope for renewed international effort to end the LRA insurgency peacefully.  
Madam Speaker, our people have responded to all that has been enumerated in this statement with enthusiasm, renewed hope and a full commitment to play their part and to work together with Government and all stakeholders to end the suffering brought to them. Continue to support us and to give hope to the people.

Honourable members, while out of this august House, we missed your company as much as you missed ours, and we yearn to participate in the debates. With this statement, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, we are now back. (Applause). Once gain thank you very much, apwoyo matek. We wish you a merry Xmas and a prosperous 2004. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson of Acholi Parliamentary Group. On behalf of Members of Parliament, I am really delighted to have you back amongst us. We have been following the work you have been doing with interest. Thank you very much and you are welcome. (Applause).  

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE TESO PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

12.13
MR PATRICK AMURIAT OBOI (Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am here to report on behalf of the Teso Parliamentary Group, which undertook a joint security mobilisation in the Teso sub-region. 

However, before I do this I would like to observe that a few members of the Teso Parliamentary Group, who were present on the 19 November 2003 in the Chamber of this House, joined their friends from Acholi and Lango in a walk-out. This walk-out by the Teso Parliamentary Group was intended to demonstrate solidarity with the people of Lango and Acholi. I am glad to report that all of us are now back in the House and are happy to be here. (Applause).

I have a comprehensive report that I will run through. Copies of this report are being made and should be availed to all members for your information and possibly debate in future.  

Background to the Joint Security Mobilisation in Teso region:
Following the invasion of the LRA rebels into Teso in mid June 2003, the people in Teso region have experienced a lot of suffering. The brutal killings by the LRA, the raids, robbery, abduction, massive displacement and loss of property have caused a serious socio-economic setback in the entire region. 

Government, in trying to bring the insurgency to an end, has used various avenues and approaches. With facilitation from Parliament, for which we are grateful, joint security mobilisation programmes for the Members of Parliament for the affected regions was conducted. 

These programmes were aimed at inter alia reaffirming our common resolve in the quest for peace and security in the entire northern and eastern regions of this country, and to assess the level of socio-economic distortion caused by the insurgency. The Teso Parliamentary Group jointly undertook the mobilisation from the month of November 2003, and this report outlines the experience and findings on the ground.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the group has got a position:

· We strongly condemn the LRA for the atrocities committed against the civilian population in the North and Northeastern parts of the country.

· We are fully aware that the LRA incursions are not ethnically inspired and have caused great suffering to the people in Acholi, Lango and the Teso sub-regions 

· We hail the UPDF and the Arrow Group in their operations to try to bring an end to the 17-year insurgency in the country. (Applause). 

· We appreciate the continued government efforts to address the difficulties in the North and Northeast of the country, including: the peace agreement reached with the UNRF II; efforts to disarm Karimojong; the peace committee appointed by His Excellency the President; the start of the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), now in its implementation stages; and the development of the National Policy Framework for IDPs.
· We lament that there is inequity in the growth and development between the more peaceful South, Central and Western Uganda and the North and Eastern parts of the country. The levels of poverty are deplorable in the Northern and Eastern parts of the country.  

In carrying out our work, the Teso Parliamentary Group moved to Teso in two phases. Phase 1 covered the districts of Soroti and Katakwi while phase 2 covered the districts of Kaberamaido and Kumi. 

Consultative meetings with various categories of stakeholders were held. These included: 
· The district security committee 
· The UPDF commanders at division and brigade levels 
· The commanders of the Arrow Group 
· The internally displaced persons in the various camps 
· The health workers in Soroti referral hospital 
· The civic society organisations involved in distribution of humanitarian aid to the IDPs 
· Local council authorities at district and sub-county levels 
· Religious and traditional leaders.

Public rallies were also held with the local communities in various places sampled by the entire group.

General observations:
Performance of security organs: 
Some fears were expressed that Government has handled LRA rebellion in Teso with kid gloves as compared to the speed with which it brought the ADF rebellion to an end. 

Nevertheless, relentless efforts by the UPDF, the local militia popularly called the Arrow Group, the Uganda Police Force has contributed to a great extent in mitigating the problems posed by rebellion. Thanks to the local communities in Teso for the vigilant co-operation they have accorded the security organs to perform their job.

It was also observed, however, that there still existed no clear understanding about the welfare of the Arrow Group especially in regard to their pay, uniform and food supplies. There was a general complaint that in many cases, they go without food and that the morale at work is compromised by lack of token allowance to fend for their families.

Lack of facilitation of the Arrow Group is causing considerable lowered morale at work and could even lead to cowardice in action and subsequent desertion. 

Although a token of Shs 60,000 was suggested as a monthly pay for the Arrow Group members, initial payments were reportedly made to only a few of the members moreover for only one month and not in arrears as had been pledged. This is a very big problem, Madam Speaker and honourable members, and you could have read in the press that some of these boys are actually going back home and abandoning their call of duty.
  
It was also observed that the members of the Arrow Group who got injuries, or at worst lost their lives during the struggle, have not got any compensation and their families have not been compensated. 

Uncertainty about their future was expressed. The people want to be reassured in no uncertain terms that the Arrow Group will not be transferred from Teso after the war.  

It was noted that Government did not honour her earlier promises for non-transfer of a similar force that had been set up in Katakwi District to curb the Karimojong cattle rustling. In this particular case, they were taken away and redeployed to fight in the Democratic Republic of Congo and elsewhere. Many have since never returned.  

Reports of misconduct by some members of the Arrow Group were reported. The misconduct includes illegal misuse of guns to terrorise wanainchi, murder, theft and drunkenness, and most recently rape.  

There is also desertion by some members of the Arrow Group citing mistreatment by UPDF superiors.  This was noted as one of the challenges affecting the recruitment and retention in the force. 


From the submissions of a number of Arrow Group members, their relationship with the UPDF was rather precarious. A number of them have quit the force and gone back to their villages, unfortunately some of them with fire arms. This, coupled with lack of clarity in the welfare of the Arrow Group, could cause a total crumbling of the good idea of its formation.  

Next, it was observed, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that the UPDF who are in command of the Arrow Group also have poor logistical facilitation. Their promptness in responding to security reports is slowed as a result. Further to this, the assertive command of the Arrow Group was also compromised by lack of facilitation for the latter. It is common knowledge that it is very difficult to control a hungry person at work.  

On remuneration of the LDUs, not only in Teso region but also in the country, there is a problem we observed. This is attributed to confusion between Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs over the management and administration of the LDUs. 

Also arising from submissions of various stakeholders who were interviewed, there was a general view that Government leaves all the options for resolution of conflict wide open. Such avenues include the amnesty law and room for negotiations. 

We also observed that the distribution of firearms especially to the Arrow Group at the frontline sub-counties has not been in tandem with the task on the ground. The sub-counties of Orungo, Morungatuny, Obalanga, Kapelebyong and Kuju have particularly been under facilitated in this respect. 

In Kapelebyong alone, a force of 600 Arrow Group is operating without arms! –(Interjection)- Yes, they are there without arms and they cannot fight. Honourable members, these are the facts that we got on the ground and yet, ironically, there are arms in the armoury in Soroti.  

Social Services. 
Generally, Government has been the major provider of the social service needs of her people. Following the massive internal displacement, the capacity of Government to cope with the needs of the IDPs was overwhelmed.  

Complementary efforts in the provision of essential needs for the IDPs by the international community, civic society organisations, private sector and all individuals/friends have been received with deserving gratitude. We are happy for this. 

A number of organisations including the European Union, World Food Programme, UNICEF, World Vision International, Medicine San Frontiers, Uganda Red Cross Society, Action Aid, ADRA Uganda, Vision Terudo, Save the Children Denmark, Ireland Aid, Mukwano Industries, Uganda Local Authorities Association, Gateway Bus Service just to mention but a few, have made tremendous contributions to this cause.

Nonetheless, Madam Speaker, honourable members, the situation in the IDP camps remains appalling in light of the number therein. The statistics below, obtained from the district disaster management committees and camp leaders, depict the magnitude of the problem of IDPs in the region. 

In the interest of time, honourable members, I am not going to read these statistics. They will be provided to you. They are quite long and elaborate. But suffice it to mention here that over 33.3 percent of the population in Teso are displaced.  

In all the IDP camps visited, there was a general complaint of unreliable and inadequate supply of food, drugs and other social necessities. In some camps like Gweri with over 7,000 IDPs, it was reported that food had been delivered only once, in July. I know some of these issues have been overtaken by events. 

The food supplies cannot even sustain a family of five for more than a week. The people also complained of lack of means to mill the delivered maize grain, and they find difficulty in boiling it due to lack of firewood. 

Poor conditions of the road network in the region have hampered the conveyance of humanitarian assistance to the desperate people living in the IDP camps in the region. Landmines planted by the LRA have further caused a glaring difficulty in delivering humanitarian assistance. 

The organisations involved in food distribution also cited delayed deployment of military escorts to accompany the food. As a result, the food stores in Soroti were overstocked and gave the wrong impression that the food needs by the IDPs had diminished.  

In certain cases, trucks loaded with food had to be parked for over a week, yet the truck owners continue to charge for the transport on a daily basis. While the recipient IDPs starved in the process, the humanitarian agencies also lamented the increased management costs for food delivery arising from such delays.

In Kaberamaido District, some people have sought refuge in the formerly uninhabited islands of Lake Kyoga. In Awer Island alone, over 8,000 people live at a great risk of starvation, disease and without proper sanitation and shelter. Of these, 400 are school-going children, 17 are teachers and yet there is no school infrastructure. 

During our visit to Awer, from the time we set foot on the island to the time we left the IDPs kept coughing continuously, and yet have no health facilities. It is, however, an uphill task for them to access assistance since the canoes used are for commercial purposes. No organisation ventures to take assistance to the islanders hence it is very difficult for them to get any support.  

The IDPs at the island also lamented that they cannot access food distributed by the Uganda Red Cross for lack of food cards required by the organisation. I think there really needs to be a change in policy on this.  

The IDPs also lack sanitary provisions like toilets and clean water. In fact, I do not know how we are going to address this. You know, there is a question of sanitary pads and knickers for women.  In fact, they were frank and they raised some of these issues. They ran away from their homes and left their knickers behind - (Interjections) The displacement has merely exacerbated the low safe water coverage previously existing in various places. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, some IDPs do not live in gazetted camps but are hosted by relatives and friends -(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members! This is an important report. I know you are excited about those knickers but when you are running in a hurry, honourable members do not say it is scandalous. The women need these sanitary pads and we have said it before in this House. It cannot be a scandal. This is real.

MR AMURIAT: But these were findings, Madam Speaker, and I think it is only proper for us to report to this House. The displacement has merely exacerbated the low safe water coverage previously existing in various places. 

Some IDPs do not live in gazetted camps but are hosted by relatives and friends from relatively safer areas of Kumi District, Usuk, Serere and Kasilo counties. Such host families have had an extra strain on the little available resources in the family and in the community. 

This situation will result into famine before the next harvest; this is definite. There is a new phenomenon that the insurgency has brought involving entire families trekking at the fall of night to Soroti town from the neighbouring villages, to spend the night under shops, office verandas and trees. 

To borrow from the words of Jan Egeland, the UN Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, about the war in the North and North East, “This is the worst forgotten and neglected humanitarian disaster in the world!”         

Education: 
The education sector, at primary, secondary and tertiary levels, has been disrupted following the displacement of the pupils/students, teachers and parents. Nearly all the schools in Katakwi District have had to close or get displaced. 

Following the displacement, several candidates for both PLE and ‘O’ Level have been denied the opportunity or the right to sit this year’s UNEB exams. This was due to the inability of their displaced parents to complete tuition fees. 

Generally, the performance of pupils and students in Teso schools will greatly be affected this year and perhaps for the next decade to come. Some of the students who are privately sponsored in tertiary institutions have had to drop out of those institutions, as their displaced parents have no means to raise the tuition following the displacements, or some of them have, unfortunately, been killed. 

Moreover, in all cases, the pupils/students are subjected to a uniform national academic assessment. There is need for an affirmative action to address this imbalance and avoid a generation gap in education in the Teso Region. 

Health: 
Medical supplies to the region cannot cope with the existing demands. Some health centres do not receive drugs and there is generally a thin deployment of medical staff. 

In Soroti Referral Hospital, which the team toured, it was observed that staff of all categories are less than a quarter of what the hospital’s original staffing requirements are. The number of patients, on the other hand, has more than trebled following the massive displacement. 

There are only four medical officers, one of them disabled, instead of the required ten. About 20 more registered nurses are required. Four volunteer nurses are now working but without a pay or motivation. All wards are congested with patients most of whom are from the disturbed areas. Many children have died of malnutrition. In spite of all the challenges, medical staff have demonstrated real ethics and zeal at work.  

For various reasons, all the medical officers who have been posted to Soroti Hospital under the normal government process have not reported. Similarly, personnel and drugs are very inadequate in all the health centres and hospitals in the region including Atutur, Ngora and Kumi hospitals. Kumi Hospital, for example, has had to bear with the pressure of the IDPs hailing from especially the southern part of Katakwi District. Medical supplies and sanitation are seriously lacking. 

On a very positive note, the UPDF is commended for sending some medical staff and medical supplies, especially for the surgical needs, to the referral hospital in Soroti. It was reported that the response of the UPDF somehow narrowed the personnel gap. We are very grateful for that.  

Medicine San Frontiers (MSF), doctors without borders, have been very helpful especially in the area of nutrition. The nutrition ward, like all other wards, is over congested. 

All in all, the medical centres visited by the team complained of irregular and inadequate medical supplies. While these were previously very inadequate, the gap has become wider, given that no provision has been made to step up supplies following displacements.  

Food Security and Production:
Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would now like to turn to food security and production. Teso as a region has lost a whole year’s crop. As entire families fled their homes, they left behind crops that had not been harvested. 

Food shortages, even in households that have not been displaced from their homes, are already hitting. This is partly because they have had to share the little they had with their displaced relatives and friends. 

It is unfortunate that even the seeds for planting in the next rainy season have been eaten up in a desperate attempt to cope with the forced famine situation. Affirmative action of food security in Teso has to be taken for the next three years or so. 

On a sad note, even the restocking programme has been severely disrupted as a result of the LRA incursions on one hand and the Karamoja cattle rustlers on the other.  

Capacity of Local Governments: 
As a result of the insurgency, the revenue payments of all the districts has been greatly affected. The internal displacement disrupted the economic activities of the would-be taxpayers. 

Moreover, facilitation of the Arrow Groups, who unarguably helped to beef up security in the region, was not forthcoming. In a desperate response to facilitate the Arrow Groups by way of providing food, fuel and treatment in emergency cases, districts are now heavily indebted to various institutions and fuel companies.  

By the time of compiling this report, the indebtedness of Kumi District, for example, stood at Shs 7 million. 
The most directly affected districts have even spent and continue to spend more.

Kaberamaido District war expenditure amounted to Ushs 23,500,000, broken down as follows:
· Fuel – Shs 8,000,000 
· Support and welfare for Arrow Boys – Shs 9,500,000,
· Procurement of communication equipment and airtime- Shs 4,100,000; and 
· Medical care – Shs 1,900,000. 

The scenario has put most of the districts to the level that they are unable to meet the requirement of counter-part funding for most of the well-intentioned government and non-government programmes. Such programmes like NUSAF and others are likely to be affected, and the beneficiaries may lose unless something is done.

Peace Talks and Amnesty.  
In some of the communities visited, it was observed that whereas Government had made it possible for the enactment of the amnesty law, in the case of the Teso Sub-region, no rebel fighters had taken advantage of the law. 

It was also observed that although the northern rebellion had lasted nearly 17 years now, there continues to be untold damage and suffering experienced by the population for the same length of time. The military option itself has not brought an end to the status quo. 

It was, therefore, the sense of some people within the population that alternative approaches be strengthened. In some cases, many victims did not know about the existence of the amnesty law.

Madam Speaker, I will now turn to our recommendations and these are broken down into short, medium and long-term recommendations. 

Short-term Recommendations: 
1. Government should address the concerns of facilitation and welfare of the Arrow Groups as a matter of urgency. This should cover the areas of uniform, allowances, food, medical care and any other incidentals arising thereof. 
 
2. The Ministry of Defence should review deployment and armament of the Arrow Group, focusing on areas of greatest needs.
3. The Ministry of Defence is urged to prepare a comprehensive bill clearly spelling out how auxiliary forces in the country will be managed and paid. I think this has been overtaken by events; it is now left to Parliament. 

4. The local communities and local councils should be involved in screening eligible personnel to serve in the Arrow Group as a means of ensuring that persons of commendable integrity are recruited to minimize crime tendencies among them. Discipline should be enforced to ensure harmony.
 
5. The Ministry of Health should at least double the medical supplies to all the hospitals and health centres in the disturbed areas. Provision of adequate medical personnel is long overdue. Affirmative action needs to be taken to arrest this situation.

6. Government should consider giving a risk allowance to teachers and medical workers in the disturbed areas as a means to motivate them in the provision of services.

7. Government should come up with a comprehensive resettlement plan in order to mitigate the after-effects of the insurgency in the entire region. A comprehensive programme to address the issues of infrastructure, development, income generation and boosting the agricultural sector needs to be drawn.

8. Key infrastructure like roads, airstrips should immediately be built/rehabilitated to enhance smooth distribution of humanitarian assistance to the IDPs in the region and ease troop deployment.

9. Appropriate security should be provided to ensure effective protection of food convoys.

10. Government should bear the debt burden that the districts have entered into while facilitating the Arrow Groups on behalf of Government.

11. The Ministry of Education should consider setting supplementary exams for the students and pupils who have missed national exams as a result of displacement.

12. Some IDPs with access to land be assisted with agricultural inputs.  
Medium-term Interventions:
1. NAADS and PMA should be implemented in all the districts of Teso.

2. Conditionality for counter-part funding be waived until the region resettles.

3. The disarmament programme in Karamoja should remain high on the agenda of the Government security plan.

4. NUSAF should focus more on income-generating activities. It is slow starting and not yet felt even in the relatively safer parts of Teso.

Long-term Interventions:
1. There is need to determine whether insurgency in the North and Northeast have any political intonations. Issues like equity in resources and position allocation need to be considered.

2. A comprehensive framework for peace talks should be developed by Government as an alternative to bringing an end to the insurgency.

3. Assistance should be sought in bringing the LRA to the negotiating table for their case to be heard so that it is made clear to the world that the Government of Uganda is towing and interested in alternative ways of ending the war.

4. Assistance be sought in identifying organisations or governments, other than the Sudan, alleged to be supporting activities associated with the LRA insurgency. Such assistance could entail forcing such organisations or governments to desist from such tendencies.    

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to thank the administration of Parliament for the facilitation of this programme, all Members of Parliament here present, and my colleagues, Members of the Teso Parliamentary Group, who tirelessly worked to make it possible for this report to be compiled. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this report on the Table. Thank you very much, Iyalama noi. Thank you for your kind attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. chairperson. Let me take this opportunity to thank all the members of the Teso Parliamentary Group for the great mobilisation work they have been doing. 
We have been following it in the press, and I think it has brought some comfort to the population. 

You know that we have set up a select committee to look at some of these matters. But in case members wish to make one or two comments before we leave these matters, they can do so. Is there anything members want to say about the report?  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural concern on how to handle it. Notwithstanding the information that we have a select committee to look into specific areas of the statements, how do we handle these statements? Do we adopt them, do we accept them, do we debate them or – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, but you know that is what I have just said. This is information to the House. They are reporting back on a mission they undertook. 

Some of the contents are matters, which the select committee will look at. That is why I said that if there is anybody who wants to raise issues on the other one, you could do so. If there are other areas you want to talk about in this report, because they are reporting back to Parliament about what they have been doing, you can do so.  

MR MWANDHA: Since we are going on recess very soon, and considering that 33 percent of the population of people in Teso are displaced, that means that out of 10 people, three people are displaced. This is a very high number. 

The honourable member reading his report has mentioned terribly difficult things, and we shall not be here for a month or so to continue asking Government, “What are you doing about this, what are you doing about that?” Isn’t it possible for the Minister at least to assure us that some of the things that are being mentioned here are actually receiving attention? 

Otherwise, for the House to receive such grave matters of people displaced, no sanitation, no water, children are dying of malnutrition, children have not had exams and all these things, and we just hear that and simply go away on recess, what will people think of us?  

So, I would have thought, Madam Speaker, that it would be useful to this House at least for the Minister to tell us exactly what is –(Interruption)

MS MARY AMAJO: I just want to elaborate on the percentage of the people who are displaced. In Kaberamaido alone, 80 percent of the people are displaced.  

MR HILLARY ONEK: Madam Speaker, the entire Kitgum population is in camps, over 90 percent of Gulu is in camps and in Pader 100 percent is in camps. So, really, I would say the entire Acholi population is in camps. So, that is the information. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The statements by the chairmen of the Acholi and Teso parliamentary groups are very grave. I agree that having a parliamentary select committee to do more analytical work on the report is a more reasoned way of doing things. 

However, still the urgency of the situation requires the Minister of Defence, who fortunately is in the House, to respond because some of these matters could have been addressed. It is also an opportunity for him to assure this country that the grim picture in this report is not being ignored; it is a very serious matter. 

We are going for recess and some of us are concerned and we would like the Minister of Defence to say something.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: As we debate this, you have heard the group from Acholi and Teso, but there is a missing link in between. I think it is very important for Parliament to take them all like they have the same problem, which must be addressed uniformly. So, the pressure put on the Executive would be to see that we get results, which will actually show that the Parliament of Uganda is working on behalf of the people of Uganda.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is the missing link?

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, the other time I was retorting that we should allow the Lango Parliamentary Group to go, and they are not here. They have not reported and we do not know what is going on there. It could even be worse, or it could be the same as these two groups have reported, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I received an indication today that the Lango Parliamentary Group is coming with a statement; I have been waiting but I have not see it. So, what can I do? I am equally helpless. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I hope the Lango Parliamentary Group will come up with a statement. The disabled people had their international day cerebrations in Lango, in fact in Apac, and the stories we heard were unbelievable, and here we are. 

We have a total human catastrophe amidst us and we are going away for a long recess, we shall not be here to find out what Government is doing. So really, since the Minister of Defence and that of Disaster preparedness are present, I think let us be assured of the steps that are going to be taken to ensure that these matters are given effective attention. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA (Mukono county South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing here as a member for Mukono South. Much as I am concerned about the reports and what is going on, I also recognize that the Government has been doing its best and there have been some flaws in what has been reported. 

I am concerned about the issue concerning the toilets and sanitation. As a former Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development and a community mobiliser in my constituency, and also having lived in a war situation, I am wondering this. These are makeshift camps. How have the MPs and leaders from the area linked up with the community development officers in those areas? 

Even in our villages, the normal way to protect a toilet is to put palm trees around the pit, you go to your kitchen and get ash and –(Interjections)- Yes, that is what we have been doing in war situations hygienically. The ash contains potassium and it reduces flies from entering the toilets. These are simple health sanitary provisions. 

So I am trying to find out; on these mobilization tours our colleagues have been going through, some of the -(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the hon. Minister I would like to state that the situations in the two regions are totally different. In the North we may not even have palm trees. 

However, the crux of the matter here is, we are faced with a situation of massive movement of the population within a very short time in a concentrated area. Within that context, within a short period, they have to construct huts to get shelter for themselves. The area is so crowded that even space for the toilets she is talking about is hardly available. People are cramped together. 

The immediate needs are water; there are no boreholes and that is the primary sanitary item. Talking about digging the toilets, people move in a hurry and find themselves, as she mentioned, in makeshift shelters. The time is not there to do those things as quickly or as orderly as she would have proposed. 

Since the honourable member is in the Executive, I would wish that the Front Bench comes to the North and sees the situation for themselves rather than theorising issues in the House. I would like to invite hon. Mukwaya to come to the North and see before she speaks what she does not know. Thank you very much.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, thank you and I thank the hon. Minister. I represent Aswa County, which has been living in camps from 1996 to date. It shocks me when a former minister responsible for gender and children, who has been in Cabinet for all this time, has not been able to understand the camp situation in Northern Uganda and in particular in my constituency. 

You find a population of about 61,000 people, for example in Pabo Camp, within a radius of two kilometres. Now, how do you expect people to plan in a normal situation the way the people in Mukono do it in their villages? 

I think this would not really come in because people are cramped together. First of all, they are fighting for space, fighting for where to put small huts, which is also not available. They are fighting for where they can put shelter, they are fighting for where to put schools and other things, and actually, the space is not enough. 

I would like to follow what my colleague has said, and I would humbly invite the hon. Minister at least to visit Aswa County to understand the situation. That would help us go a long way in understanding the situation in Northern Uganda. 

In the same vein, I would urge especially the Front Bench because they make very important decisions for this country and for our people, to take their time to visit and see the conditions and the people suffering in Soroti, Lira and in the Acholi sub-region. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, probably when I visited Kitgum, Gulu and Pader, these Members of Parliament were not Members of the Sixth Parliament –(Interjection)- Yes, I know, I have been in war for five good years and we were moving like you are moving. But you cannot tell me that you cannot even have a hoe to dig a small hole where to keep your pupu. So, let us be really serious because we are trying to find solutions to a situation (Mrs Kulany rose_)- I am not accepting information -(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Speaker, whereas I understand the feelings that the hon. Minister is expressing, having experienced the situation of war in her own area; is it in order for her to continually mislead this House, when she very well knows that the attacks of the LRA never give opportunity for one even to pick a hoe, not even a pick axe, not even a grain of millet to run to the camp?  Sometimes people run virtually naked like Adam and Eve before they committed that sin. Is she in order to misinform this House that people in those camps have hoes and pick axes whereas these people have none of those, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know these attacks by LRA take people by surprise; they take place at night. So, I think we should not compare them to an organised war situation. The war in Luwero was organized – (Interjections)- Yes, but these are sporadic attacks. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, given the pronouncements of the hon. Minister for Justice, I want to seek clarification from her whether the Cabinet ever receives a brief and an appreciation of what exactly is happening on the ground?

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The hon. Member from Mukono South in her presentation said clearly that “I am talking as a Member of Parliament from Mukono South, not as a Member of the Cabinet.” Is the Member for Bunyole in order to ask the Member for Mukono South to address us as a minister when she is talking in her capacity as a member for Mukono South?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the Minister said that in 1996 she was responsible for that sector and travelled to the North, and she said when she was there the Members of Parliament were not there.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the enthusiasm with which many Members would wish to move to the Front Bench. But I wish we could not do it at the expense of the suffering people of Uganda for whom we are supposed to talk on their behalf. (Applause).

Madam Speaker, just a month ago, the hon. Lt. Gen. Brig. Moses Ali and the Third Deputy Prime Minister presented a grisly situation about what is happening in the war-ravaged areas of Eastern and Northern Uganda. I had imagined that when he presented that position, he had had a prior discussion with fellow Members of the Cabinet, in which instance I would not imagine that the hon. Minister could come here and expect that people in war-ravaged areas should be having a hoe wherever they go for them to keep their pupu. What we have in the war ravaged situation is an emergency situation, which requires immediate Government attention, and for her as a member of Cabinet, who is in such an important position, I want to seek clarification; do you ever at any one time present and defend the issues of these suffering people of Northern and Eastern Uganda in a manner that you ought to have done, especially with proper information from Brig. Moses Ali?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, first of all, it is not a crime for anybody to even imagine that one day one would be a minister. It is not a crime and every Back Bencher should aspire to be a minister, including himself. 
Madam Speaker, I want also to mention that I have the information. I was challenged that I have not been to the North and I have stated that I have been to the North, and I have eaten with women in the camp, even where Members of Parliament did not go with me. Yes, I have been to the North, and I said in the beginning that I acknowledge Government has done something, but I have also acknowledged that there are flaws. So, I am not in heaven, I am here.  But I submit, Madam Speaker, that it is a contradiction from some of the submissions of my colleagues. If I cannot dig a hole to help myself, then do they expect Government to go and make their toilets? (Interjections) You know for me as an adult Ugandan, sometimes when we have situations like this, we should not over-politicise them.  

We should find realistic means of assisting our people, because are you expecting Government to get these photogenic toilets, go place them there and if anybody runs they will be abandoned, then who would be there to take them to the next camp? Let us be realistic. All of us are aware that our people are suffering. There is no doubt about that and we have not denied it. But for somebody to come to the Floor and to tell me that I am –(Interruption)

1.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mrs Betty Akech Okullo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The plight of the people, who have been in camps from 1996 to 2003, is not something we think is temporary and something that can get over quickly.  We have already been told by my colleagues from Acholi sub-region that the places where these people are, are concentrated. They are small places and this is so because the Army cannot allow such places to expand beyond a radius, which they can control. Therefore, for seven years you have a small place to put in your pupu; that small place gets full. Therefore, what we are saying and I think what my colleagues are saying is that we need, because this thing has over-delayed, to have better sanitary facilities –(Applause)- for those people. It is no longer a question of using a small hole to hide your pupu; it has gone beyond that, Madam speaker. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let hon. Mukwaya finish then you will contribute.
MRS MUKWAYA: No, I am not taking any information. Madam Speaker, I am glad –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam speaker, I am glad that my colleague hon. Akech is talking about – because if you have been listening carefully, I am responding to an issue that was raised from Teso. Yes, my colleagues from Teso are saying these are makeshifts; you cannot even stay there for a week. (Interjections). Yes, hon. Betty Akech is talking about a situation where people have stayed in a camp for a period of time and the area cannot be expanded, and I agree with her.  (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I listened to what the hon. Member of Teso was reporting to this House. The Minister is talking about a small matter of digging a small hole to hide your pupu as if this is the total sanitation that is required in a displaced camp; it is not. But, furthermore, the Minister assumes that every person there has a small hoe to use to dig these small holes to hide the pupu. They may not have them. But, sanitation should be understood by the Minister to be a much broader matter than simply digging a hole. 

Surely, since she has been advised that there is limited space in these camps, I want to ask the Minister not to continue pushing a matter, which is so minor so that we can address the bigger issues concerning the human catastrophe that is existing in the North and in Teso. Madam Speaker, I pray that the Minister moves away from that flimsy matter and we go to much bigger matters. Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I am about to wind up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is winding up; you will contribute.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, it is important that women should be in assemblies where matters that affect people are discussed. Most men want to discuss bigger issues and women mind about the details and it is those details that make the point -(Interjections)- yes, and it makes the difference. The fact that I do not have the report, I said here that, having sat and listened to the report, I agree with what has been submitted. So what is the problem? And I admitted that Government has done its best, but there are some flaws; I have acknowledged that.  But, I was intrigued by, you may call it a small matter, but to me that is really a big matter. That is why really even when we are handling the UPE programme, before we even talked about permanent structures for classrooms, that was the area that we wanted to start with. So it is important.  But, if it appears so trivial, at least the managers of the programme have heard that even without the permanent structures something can be done. I rest my case. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, you ruled that we have put a Parliamentary Select Committee to look into the reports.  The reports which have been submitted to the house are very substantive and we have debated the security situation and the situation of displaced persons in camps in this House over and over again. Of great interest is for the Minister responsible for Defence to tell us what is actually on the ground, what step the Executive arm of Government has done. Because, given the constraint of time that we are facing right now, it would be unfortunate if we simply traded debating scores on the Floor of the House when we need a substantive report on what is being done to alleviate the situation reported by the two groups of Parliament. 

I submit to you, Madam Speaker, that instead of trading debating scores of dealing with peripheral matters to the report, because the reports were very substantive and given the constraint of time that we are facing right now, we give an opportunity to the Minister of Defence to tell us substantively what is being done and then the Select Committee will look at the report and it will come with an analysed situation back to the House. But we should not adjourn this House for the recess before we hear what has been done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will speak, but I said that the substantive Minister should wait and hear the comments members want to make about this matter before they answer and before the Select Committee starts work. And about time, we shall stay here until midnight.
MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. We have had the two reports; the material is substantive, but what I have noted is that there are two situations in those reports: there is that situation which requires immediate attention and the other one, which needs long term attention and which can be handled by the Select Committee.

So, I am looking at health. Because of the concentrated people in camps in terms of their sanitation, an epidemic can break out any time. So, I recommend to the House that the Ministry of Health takes immediate action to move there and make sure that we do not have an outbreak.

Two, the Ministry of Disaster and emergency should get prepared to make sure that these people receive food and they should not starve. That is what I want to propose, Madam Speaker.

1.16
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE  (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the two chairmen for the reports. We appreciate the atrocities and problems that are going on in those areas.  

Madam Speaker, I noted one thing with great concern and this was from the report from the Teso Parliamentary Group Chairperson, regarding our Arrow Boys. Because they have not been paid some of them have left with the arms. That region is a region where we are already having problem with illegal guns in the hands of people that – (Interruption)
 
MR MWANDHA: I believe according to the appointed time for elections and for voting, we closed at 1 O’clock. The very reason why we are doing Business before we open the box is because it was not yet 1 0’clock. I see one of my hon. colleagues picking up a ballot paper which in fact, may be in my interest, but is it in order for him to begin voting when the time has long passed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know you should not have your cake and eat it too. You said there were members who were travelling. So, for me I have not closed, I am waiting for those who have travelled. I do not know who is travelling from Kitgum or from Kisoro, but when I close I will close.  After I close, nobody will vote.  
MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was submitting that I really feel very concerned when I hear that some guns are going out into the communities unprotected or un-prevented. We already have a problem of small arms in Uganda and even many parts of Africa. Small arms are very dangerous in the communities and here we are. At the time when the Arrow Boys came in place, it was kind of responding to a crisis, and we applauded them. We said, yes, it is self-defence and we needed to have them defending their own people, defending their own areas. 

But now, a dangerous situation is arising from this. Unless these Arrow Boys were well registered when they came in, and unless the arms, which were given to them were well registered and we know who has which gun, these guns can become a problem like those in Karamoja. That is why, Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the ministries concerned, who distributed these guns. In a situation like this, where these young Arrow Boys are going away with the guns, how are they going to be retrieved? How are they going to come back so that we know that these guns are not going to be pointed at the wrong people, these guns are not going to be misused? 

Possibly when these Arrow Boys came in place, we appreciated that they were coming to protect the people. Possibly we would not even know if some came in with the motive to receive or to snatch the guns; we would not know.  So, I would like to know, Madam Speaker, how this is going to be handled. How do these guns come back and how do we avoid these guns doing more atrocities in the region than was intended?  Thank you very much.

1.20
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam speaker. I have listened to the reports from the two Parliamentary Groups. But my concern has been on statements from leaders. The Members of Parliament in these Parliamentary Groups are putting in all the efforts to see that they end the suffering of their voters.  But from time to time we are reading from the press statements attributed to leaders. One such statement was the one attributed to the Minister of Local Government when he was in Mbale. He said the Members of Parliament of Lango and Acholi who walked out support Kony, and he singled out the name of hon. Okulo Epak, that  because he had made a statement on abolition of graduated tax.  

Madam Speaker, unless we have this close relationship and trust between the Executive and the Members of Parliament, I see us far from ending the insurgency. We have also heard other statements attributed to leaders of the Arrow Groups saying that, “We have been invaded by the Acholis, now we have to finish them.” Such statements to the masses will not end the insurgency.  

Madam Speaker, as a student of Disaster Management, I have been privately discussing with members from the Office of Disaster Preparedness, and I particularly discussed with the Commissioner. When I heard the Minister of Justice discussing, I thought I would give her information on the crisis. The Assistant Commissioner in charge of Disaster Preparedness told us that when the rebels attacked Teso and the masses flocked from the villages to Teso town, within three days all the toilets in Teso were filled. So, I can see a situation where in a camp in Pabo with over 60,000 people and they dig a pit latrine, it is filled in a day. So the only activity they will be engaged in is to dig pit latrines because they will dig one today, they fill it, dig another one and I do not know the size of the land.  

So, Madam Speaker, my concern is that as leaders, we should weigh our statements before we make them because they can either extend the crisis or extend the war. So, let us weigh our statements as leaders and let us have trust particularly between the Executive and the backbenchers on how to fight this war. (Interruption)

MS AMAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member for giving way. The information I want to give is on my behalf and on behalf of Kaberamaido District. I have been interacting with other leaders of Kaberamaido District who have taken refuge here and I have been interacting with them during the field trips. I would like to make this statement: The people of Kaberamaido condemn the insurgency as was put in the report. But they do not in their minds condemn the Acholi people as a tribe, as some of my colleagues have stated here and in the media. We condemn the insurgency, but do not make a blanket condemnation of the Acholi people as a tribe because we know even the Acholi are suffering. Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for the information, which is very commendable. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the discussion I have also had with these people of Disaster Preparedness is that actually we do not have disaster preparedness as a country. What we do is disaster response. I was seeing through the Supplementary Budget of the Minister; I expected a lot of funds put on the vote of Disaster Preparedness so that we can prepare and have some things in place to avoid some of the crisis. You see, with disaster response, the amount of money you use in disaster response is three times more than the money you would have used to prevent a disaster. So, I think we should prepare as Government and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, Minister, I think I am going to give you an opportunity to make your statement.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is now 1.25 p.m. I want to close the ballot box. Are we in agreement? So, those who are travelling, who arrive after this time, will not vote. Do we agree?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can the Sergeant-at-Arms seal the box?

(The Ballot Box was sealed)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honourable Members, 243 Members have voted according to our records. 243 Members have voted, 61 have not voted; that includes the ex-officio Members, the Speaker and myself and those who have not travelled here. So when we finish this particular part of the report, we shall then start the counting which will be done here. Let us finish one thing at a time. 

1.28
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have said it before and I will say it again. Perhaps our nation has lost a heart to be sympathetic with suffering in certain areas. What is going on in Acholi, Lango and Teso is a very grave situation and we have been hearing it for more than a year. 

Madam Speaker, I can almost guess what the Minister of Defence is going to tell us today. “Kony is going to be defeated in another three months; Government is trying its best.” That is what we have continually heard. What is happening in the North and the North East is a wrong policy.  The policy of dealing with Kony has been wrong and the only way we are going to succeed is if we change the policy. If we know that we are the Government, we are responsible for protecting the people in Acholi, Lango and Teso. Kony is a spoiler, nobody looks up to Kony for protection in this country, we look up to the Government and the Government has failed us so far. 

It is sad when you have a disconnected policy. The Minister of Local Government is saying one thing; the Minister of Defence is saying another. I know the Minister of Justice, an extremely kind hearted lady, but because of lack of consistent policy, you can see what has come out today. (Laughter). For somebody on the Front Bench to come up with what has been said today and what we expect today, I think is wrong. People have come from outside and gone to that area and seen what is going on and they have been shocked that we are not doing anything to end the situation. 

Mrs Bigombe who was involved in the process in that area said that at one time Kony had agreed to have discussion, but the Government was adamant, they wanted to conquer Kony, and that policy has not ended, we are still -(Interruption)


THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, whereas I was really most reluctant to intervene even where the statements by my colleague about discrepancies in Government policy is concerned, because obviously there is no truth in it; but the statement he is making now that the former Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, Betty Bigombe, had stated that Kony was willing to talk and it was Government that did not want to talk, but wanted to conquer, is a manifestly false statement. Is it in order for him to make a statement as manifestly false as that one when it is public knowledge Betty Bigombe as a Minister of Government indeed led the delegation that held peace talks with Kony himself; that in fact Government declared a ceasefire; that in fact the President gave Kony seven days in which to conclude the talks or the ceasefire would end?  Is it in order for this hon. Member to stand in this august House and give such manifestly false information against the public knowledge everyone has about the truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, you know hon. Bigombe was not acting as an individual. I think she was a Minister for Pacification of the North when she was engaging the talks with those people. So the Government was actually engaging in the talks with them through Betty Bigombe as a Minister of the Government. So you are out of order.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you Madam Speaker for your very wise ruling. But it was in the papers; I have never met Mrs. Bigombe, I have never talked to her, but it was reported in both papers and that is what she said. I am sorry.  

Madam Speaker, I will continue this way. I think by now we should have realised that our policy in the North is wrong and we ought to change it in order to save the lives of the people in that area. I am told that in Soroti alone, they have filled an acre –(Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: In light of your ruling, Madam Speaker, and in light of the known fact that Government policy regarding resolution of conflict is by peaceful means, is it in order for the hon. Member to continue making the point to insist that Government policy is not that? That is point number one.  
Point number two -(Interjections)- Yes, these are two points of order. Number two, having made your ruling, isn’t it in order for the hon. Member to withdraw the allegation he made earlier about Government not being interested in talks with Kony and Government being interested in conquering?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled him out of order.

DR MALLINGA: I even apologised, Madam Speaker!

MR MWANDHA: I just want to raise a point of procedure, because the hon. Member on the Floor had not even finished the second point over which the Minister raised a point of order. I am interested in knowing why he believes that Government’s policy in the North is wrong? I want him to explain it so that at least we are in a position to judge him whether what he is saying is right or wrong. But to stop him from explaining why he is putting this point will deny us the opportunity to know whether what he is saying is right or wrong.  

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Can hon. Mallinga from Butebo explain, because he is quoting newspapers? Was it these hearsay stories or it was an interview with Madam Betty Kigombe? If it was an interview, then why are you crucifying hon. Mallinga?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled the hon. Member out of order on the point of Mrs. Bigombe.  Let us not smuggle it back through clarification.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you. I think I will continue what I call policy of the Government in areas that are affected. We were all interested, since the 6th Parliament, that dialogue be opened between Mr Kony and the Government of Uganda.  People were selected to this end. We were shocked here in this House when repeatedly the Government said that talks were going on, and that hon. Kategaya was leading those talks. We discovered that hon. Kategaya had been out of Government for almost a year and yet we were being told that talks were carrying on in the North. That is one failure of the Government policy of peaceful negotiation.  
Secondly, I was shocked when the Government said that if talks were to be conducted, Kony should go somewhere in the bush and Government representatives would find him there with all his troops. I do not think that is a right policy – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, you are now dwelling on past matters. But you know this report has touched on very current matters: the humanitarian disaster, the failure to do exams, the sanitation and the food. Why don’t we talk about these problems of now because it has to be addressed?  The other one we have talked about so many times, but people want medicines, they want food, the children have not done exams.  Please let us focus on current issues.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker this was just a preamble to show that the wrong polices have led to people living in the camps, wrong polices have led to overcrowding, wrong polices have led to having such a high mortality of human beings in Soroti. I am told and I am well informed that an acre of land was allocated for burial of the dead in Soroti and it has been filled. Even in Katakwi, an acre was allocated for burial of the dead and it is almost filled.  I think we have reached a stage where to alleviate all this suffering we have to seriously accept that the military option has failed – (Interruption)

MR BENEDICT ETONU: Thank you very much, hon. Member and Madam Speaker. As we speak now, last week alone in my constituency in Amuria county and at Amuria Trading Center, where there is the largest camp, children and the elderly – maybe if I was there, I would be dead now also – are dying at the rate of at least five a day.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, what this shows is what I have been saying. The military option has failed; let us engage maybe another nation to come to our aid. Let us open up talks, let them intervene and end this suffering. What I see as statements from some of the members of the Front Bench is as if they have no sympathy at all and the nation is being taken for a ride.  

I know for a fact that certain people from my area were in Kaberamaido last week, they were attacked –(Interjection)– I am not taking it up, I am winding up –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a procedural matter.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  We have received the reports from the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the Teso Parliamentary Group and you wisely advised that a Select Committee be set up. Madam Speaker, the issue is whether we can wait for the Select Committee to look at these reports as we are proceeding on recess or not. Yet, Madam Speaker, there are certain things within those reports that Parliament can pronounce itself on right now to stop further catastrophe from happening. 

For instance, in the report, the Members acknowledge that the Arrow Group is doing some good work, but the serious concern is that the Ministries of Defence and Finance have failed to raise money to pay the Arrow Group and people are going away, and yet we can resolve here and now, even without a Select Committee, that Government should find money immediately to pay the Arrow Group such that they do not go away.  The point of procedure I am raising is, could we not look at those issues for which we can get resolutions now that can be implemented by Government and then leave other matters to be handled by the Select Committee. Because, if we continue debating, we will not come up with concrete resolutions and yet some things can be resolved now, and action be taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had told hon. Mallinga that the matters he is raising about the talks, which failed, are post-mortem. But there are urgent issues; the people want medicine, we should decide whether the children should have special exams and today is the only day we have. Just discuss what we can do as an emergency intervention for these people; they need help right now and we are going away at the end of today.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I am going to summarize this way. Unless we deal with the fundamental causes of all this suffering, we all realize that, one, health care is not adequate in the camps. I have addressed it, I told you people are dying and gravesides have been filled. The Minister of Health is here; I hope he will respond. 

I have mentioned that attacks still go on in spite of the Government spending money and telling us that Kony is almost coming to an end. But it is not coming to an end. What can we do about the education of the children in the camps?  

I will mention one thing, Madam Speaker.  You have heard of an operation in Bunyoro in 1900 by a man called Colville and what is happening is exactly what is happening in Acholi and Teso.  The problems in Bunyoro are still there 100 years later. So, if we do not take decisive action in Acholi and Teso and Lango, we shall be living with the problems which we started 100 years ago.  Teso was one of the areas with the highest literacy in the country; 80 per cent of the Teso could read and write but now that is in jeopardy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up, hon. Mallinga.

DR MALLINGA STEVEN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The Iteso for a long time were the second largest population in this country next to Baganda, but in the 1980s they went to camps. By the time they got out of the camps, they were not any more the second largest tribe in the country; they were fourth. Busoga and Ankole were ahead. We do not know how many people died then and we do not know how many people have died in this tragedy.  I hope one day we shall be able to know how many Ugandans have died while we watch all this tragedy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can I really ask members to focus on things, which we can do quickly?

1.45
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo District): Thank you Madam Speaker and I will abide by your directive. I have been listening attentively to the Acholi Group and the Teso Parliamentary Group report.  They gave us a lot of information, but I also note that when you look at the different information, they are disparaging.  For example in Kaberamaido, we have been told there is 80 per cent displacement, in Teso 30 per cent displacement and 100 per cent in Pader.  Now when we get this information, as Parliament, sometimes I wonder because we need to look at interventions. And, Madam Speaker as you say, we need to look at the immediate, short term, medium and long term. Now, when you talk about immediate intervention, it is multifaceted. I remember one time when we had the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, she talked about a cabinet committee composed of different ministries and I think this is the time when the Ministry in-charge of Water, that of Health and that of Defence and others, could come together and provide an immediate solution to the problems at hand.

Now, when you talk about, for example, short term and actually medium term, there are two issues which have been on the Floor for sometime.  The first one is a policy on internally displaced persons.  If we had this policy, we would not have the kind of clashes that we have seen going on because it would provide for equal opportunity in different areas, whether it is economic, health or social. Therefore, I am thinking – right now we may think about people internally displaced by war, but in other areas like Toro, you could have internal displacement because of earthquake. If we could have this in the short term built on the work already being done by the Disaster Preparedness Committee, we would be in a better position to handle any kind of crisis.

Finally, Madam Speaker, is the issue of the refugees law.  In practice, Uganda is a shining example on how we treat refugees but when you look at the law, it is called The Control of Aliens Act, even the title itself is very hostile, yet in practice we are doing very well.  I am urging the ministry responsible to come up with a revised version so that what is in practice is shown in the law.  That is my proposal, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

1.50
MR JACK SABIITI  (Rukiga County, Kabale District):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Now, my concern is what we should do as Parliament before we go for this recess.  The two reports have talked basically of food, medicines and sanitation.  Now, Madam Speaker, if we leave and go on recess and nothing has been presented in the 7th Parliament to help the suffering people of Teso and the North, I think we shall have failed in our duty as Members of Parliament.  

I would request, therefore, that before we leave, the Minister of Finance- because I have looked- like hon. Byaruhanga who looked through this supplementary, billions and billions of money paid to Mehta and others.  We would like to know what is actually needed so that Parliament – you remember Madam Speaker, last time we wanted to move a motion here so that Government comes up with a reasonable budget where Parliament can come in and find a way of helping these people, but they are trying to evade the whole issue. 

 So, I would request that really the Minister of Finance liases with the relevant ministries like Health, Education, Water, Disaster and come up with what is at least required.  But when we continue talking about these issues- for Defence we gave them the money and they are trying their best. Whether the policies are wrong or right but at least now these people need food and medicine. So, I really request, Madam Speaker, let us come up with at least a figure of a certain amount to go to the North to help people to have food and medicine.  So, I appeal to the Minister of Finance before we even discuss this supplementary, I would request that we first make sure in this supplementary we have money for these people in the North.  Thank you very much.

1.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairman of the two groups for their report.  These reports are extremely serious.  The issues in the Northeast and the North are extremely sensitive and therefore, we must handle them a little bit more carefully. And I agree entirely with hon. Byaruhanga who said that we should be careful, what sort of words we speak and we weigh exactly what we say.  That does not only go for the front bench but it also goes for Members of Parliament.  Sometimes the things we say do not help us very much.  

After thanking the members who have given us these reports, there are serious issues- but I would like to thank the chairman especially of the Teso Group. When reading his report, he has mentioned issues that have been overtaken by certain events that have been put into place. It would have been nice for us to know what has been put in place and what is helping those people who are in the camps.  

Another issue that has come out very clearly is that some of these services, which are supposed to be provided, are slow and therefore are not arriving in the camp as fast as they should, but they have been accepted.  Why, because the two groups have met the Chief Executive of the Government and they have spoken to the President and they have given him some of the issues they feel must be tackled.

I am also happy that another Member of Parliament a few minutes ago said actually Cabinet is concerned to the extent that they have a standing committee of Cabinet, which is dealing with the issues of disaster in the North and the Northeast.  They are crosscutting issues; they involve sanitation in taking hygiene and health; they concern water; they concern education for the children; they concern our medical facilities, which are in the area.  These are all issues that have been given to us in the reports.  In fact, they have gone as far as saying that some of the hospitals, like the referral hospital in Soroti, are operating at a third its strength.  If this is true then we should have an answer to it.  

Madam Speaker, anybody who is going to carry out any action has to study these reports.  Even Government has to study these reports.  Luckily, on Friday, I have been told there is a cabinet meeting, and I just also wanted to say; because I heard some members who are always talking about the front bench and I want this to cease. I know very well that there are people on the backbench who would love to come to the frontbench; and in fact not only that, they campaign for it.  Next time when somebody says it, I will name them.  It is not fair every time to bash or to turn the frontbench into a punching bag. I feel that we should work as a team and this team should help us to find solutions to the problems that are in the North. What has come out of these reports, Madam Speaker, is that everybody condemns the insurgency in the North and nobody should say that the people from that area are not condemning this insurgency.  

The other very important point is that, Madam Speaker, you have accepted a select committee, which I support.  But as much as I support it, I wanted somebody to help me and this is because I have not been a party to this, or have not yet been told what actions have taken place since the Head of State of this Government, the Chief Executive, was met.  What sort of actions have been put in place and how much of these have been realized?  Probably then and only then will the people realize that Government is concerned.  It is this concern that I want us to establish, and from that basis I would like somebody also to help us and tell us what is not moving as fast as it should.  

I would like to thank hon. Sabiiti for having said, “Yes, I have looked at the supplementary but I have not seen anything on disaster preparedness in the North and in the North-east.”  I think that is a positive way forward.  If that is so, is it because of not having enough finances that the different ministries that are dealing with these issues have not managed to deliver the services to these areas?  

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I have been in Cabinet for some time and the point of the North and the Northeast is a very big concern in Cabinet, and there is no time we sat for more than two times that it has not been mentioned.  It has been mentioned by the Head of State himself, it has been mentioned by different ministers, including those of Disaster Preparedness. It has been mentioned by the Minister of Defence and his continuous supply of information and the concern is all round.  That is why I was little bit worried when I saw us being diverted on very minor issues that we should find solutions for without even standing up here in front of you, Madam Speaker.  You know, when a Speaker of Parliament listens to us wasting time on issues that we can solve, it is really very unfortunate.  

I would, therefore, like to say the way forward is, there are certain actions that have been taken.  There are actions that have not been taken; there actions that are slow and, therefore, with what is happening now, we are going in the Christmas season; a lot of members are going on Christmas holiday, and we are concerned.  What can Government do between now and this time when we are having a holiday? Therefore, the different ministers who are concerned should read this report and the Government itself on Friday can consider it in Cabinet and eventually some actions should be taken.
Madam Speaker, I would like to end by appealing to everybody, be it the frontbench, be it any member of this House, that the question we are dealing with is extremely sensitive, not only to the people in that area, but also to the people in the whole of this country.  I would like to thank you very much.

1.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mrs Amongin Aporu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would, first of all, like to start by thanking the Chairpersons of Acholi and Teso Parliamentary Groups for the reports that they have submitted to this august House.  This morning, from 8.00 a.m., the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was meeting with the Lango Parliamentary Group, and the Lango Parliamentary Group are still going on with their security mobilization in the district of Apac and Lira.  When they are through with the mobilization, they will subsequently present the report to this House.  

Madam Speaker, it is a clear fact that the people who are internally displaced are suffering and Government is aware of the plight of these people.  It is very expensive managing people who are camped, and internally displaced because we are talking about 1.3 million Ugandans who are displaced in the region of Acholi, Lango and Teso.  

Madam Speaker, I will not go into the details of the percentages now, but since we are appearing before the Select Committee on Monday, the Chairperson of the Select Committee informed me that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is appearing first.  I would request the Chairpersons of the Committees to present their reports to the Select Committee so that we shall wholistically report to the House next time.  

I would like to respond to some of the issues raised.  Hon. Patrick Amuriat in his submission said that some of the issues have been overtaken by events.  I just want to highlight a few of the areas.  When you go to Soroti Municipality in the town, you will find that the level of the presence of the people has gone down.  It is because the Office of the Prime Minister, in conjunction with the Teso Disaster Committees, have moved people out of the town centre outside and some of them are now settled in a camp in the Municipality and the rest of the people are displaced within the host communities.  

Others are settled in temporary camps that have been set because the people had to be moved out of the schools to allow the children in the Teso region to sit their examination.  But I want also to say that after the Primary Leaving Examinations, it was also noted that the parents who had run to the islands have got a number of children with them who did not sit the Primary Leaving Examination.

The Office of the Prime Minister coordinates the agencies.  Those agencies that were read out: ADRA-Uganda, Medicines and Frontiers, UNICEF and others, after our inter-agency meeting, they made interventions in areas of humanitarian assistance, in medicine, health and food to the suffering people.  

Madam Speaker, the issues that have been raised by both Acholi and Teso are similar and we want to thank them because they have raised very crucial issues and this goes along way in assisting Government in finding ways and avenues of narrowing the gaps and to be focused and to increase the support to the affected population.  We want to commend them for that.  Now, that they have raised these issues, we shall definitely group them and have them responded to in the short, medium and long term.

Issues raised in the health sector, education sector, transport and water sector, we shall definitely have to call the National Disaster Committee to sit down and we shall have the technical ministries to address the issues.  The Ministry of Health definitely will address the issue of drugs and tomorrow we are having a meeting with the Minister of Health in as far as the emergency drugs are concerned for the affected population in Acholi, Lango and Teso.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has released money, and this morning in the meeting, we informed the Lango Parliamentary Group that we have purchased food for the internally displaced people, but we shall give priority for allocation to Apac District. 

 I have been discussing this morning with the Minister of Defence that the food is here but the terrorists are present in Lango, what do we do?  The Minister of Defence has assured me that the food is going to be escorted to Oyam North, Oyam south and Kole County because we cannot just allow the trailers to go unaccompanied. We continually work in harmony with the Ministry of Defence because we do not want to risk both the staff from Government and the staff from the international agencies; although the rebels have burnt some of our trailers and you know buying a trailer is 300 million.  So, sometimes when Members of Parliament raise issues that the food doesn’t reach the district headquarters in time, it because it spends five days without being escorted. We try to coordinate with Defence in order not to risk the lives of the trailer drivers.  

In as far as water is concerned, the internally displaced people in the municipalities, Government has agreed that all the internally displaced persons in the camps in the Municipalities, will have stand pipes for water and the bills will be paid by Government.  As for the rural water: The bore holes, the protected springs, the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment in conjunction with the districts will re-allocate funds to avail water to the internally displaced persons wherever they are.

The Inter-Agency Committee which is coordinated under the Office of the Prime Minister will also give their interventions.  Madam speaker, I know the situation is not very palatable in the North but I would appeal to the Members of Parliament to bear with us because even the supplementary for today, which you have referred to the Committee, we were requesting for a supplementary release.  If you read this report No. (4), it is specifically talking about emergency relief and security needs.  So as soon as the money is released, we shall definitely reach out and support the internally displaced people because we are talking about release of money to the tune of 5.1 billion and 508, respectively, for health, education, water and others.  

The issue of the law, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the refugee policy, Cabinet has already approved it –(Interruption)


MR SABIITI: You talked of a provision to be in this report, but could you please guide us to know where it is because we do not see it in this report?

MR MWANDHA: I just want to find out from the Minister whether Government has people in these camps who assess the day to day situation in the camps and avail the information back the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness for them to take appropriate action, or do they depend on the information that may be given by Members of Parliament, or by other people, or do they have a regular reporting system on the situation on each of the camps and assessing the needs of those camps on a regular basis.  Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, according to hon. Amajo and hon. Onek, in Pader 100 per cent are in camps, Kitgum around 90 percent and they are saying they do not have even sanitation and water.  Now, I am wondering where does the money allocated to these Local Governments go, because there is for water and sanitation, there is road construction, there is all these things, where does it go?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do not know whether we shall really get all those answers today.  There is a selectoral Committee sitting on Monday. Let me ask members to go to the Select Committee and listen and also get clarification, for we cannot finish this matter on the Floor of this House.  

MS ALASO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Yes, you are right when you say the Select Committee is going to sit on Monday.  But I have a bit of dilemma how we are going to proceed because what we are looking at is an emergency of emergencies, if there is anything like that, and you have committed the Supplementary budget from the Ministry of Finance.  I came in late but I was told you have committed it to the Finance Committee, and what we are now asking is for an emergency of all emergencies, which does not seem to have the potential if we ever waited for the Select Committee, or even to wait for the Finance Committee to come back here then we will really run into a crisis. So, I am wondering how we are going to proceed on that aspect of emergency!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I said we shall stay here until midnight today.  So, I expect that report to come back today from the Finance Committee.  We shall stay here until midnight; we will deal with these matters.

Mrs Amongin Aporu:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The issue of emergency intervention, the Prime Minister is convening an Inter-Ministerial meeting to look into this.  Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is Cabinet tomorrow, Friday, and we shall also discuss the issues that have been raised by the Parliamentary Group of Acholi and Teso.  

Hon. Jack Sabiiti, the information that I was giving is on the resolution, which the Ministry of Finance was going to move today for the Supplementary Expenditure for the fiscal year 2003/2004, page 4, this is the document that was distributed to members.  

Hon. Mwandha wanted to find out –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI:  You see, we want really to be sure that what you are stating is correct. Given what the Ministry of Finance has presented in this table, I do not see this figure in this table. But when you come to page 4, he is talking of what has so far been released, which means it has not been spent.  So, we are talking of the additional funds from now onwards as a supplementary in addition to these funds –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you are dealing with a supplementary, which is not even before this House.  Really, you leave the Minister deal with her disasters; the Minister of Finance will deal with the supplementary.

MRS APORU:  Madam Speaker, I want to respond to hon. Mwandha.  We have got a structure: The District Disaster Management Committees, in liaison with the Sub-County Committees and the NGOs, go down to the places where people are displaced and they assess the food needs and non-food needs of the people who are displaced.  


Hon. Mutuluuza, in Acholi, in Pader and in Kaberamaido, it is true almost the whole population is displaced, but this doesn’t mean to say that Government has not provided any facilities to the people.  Services have been extended to the people but they are not adequate. But at least services have been extended to the people; borehole water and the mobile toilets and others have been extended to the people.  But like as I said in the beginning, the reports are going to empower us to get a strategy of spreading out and intervening more to the affected people.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, when we take food- like now Government has bought food and we are starting with Apac, we shall be informing the District Disaster Committees and the Members of Parliament so that every Member of Parliament gets to know when Government is sending assistance to his or her constituency, so that they help us to oversee and report also to the House –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  I am sorry to intervene and I thank the Minister for giving way.  I hear her saying “finally”, and she is finalizing on the issue of food.  But there is an issue, which was raised in this House, and this is in respect of Article 33(3), which states that, “The State shall protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society.”  In line with this was mention of the need for sanitary towels.  Women in displaced camps have to be supplied these very essential commodities. (Applause) I remember even in the President’s manifesto, there was a provision for it.  Hon. Kavuma raised this on the Floor of the House and she was supported.  Can the Minister inform us as to what measures the Government has undertaken to ensure that women and girls do not get embarrassed in this particular sensitive situation?  I thank you.

MRS APORU:  Thank you very much, hon. Dora Byamukama.  I was going to respond because as I was finalising, I was going to talk about the trauma centres.  We have ever and we always intervene by supplying sanitary towels.  You remember when I stood here one time and I talked about towels; members said how could I come here and talk about sanitary towels.  So, I stopped talking about sanitary towels.  It is also one of the items that we give to girls in schools.  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, I did not hear.  What were you saying?

MR AMONGIN APORU:  I was saying, one time when I came here, I heard members talking about the non-food items to be taken to the camps, and I raised the issue of towels. So, shortly before I could read “sanitary towels”, hon. Tom Bagalana said, “Stop telling us about towels.”  But, I wanted, Madam Speaker, to inform the House that we are very mindful about the womenfolk, the youth; we are very mindful because each time we take the sanitary towels. We have not been reflecting that we have given so many cartons of sanitary towels to a girls’ school or to the women, but we try in one way or the other.  Even with our partners, the agencies, they sometimes give us –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister. I have no intentions really of disrupting the flow of that feedback, but I just want to emphasize the position of our Committee.  We take note of the fact that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has been trying to give to the schoolgirls sanitary towels, but we were rather concerned as a Committee about the women out there in those camps.

Madam Speaker, those women fled their homes just as if we were put to run in this House; this is how we are going to live.  No extra panty - nothing.  No old clothes you expect them to tear up and use, they do not have; and so what happens is if their periods catch up with them- let me be blunt as I possibly can. If their periods catch up with them in the camp, this is a camp where you sleep with your husband, your daughter and all your relatives in that church and you are all stained with blood.  That is the plight of those women and how I wish the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness would go an extra mile to think about not only the schoolgirls, but also the women in those camps.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I am really surprised that a man intimidated you into not talking about towels. A man who does not menstruate – (Laughter).  Honourable members, I think there is no shame in mentioning these things; these people require them and I think they should be provided. (Applause)


MS SANTA OKOT:  I wanted, hon. Speaker, to also get a clarification from the State Minister for Disaster Preparedness on one issue which also appeared in the report of the Teso Parliamentary Group; the issue of issuing cards to the members in the camps in order to access food.  This has been a complaint over and over from my people of Pader District that World Food Programme, when they take food to the ground, and as you are aware people did not come to the camp at once. Some kept on coming in bits.  So, you find that on the first time when World Food Programme was doing their assessment, some people were left out. Each time they take food, they distribute to some people and leave others even when they are in the line. The explanation they give is that you have not been assessed and yet these persons are already living in the camp and we have always echoed this to the hon. Minister several times and it is still happening.  

Recently, they took food to Kalongo sub-county where they had last distributed food in August and they gave food to people whom they say they had assessed and came back with 500 bags.  We do not know where they took the food.  I have heard the same complaint when the honourable chairperson of Teso was also complaining that some people are given cards, those who do not have cards even if they are present they miss food.  I would like to get the clarification from the honourable minister if she has ever informed World Food to really give food to every person present in the camp. Thank you.

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker, there is a possibility that Government could be spending a lot of money in aid of the people who are in the camps, when actually this money does not benefit the people for which it is intended.  There has been recently  a case reported in the newspapers about the 700 bags of maize that were intended for the displaced people in the camps in Kumi and this maize was apprehended in Mbale stores when it was milling for commercial benefit the people who were holding it.  I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister. Does your ministry have the capacity to ensure that actually the food releases go directly to the people for whom it is intended?  It could be that what my honourable colleague is seeking clarification about the 500 bags, could be those are the same bags which eventually end up on the commercial markets and stores for commercial purposes.  I thank you.

MR OKUPA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister.  It is disheartening to find that little is being done to take care of the female colleagues in the camps.  Madam Speaker, as you know the problems the female flock face in such situations are unique.  We have in these displaced camps and disturbed areas pregnant women running.  Many have got miscarriages, some have delivered on the way and some have died.  When we went to Kaberamaido and more especially in Awel Island- that is between Kasilo and Kaberamaido- it was unfortunate that maternity services are not seen in these places.  One of the ladies in the process had a miscarriage. She had a retained placenta because getting out of the Island to Kasilo mainland in Bugondo sub county was a problem.  She had to die in the middle of the lake in a small canoe because they also do not have transport; they only use canoes.  Now the question is, what special services is the ministry preparing for us in store to help the women folk in such situations?  Thank you.

MRS APORU:  Madam Speaker, you know I informed the House that the issues of managing displacement are complex.  I must admit, Madam Speaker, that the distribution of sanitary towels is a gradual process. We have been addressing the schoolgirl first and we shall gradually move and address the women who are internally displaced. 

 I want also, Madam Speaker to say that as much as this group cannot wait, but we have to put priorities.  We have our priorities and we work according to the priorities of the budgeting of the department of Disaster Management and Refugees.  

I would also, Madam Speaker, want to say that the Women Member of Parliament for Pader, hon. Santa Okot has raised the issue of the cards as the Teso Chairperson of Teso Parliamentary Group raised it.  We have already handled this issue, because all these agents work under the Office of the Prime Minister: the Uganda Red Cross, the World Food Programme, all of them that distribute food. And now we have said it should not be a conditionality that only people who have cards should be served.  We are addressing this, because the influx, the make-shift camps, people keep on moving, so we have now changed the mechanism of serving the internally displaced persons.

Hon. Dombo Emmanuel, has asked that do you have the capacity?  Yes, we have a capacity- we are under the Office of the Prime Minister and the Head of Government Business- we have the capacity to make sure that the people are served accordingly.  The people who stole food from Kumi were staff from the Uganda Red Cross and they will be disciplined accordingly through the Uganda Red Cross Society.  The Uganda Red Cross was an implementing agency that was contracted by World Food Programme to distribute food to the internally displaced persons, and the people who stole the 700 bags of food have already been arrested and they are in prison and I think they will be prosecuted for stealing the food for the suffering people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have got to have these votes counted. I really want us to tie up this matter so that the Minister of Defence can come in.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out, if the people in displaced camps are not identified and everybody is allowed to access food, how do you make sure that you are not giving this food to rebels? If the cards are dispensed this means everybody is now accessing food. How do you make sure that this food is not supplied to the rebels themselves?

MRS APORU: I would like to inform the honourable colleague that the people know themselves and they are very sensitive. They know themselves. There is no way rebels can freely come to the line because people identify themselves. 

The rebels are the ones who normally ambush the trucks for food; it is not the normal ordinary person who is suffering. The rebels are the ones who normally hijack, ambush or burn the vehicles. (Interruption) 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want us to end this matter and –(Interruption)

MR ETONU: In Amuria, for example, people in the camps have divided themselves into cells and are registered by their leaders. When the food comes, they go by the register. Therefore, the food will not be able to get to any rebel. In any case, if a rebel came into the camp he would not go back alive because they know who they are. People are living together, they know who is who; they identified themselves even before they came to the camp.  

The other thing I want to say is, when the food gets to the camp, if it remains the agency implementing this gives more food to the people there; no food will go back. If you attempt to take food back, I do not think you will even get away alive. 

So, these people who have stolen food, maybe they did it along the way from Mbale to Soroti. Food will never come from those camps. It has never happened. And we thank the ministry and the Government for delivering food, although it is not enough.


MRS APORU: Madam Speaker, hon. Elijah Okupa raised the issue of the women. First of all, in all these camps the women constitute the greatest percentage. We have noted that the greatest difficulty in health service delivery is particularly to the pregnant women, those in need of delivery in the camp. Mobile clinics sometimes stop operating at 4 or 3 O’clock. They are not able to help this category of people who are displaced. 

The women displaced in the islands suffer most. Those of you who come from the islands, there are people from Lango, Kaberamaido and Apac who are displaced in the islands. Some of these islands are floating. Even if we went there, you would find that the island has moved somewhere else. It is very difficult.  

We are, therefore, appealing to you to join the call of the Office of the Prime Minister. We would like you to appeal to the internally displaced people in the floating islands to come down to the plains so that health service delivery and other social service delivery is extended to them.  


I know we are going for recess, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to invite the chairman of Teso Parliamentary Group and all the members to go and appeal to our people to get down to the plains. There we will be able to serve them, because we have food, we have blankets. 

At the moment we do not have transport to reach out there because the canoes are very risky for us to use. But we pledge that during recess we will work with you.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the report mentioned Mr Jan Egeland, the representative of the Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs and Relief in the United Nations (UN).  I would like to report to the House that the UN has approved the opening of four more regional centres in the Northern region. 

I had the privilege of leading a Ugandan delegation to Geneva where Mr Egeland presented a paper about the plight of suffering people. He informed the assembly that the UN is going to have an office opened in Lira for UN World Food Programme, and then for UN OCHA in Soroti, Moroto and Kitgum. 

They will have international staff and local staff because they want to supplement the partnership with the Government of Uganda, to see that we extend humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced people so that these issues are at least brought to an acceptable standard in one way or the other. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who previously spoke thanking the two parliamentary groups for the reports they have presented.  

I would like to request them, Madam Speaker, to continue doing this because I think it is in their interest. Indeed as Members of Parliament, I think it is their duty to discover what is happening in their constituencies and inform the relevant government organs, which have the tasks to respond to the problems that may exist in these constituencies.  

I, therefore, suggest that either as a parliamentary group or even as individual representatives of constituencies, they make regular reports. For instance, they can make regular reports to Ministry of Defence about defence issues in their constituencies and what we need to do together to attend to those problems.  

At Ministry of Defence, we consider every Member of Parliament our partner in the performance of our function as a ministry. We would like, therefore, to invite you irrespective of your political views.  

Ministry of Defence is absolutely open, hon. Aggrey Awori will tell you that. It is absolutely open. Once we are discussing questions of problems facing our people in any constituency, partisan politics does not come in. 

We have a clear sight, we do not have coloured sight at the Ministry of Defence headquarters. So, please, I would like to invite you in future to do what you have done now with us directly, and of course also report to Parliament about the progress or lack of progress in our efforts to contain the problems in this country.

Secondly, I would like to use this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to welcome back the Members of Parliament from Acholi and some from Teso, who had joined the Acholi Parliamentary Group and Lango Parliamentary Group in suspending participation in Parliament until their problems in the North were solved. 

Indeed their return is a good sign. It clearly shows, and I know for sure that from the intensive interactions they have had with the President and other leaders in Government, they are satisfied that their conditions they put in place for their participation in Parliament have been satisfied. Therefore, they are welcome back.

There are obviously a lot of problems as you can see from this report. The situation in the north and northeast of Uganda is a very grave situation for the welfare of our people. There is no doubt about it. 

I would like to echo the points made by the hon. Francis Babu in his contribution, that Government is very much conscious of this problem because we are close to it, we are there. I want to repeat what I have said here before that we, the NRM Government, do regret that this situation exists.  We have done all we can and we continue to do all we can to contain that bad situation.  
The Minister of State in charge of Disaster Preparedness has ably presented her response, which I thought was quite comprehensive. You can see that Government is doing everything possible to attend to the problems of the suffering of the people in internally displaced people’s camps.  

On our part, through the UPDF, we are doing whatever we can to help. I think we have moved a long way. You remember there was a time when these bandits could successfully attack internally displaced people’s camps. You remember the attack of Acholi Pii where they killed many people; I do not remember the figure, but very many were killed. They could also stop movement of vehicles. But we have moved away from all that. 

At the moment we are able to protect these camps from attacks by bandits. We are able to sustain the movement of relief to the people in camps, as you have heard from the minister and as all these MPs know. We are able - as the Acholi Parliamentary Group has said – to protect them in performing their duties.  

We have not been able to provide 100 percent protection because we have not entirely eliminated these groups. They are still there, but we are making a lot of progress. 

I was happy to read in the report by the Acholi Parliamentary Group, praises about what UPDF has been doing and what it has achieved. They say, on page 4, the second paragraph: 

“That the tour was completed successfully due to the escort protection provided by the UPDF’s 4th and 5th Divisions. Throughout the tour, the UPDF verified security along the road, deployed as necessary and deployed escort vehicles and personnel. The UPDF assigned to the tour performed extremely well and are to be commended for effectively carrying out a very difficult task.” (Applause).

I am happy that in this report on page 5, in paragraph 3.2 under the heading, “The Security Situation in Acholi”, they say: 

“The APG - I presume that to mean the Acholi Parliamentary Group – team found that much of Gulu District was relatively peaceful, and people travelled frequently and in some cases even at night. 
This however was not the case in Kitgum and Pader districts.” There, the situation is different.  

In paragraph 3.3, under the heading “Conduct of the UPDF and LDUs”, they say: In Gulu District in the areas under the jurisdiction of the UPDF 4th Division, there were generally extremely positive reports on the conduct of the UPDF and the local LDUs, apart from some complaints of soldiers taking away wives of the civilians”. There were not so positive reports about UPDF units in Kitgum and Pader districts, and they have listed them as well. 

I welcome this kind of reporting because I think it is objective. It gives us a picture of what is happening in the country, and it gives us an opportunity as a government to attend to those problems that may be persisting. I would like to pledge the commitment of the Ministry of Defence and the Government that even these outstanding problems will be solved.

Let me briefly talk about two or three points, which were raised in the contributions by members on the Floor. 

The question about the payments for the Arrow Group; it is true that this has delayed. By the way, I should have said the Teso Parliamentary Group did the same. I think they have talked objectively about the situation there. They have praised UPDF where it deserves it and raised problems where the UPDF has been weak.  

I was particularly pleased that the people in Teso, in the referral hospital, have appreciated the fact that UPDF has posted medical personnel who have filled the gap. As a consequence, the plight of the people who needed referral medical care has been made less.

The question of payments to LDUs and particularly Arrow Group, as MPs will appreciate, has been problematic. It is problematic because we had not included them in the budget. So, monies that you passed on our vote or the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ vote did not include payment to the Arrow Group or the Amuka Group. 
We are, however, doing everything possible. In fact I was supposed to visit Teso yesterday and I did not go because I wanted to be in Cabinet when we are discussing this.  

I am rather surprised that in the presentation of the Minister of Finance, the question of Internal Affairs and payments to the Arrow Group is not covered. Unfortunately, I did not find any of their representatives here. I will take it up with them because we have already discussed this in Cabinet. And as I said, that is the reason why I did not travel to Teso yesterday. 

I would like to pledge again that Government will do everything possible to meet this cost. I know, because you have told me many times before, that if we come to Parliament you will support us in this. (Interruption)

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want to get from the Minister is about the payment of the home guards and the arrow boys. According to him they were not budgeted for, but also time came when their services became a necessity and Government opted to use them. 

Recently we were informed that Ministry of Defence discovered thousands of ghost soldiers, who had actually been budgeted for and they are in the budget. Can the Minister give us an estimated precise number of the ghost soldiers they discovered, so that when they bring a supplementary to support the home guards we would know the difference?

Secondly, the Minister talked about containing the situation. I do not know whether all efforts are going to be geared towards containing the situation, or the Ministry will shift from containing the situation to resolving the problem?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Minister. The other clarification I want to get from you is about the payment to the Arrow boys. There has been some conflicting information about this. I wish we could hear from you about the payment of the Arrow boys, because some information goes to the Arrow boys that they are going to be paid from July and others say from December. So, this disjointed information is causing a lot of problems among the Arrow boys. 
Could you tell us clearly whether you are paying these people from August, July, or it is only for December so that they have the correct information?  

I would also want to appeal to you to please give the correct information. Let people not keep derailing what you are supposed to do and give contrary information. If we get it from you, the Minister of Defence, we would take it as a serious word from the Ministry.  Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: This is also to do with the welfare, Madam Speaker, of the Arrow boys, specifically in relation to a matter that was addressed in the report. We are losing some of these boys. 

Just a few days ago, I think four boys from Tubu were killed and are being buried as we speak now. In the absence of the enabling law, what does Government intend to do to try to address the case of Arrow boys who die in action?

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I may respond to hon. Okumu Reagan - I am competing with a lot of noise from outside.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Sergeant-at-Arms please ask members to come back or keep quiet?

MR MBABAZI: On the question of ghosts, it is true and I think, Madam Speaker, I did mention this recently in Parliament. It is true that the war on the question of ghosts in the Army is on, but it is only at the starting stage. When all these investigations have been completed and the reports have been finalized, I will come to brief Parliament about that effort. 

For the time being, what we have established is that, yes indeed there are ghosts. We have put up a committee to dig deep into this in order to be precise in terms of number and in terms of people that have been involved. This, however, does not help in the matter we are discussing, the question of payment of LDUs, Arrow Groups and others.  

Madam Speaker, let us take the example of the Arrow Group. The leadership in Lango generally, under the able leadership of their district chairmen and of the leaders, hon. Felix Ogong and hon. Jovino Akaki and the leader of the Lango Parliamentary Group, hon. Okulo Epak, have resolved that irrespective of political differences, they will handle security as security. They will not mix politics with security –(Applause) - and they have gone ahead and mobilized the people.  

So, originally, we had planned to recruit 1,600 Amuka people, the Rhino Group. But because of the enthusiasm of the people of Lango to fight this insecurity, not only the enthusiasm of the leaders, the President in his interaction with the leadership there agreed to raise this number to 10,000. 

When you look at the numbers we are talking about, 10,000 the Amuka Group, and the Arrow Group that is slightly less than 10,000 at the moment, then you can see that even as we discover ghosts in the Army we are not likely to raise numbers to that level. We, therefore, know for sure that we will need funding to support the enthusiasm of the people to fight against this terrorism. 

As I said, Government will come to you soon. I had hoped that it would be in this particular one, but maybe the Ministry of Finance will clarify that.  Secondly, the question –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the Minister’s effort to address the issues of the welfare of the auxiliary forces. I also know that at the inception of all this initiative, the local governments incurred a lot of debt expenditure to try to sustain this, to the extent that the local governments are really indebted now in terms of fuel and the earlier efforts to feed people. 

I am wondering, as the Minister seeks a supplementary provision for welfare, facilitation and payment, whether he has also looked at a way of trying to see that the burden that was borne by local governments then is lifted from them now. Are you considering getting some monies? Because this was a security function and we all know security is not a decentralized initiative. Could you please help me along that line?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the select committee is going to start sitting on Monday. Some of these issues can be dealt with in detail from there. Yes, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: It is very important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, there are matters, which cannot be concluded on the Floor of this House. You will have an opportunity over several days and months, to discuss this matter before the select committee in detail so that it comes out better.  

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just would like to state that as I said earlier, the problem we have is the resource envelope. That is what limits our action because our resources are limited. Otherwise, if we had the resources to do everything, we would. Now -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude your statement.  

MR MBABAZI: I am obviously not handling the question of claims by local governments when they do not come to Defence. I presume the relevant ministry that handles them will do that.  

I would also like to answer the question, which I have seen even in the media, about welfare of these auxiliary forces like the Arrow Group. Apart from their salary, they get everything else the same as soldiers. They have uniform, they are armed, they are fed and they are under the same command as the UPDF. When they die they are entitled to the same benefits as regular troops. 

I wanted to make this very clear so that people understand it. It is a question I am responding to because I have seen it in the media; people have been viciously raising it.  

The question about containing and resolving is one that we have handled all along, because taking up arms against the Government is not a new phenomenon in Uganda. It is something that has been going on for many years, and the last bit we are dealing with is that one in the North. I have no doubt in my mind at all, as I have told this Parliament very clearly many times before, that we will resolve it too. I have no doubt about it at all.

Has the military operation failed? Well, a few days ago I said in this House that Government policy is to apply the carrot and stick method.  
We are willing, as a government, to talk to anyone who has got a point to make. 

But if you do not have a point to make and you think you can hold this government at ransom and hold the people of Uganda at ransom, we have clearly demonstrated over and over again that we will give you what you deserve. We shall apply maximum military force to these bandits until we have put enough pressure on them to want to talk.

Anytime they want to talk, hon. Mallinga you had made this point earlier, we are always ready. You will never find us wanting on the question of talking to these people. (Applause). 

Hon. Okupa Elijah, a Pan African Parliamentary candidate, raised a point about the Arrow Group and their payments. The policy for the payment of the Arrow Group is like any other group. There is no selective handling of one group. The policy is universal. 

When someone adorns military uniform you go through training, and after you have been passed out you are enrolled. It is after enrolment that you are paid, and this policy will apply to the Arrow Group as well. 

I know we had issued or released money for the month of October. If they had been enrolled and they were committed to the field before October, we shall pay them that period. In our request for supplementary funding to the Ministry of Finance, those details have been given, in very close collaboration with the leadership of Teso.  

Finally, I want to thank you very much honourable members. I want to thank Parliament for appreciating the efforts Government is trying to put into resolving all these problems. We fully appreciate your support and I look forward to your giving us even greater support in the coming days. Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Ministers of Disaster Preparedness and of Defence for those clarifications. Of course our select committee is at liberty to make use of these reports. They are also at liberty to summon either the Minister of Local Government on that issue of the money, or anybody in the Government to assist them.  
I would like to use the powers given to me under our rules to suspend the business on the Order Paper until 4.30 p.m. I am doing this to enable the counting of votes to take place. I have taken into account the fears and worries of the members, that is why I am appointing the Chamber as a counting hall rather than the South Committee room or any other place as is provided for under the rules. 

I ask the candidates to go away but they can have one agent here. If they are not going collapse, they can witness the counting. They can also have their observers here so long as the observers do not interfere with the counting. Otherwise, they would be committing an election offence. 

The hon. Rugumayo, hon. Ssemakula Kiwanuka and the clerks will conduct the counting. Please, remain in your seats and if you are here, just listen. Do not cause a scuffle and do not touch the ballot box. Only hon. Rugumayo, hon. Kiwanuka and the clerks are allowed to touch those papers. 

Members did request that as the papers are taken from the box they be read out. You do that so that there is no doubt about the results of this election. You read them out so that they tally. I do not want any problem with this election. 

The other business of the House is suspended until 4.30 p.m. this afternoon. Hon. Kasenene has arrived. He could also assist. As a non-voting member, hon. Kasenene, you could join the team. The rest of us can go for lunch –(Interjections)- I want to go for lunch, I do not want to stay here! You can count the votes in my absence.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 3.07 p.m.)

( On resumption at 5.12 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are disturbing the presiding officer with these funny messages. Anyway, I would like to read the outcome of the elections:  
(1) Hon. Chebrot Chemoiko Steven -	5 votes
(2) Hon. Lukyamuzi John Ken	-	14 votes
(3) Hon. Okupa Elijah		-	17 votes
(4) Hon. Mwandha James	-	19 votes
(5) Hon. Atubo Omara Daniel	-	27 votes
(6) Hon. Wagonda Muguli John	 -	49 votes
(7) Hon. Ruhindi Freddie		-	52 votes
(8) Hon. Awori Siryoyi Aggrey	 -	62 votes
(9) Hon. Ogenga Latigo Morris	 -	78 votes
(10) Hon. Kabareebe Amon-Reeves -	79 votes
(11) Hon. Bulamu Johnny Richard -	88 votes
(12) Hon. Miria Matembe 	-	92 votes
(13) Hon. Katuntu Abdu		-	101 votes
(14) Hon. Omach Mandir Jachan -	110 votes
(15) Hon. Sebalu Mike Kennedy -	130 votes
(16) Hon. Amongi Betty Ongom -	68 votes
(17) Hon. Tiperu Nusura	 	-	72 votes
(18) Hon. Biira Bwambale Loyce -	101 votes

In the circumstances, I hereby declare the following members duly elected. Group A:
(1)	Hon. Sebalu Mike Kennedy. (Applause).
(2)	Hon. Omach Mandir Jachan. (Applause).
(3)	Hon. Katuntu Abdu. (Applause).
(4)	Hon. Matembe Miria. (Applause).

In Group B, I hereby declare the hon. Loyce Bwambale duly elected. (Applause).

I do not know whether they would like to make acceptance speeches. Let me thank all the voters for turning up in such great numbers. I want to thank the campaign managers for all the candidates. I want also to thank the counting agents, the hon. Rugumayo - I saw him drinking some water - hon. Semakula and the clerks. I want to thank them all for their work. 

I would like to request the Rules Committee to take another look at the rules so that you do not give the presiding officer trouble at the next elections, of having to gamble with either counting here or counting somewhere else. Also, the question of observers and agents for the candidates must be addressed. 

You will save me a lot of trouble if you can do this. The committee could take that up. I do not know whether the members want to make acceptance speeches. Hon. Omach?

5.16
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker and my dear voters –(Laughter)- Proverbs 17:17 says: “A friend loves at all times.” That I have made it to the Pan African Parliament is because you love me. (Applause). I am overwhelmed with joy to be the first Ugandan to talk as a member of the Pan African Parliament. (Applause).
I did quote the Bible to you, that the first will be last and the last will be first. Yesterday I was the last to address you as a guest of honour, so today again I am the guest of honour - even if Sebalu defeated me. Hon. Members of Parliament of Uganda –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MR OMACH: I would like to thank each and every one of you who has made it possible for me to win. I would like to thank very heartily those with whom we contested, all the 18. It was a very difficult struggle, very stiff and it also showed that our Parliament of the Republic of Uganda has got very mature, quality people. I say hats off for you.  

I would like to thank my proposer and campaign manager, Capt. Basaliza –(Laughter)- and the seconder, yet another Captain, David Guma. As you can see this is about Captains and so I am not a minor, I am major. (Laughter).

With this majority, I would like to go and effectively represent the Government of Uganda in the Pan African Parliament. I would like to go and represent this Parliament to which I belong and I will continue to belong effectively. 

My speech, which I distributed to you yesterday, is what I will fight for. I have promised that I will fight for the women’s cause; I will fight for the issues of the farmers; I will fight for the economic integration of Africa; and once the political will is there, the sky will be the limit. May God bless you all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.21
MR ABDU KANTUTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I must confess that it has been quite a long time since I felt the way I am feeling now. I must say I am humbled. I wanted to speak from over there because I was not so sure whether I would not stumble while coming over here. (Laughter) 

I have got your mandate and as I look at this House, all of you have given me your votes. (Applause). 
I want to promise and pledge that I will put my country first before anything else. (Applause). 
Whoever has been skeptical about me, rest assured. (Applause). Whoever has given me his vote, it has not been in vain. All of you gave me. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I know that the responsibility ahead of us as your representatives is quite enormous but we shall be up to the task; I promise. 

I would like to certainly thank my chief campaign manager, the Woman Member of Parliament for Bushenyi, hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. (Applause). I would like to thank the following colleagues in a special way: hon. Bernard Mulengani, Dr Johnson Nkuuhe and the hon. Francis Mukama. As you can see, and as I said yesterday, we do not agree all the time with them but on the question of this country there are no differences. I promise I will be your representative. I thank you all. (Applause).

5.24
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Praise God!

HON. MEMBERS: Amen!

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I certainly want to start by thanking God so much, because he is faithful and the word of God says that when the Lord is on my side, who can be against me? (Applause) And the other word says, “He who is in me is greater than the one in the world.” It continues to say that those who trust in the Lord will not be put to shame. (Applause). That is why I thank him because today he has fulfilled his promises.  

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and all of you my voters. May God continue to bless you. (Applause). I want to thank you not only for campaigning and voting for me but also for living up to your promises, because in this House you have been calling upon women, especially Matembe to graduate from affirmative act. I decided to graduate and I sat here and I waited for you to confer upon me the degree –(Laughter)- now that you have done so, I do believe that your promise was correct and you have lived up to it. I thank you so much. 

I thank everybody. I cannot single out any particular individual because I know some women were really dying for me. Then some men were really in for me –(Laughter)- I mean in terms of the campaigners, but of course in terms of the voters you were all for me and you have put me there. 

I want to tell you that as usual you can depend on Matembe for my country because I put my country - of course for God and then my country - like our motto. I am going to that place and I will go with God before me; and I will put my country first. I can never let it down and I will raise the flag of Uganda higher and higher. 

By the way, you did not know but people were already asking, “Where is Matembe?  Please, send us Matembe!” (Laughter). In fact, if it did not happen, those friends would have said, “Eh, what has happened to this country called Uganda?” And now that it has happened I want to ask you to pray for us when we go there. We are going there and the competition for Vice-President, I am not going to tell you that of the President, because I am sure that lady who was the Speaker is ready to take up that - I am sure people lobbied early. 

But I want you to pray for us about this Vice-President business so that when we reach there, also in the eastern region we get that position of the Vice-President. They need four Vice-Presidents, one from each region. Therefore, you continue praying that we go and start lobbying so that we also become the vice; and then we shall see how we continue to raise this flag higher and higher. 

In the meantime I also thank God for having organized that party for us this evening that we –(Laughter)- that we are going to enjoy. Therefore, I wish you a merry Christmas and a happy new year and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the “do” this evening. Thank you very much and God bless you. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.29
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker and honourable members of the House, Bwambale Biira Loyce is overwhelmed with joy. Your vote, your confidence, your trust, has made me stand here in the capacity of an elected Member from Uganda to the Pan African Parliament. I am very delighted. (Applause). 
I want to thank you, particularly those who spearheaded my mobilisation; it was not easy, it was crosscutting but that is what it means.

That in the Protocol there should have been one woman meant that many interests were going to converge. So, you have done the needful. I, therefore, want to recognize all the women, without distinction, of UWOPA who first recognized me and marketed me to all of you. (Applause). 

I want to thank Kasese District, which brought me from the classroom as a headmistress and gave me the opportunity -(Laughter)- for you to elect me this afternoon. I am very much delighted that I have been here, and that this House has also elected hon. Miria Matembe. I read on the Internet that South Africa had elected five members, three of whom were women, including a whole Speaker. 

If Uganda had arrived there with only one woman and yet in Africa Uganda spearheads affirmative action, you can imagine how that one woman would have defended the position of Uganda, having introduced women into politics. Now that you have selected two women, we want to thank you and please, give us the necessary support. (Applause).

This has made history, it has indicated maturity of this House because when we entered here in 1989 on affirmative action, I was with hon. Miria Matembe. Again we are going to be women pioneers for the Pan African Parliament. This is a reflection of true maturity on your part; we thank you and cherish you. 

We want to pledge that from all the manifestos that were ably displayed here, the probability was that all of us could have gone. I noted that and I respect it. In our deliberations we are going to put all the manifestos together and see that we champion -(Applause)- everyone’s cause who came up and contested. It was not easy to offer ourselves; we did. Please, thank all of us - the 18 who stood and offered ourselves. (Applause).

We are not going to forget all of you –(Interjection). I want to pledge that the 18 people we stood with and all of you in your capacities as Uganda, we are going to promote each one of you according to your talent and fix you where you can portray a good image of Uganda. Ugandans are hardworking, they are good people, and they are innovative. So, we are taking Ugandans. Well, I got 101 votes, but to me, I got all the 304. Whoever gave me a negative face as I gave a smile; it is now all smiles across.   

Once again I promise that we shall live up to the expectations of all Ugandans and Africa at large.  I thank you again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me now invite the member with the highest number of votes, hon. Sebalu.    

5.37
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, I am delighted and I am overwhelmed yet humbled by the overwhelming support that has been given to me. In fact there is a scholar who said that it is always good to aspire and inspire before you expire; and I have done exactly that. So, I must thank you sincerely. 

It has been a long journey and I started on it quite early. I was strategic and I was prepared. In fact I was the most prepared among all the candidates. That is on record. I was prepared, I consulted at all levels, I have used all the good methods, and I exploited technology to the best of my ability. As I speak now a message of thanks is already waiting; some must have got it. 

Honourable members, I must sincerely thank you and I promise to work with all Members of Parliament because I am going to represent Uganda and this is going to be a collective effort. We need the wisdom of each one of us. Most especially, I am going to do a lot of consultations with all the colleagues with whom we stood. I believe they are people with a lot of useful knowledge on this subject and they have already expressed their interest in the subject, so we shall always work together for the good of Uganda.

While there we shall always put Uganda first because it is for Uganda that we are going to be there. Indeed, we were all very capable people, judging from the exposition we got here yesterday. It so happened that you had to choose five and I happen to be one of them. So, I must thank you for that. 
That is not to say that the others were not good enough; all of us were good and we should always be used in this endeavor of enhancing the image and portray it very positively in the Pan African Parliament. 

Surely, given the effort that I put in, you will agree with me that if I were not voted, you would have taken the wrong side of the right corridor. I really put in all the effort that was necessary (Laughter). Surely, I deserved that and I am happy that you have recognised my effort. I promise that I will never let you down. 

I do not intend to tire you. Since I have tired you long enough, I beg to thank you once again. Thank you for the mandate that you have given me and I promise to deliver to the best of my ability. I will always consult you. It will always be a collective effort and I will always report back because what we are going for is about good governance and transparency. I will try to implement it to the letter. 

Thank you very much once again. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the way you have conducted the sessions. You conducted the campaigns very well, you have conducted the elections in such a way that there are no reports of election violence so far, and I do not think that anything to that effect will come up. I do not think there will be any petitions; no rigging -(Laughter)  

Madam Speaker, you have exercised your authority to the best and we are all very satisfied. I delayed because some people were confirming that the results have been free and fair, and they are happy. 

I must thank the clerks who have also assisted us, and I thank everyone who has contributed to the electoral process. We have proved that actually elections can be held without violence. So, the violence report will not extend to this election. Thank you very much. May the Lord bless you. (Applause).

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want on behalf of my colleagues who have not made it - not because they were not good enough - but they have just not made it. First of all, I want to congratulate our colleagues, the five colleagues this House has elected. (Applause). 
We have elected a very good team, a formidable team and I am sure they will be speaking on your behalf. We should have a lot of confidence in this team. It is a team made up of capable, experienced men and women who have clear, political aspirations and I think we could not have done any better.

Madam Speaker, of course there were only five and we had to take the five. It is important that the rest of us should accept the verdict of the House and support our colleagues wholeheartedly (Applause). We shall be available for consultations as and when it is necessary. I am sure that the people that we have elected will carry with them the real Constitution of this Parliament. This Parliament has got members representing special interests and we hope when they get there they will preach the gospel of having a society in Africa for all, where everybody has a place regardless of his sex, his age, his disability or whatever.  

I also want to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having conducted this process as efficiently and as fairly as it has been carried out. (Applause). As Chairman of the Election Violence Committee, I cannot see any violence that has taken place. I hope that in future all elections in this country will be carried out as smoothly as we have done today. We have demonstrated, and given a very good example. 

I congratulate all the five and I thank you honourable members for the support you have given each one of us who are still with you. 

We want to thank the returning officers. I want to thank staff of Parliament and I want to thank everybody that has been involved in this process. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.42
THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): I thank you, Madam Speaker, Members of the Pan African Parliament, and hon. Members of the Ugandan Parliament. On behalf of the Government, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the five successful candidates that we have just elected to the Pan African Parliament. 

Obviously as you can see, the mix is very good, all skills, experiences and talents have been tapped into. And the Government strongly believes that you will be very effective representatives of the Republic of Uganda to the Pan African Parliament.

I would like on behalf of Government to pledge unreserved support. Always count on Government as well as Members of Parliament. We are here to give you all the support and we are sure that you will be extremely effective as you raise the flag of Uganda very high.  

I would like to congratulate all the members that were running in this election. As you have realised the results are extremely very tight. That means that all of you were extremely competent candidates and this gives me heart to say that in this Parliament we have extremely competent people.  Congratulations all of you for having run a successful race; a race with now violence like people have stated earlier. Perhaps, Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that debating the Report on Election Violence at this time has contributed a lot to ensure that there was no violence in this election. 

I would like to thank the electorate. The electorate was extremely peaceful and active, but I would also like to congratulate you for having elected two women. That confirms that gender mainstreaming, as the National Gender Policy demands in Uganda, has really had an act on all of us. Congratulations to all of you and indeed to those that are going to the Pan African Parliament.  Thank you very much indeed for confirming to everybody that Uganda is above self. I thank you all and I take this opportunity to wish you a happy Christmas. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for ably conducting the elections with your staff, and the returning officers. I thank all of you and congratulations to all. 

5.49
MR AMOOTI OTADA (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not want to speak about the event, which has just taken place, but I would like to thank those who have gone through and the colleagues who participated but did not make it.
What I want to raise, I consider it in my opinion - and I think that the Members of Parliament will agree with me - as a matter, which is of urgent nature; especially given the fact that we are about to break off and go on recess.

Sometime last month, the issue of Bujagali and Karuma Power Project came to this Floor. I gave my contribution and yesterday and today the Monitor has done very serious reporting on the matter of this project. I also went out of my way and got another article from a Norwegian newspaper called Development Today. 

It is true, Madam Speaker, that a Canadian consulting firm called ECAS International was given the task to do a consultancy on these two projects. Indeed, it is true that ECAS in their report preferred AES as opposed to Karuma or NORPAK for that matter. Now it has come out in the open, the fact that ECAS International, which did this job, did not do it prudently. In fact they are being talked about as a very dubious firm because they over-priced the Karuma Project by an overwhelming US $200 million, to undermine Karuma and promote AES in terms of price comparison! 

This is a fact, which I believe - and of course this report, which they did and inflated the US $200 million, is an issue that was based upon our government. Our government had to take a decision on which project should be taken on and which one should be dropped. Therefore, they quoted Karuma at US $585 million whereas Karuma had bid for US $385 million.  

I wind up by saying that this, in my view, is a very urgent and serious matter. With your discretion I wish to first of all lay it on the Table and appeal to you to give us direction on this matter that I consider very important. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much. Before my honourable colleague lays his papers on the Table, I want to seek a clarification from him. Madam Speaker, to the best of my ability there are very few firms in the world that do consulting on power projects and one of them happens to be ECAS International, which he has said is dubious. 


The clarification I want to seek from him is that the same ECAS he is talking about did handle the third extension programme on the River Nile for the Government of Uganda. Is that to say that they actually handled that project dubiously also?  Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, much as you think ECAS is a famous company, it is also notorious because it has a bad reputation in Botwsana. It was in a scandal involving Botwsana and South Africa, the project where South Africa was supposed to pump water from Botswana and use it for electricity. It is a Canadian company and it is being investigated within Canada itself. So, while you are keen to protect that company here in Uganda, get your facts correct.

In fact you should work with global forces fighting corruption, and ECAS is ranking high on that list. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I just did not want to read the whole of this literature. What Dr Nkuuhe has talked about is part of this document. There is a case where this company is being taken to court for fraudulent ways.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay it on the Table.

MR KASIGWA: To put the record right, Madam Speaker, I did not say that I am protecting ECAS International. I did not state at any stage that I am protecting ECAS International. All I want done is that they should be thoroughly investigated because they did handle the extension power project in Uganda. It could have been fraudulently done. That is why I was seeking that clarification from my honourable colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we may not have enough time to get an answer from the Minister immediately, I want to commit this to the Natural Resources Committee, even if we are on recess. They should treat it as a matter of urgency. I will allow them to sit if they put in their request so that they can handle that during recess. They can invite you, the Minister and anybody involved in that, and then they report back when we return.


5.57
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek the indulgence of the Chair and the indulgence of this House. At this time when we have just been electing our representatives to the Pan African Parliament, may we recognise some of the contributions and achievements that Ugandans have been achieving at this time in the African context?

More specifically, Madam Speaker, I would have loved to raise this in the presence of the hon. Minister of Works who unfortunately I have just received a communication that he is chairing an Inter-Ministerial meeting. He will be on the way to join us soon. All the same, it does not prevent us as a House from recognising achievements of excellence that are best told amongst one of ourselves and the country as a whole.

You may realize that last week, the hon. Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira, received a special African Achievers’ Award in Information Communication Technology (ICT). This is something that Uganda, which is just emerging out of turmoil under the wise leadership of the Movement Government and His Excellency the President – (Applause)- also having taken on the very technical reforms, which are happening now. 

For the information of the House, may I read from the letter, which invited the honourable minister; and also make a brief statement? This is an invitation to receive a special African ICT Achievers’ Award. It says;

“It is my pleasure to invite you to receive a Special African ICT Achievers’ Award, which is to be awarded on the evening of Saturday 8 November 2003 at the Sandton Convention Center in Johannesburg. 

The African ICT Achievers’ Award is an annual event, which is organized to celebrate excellence and leadership in the ICT sector. 

As a tribute to your visionary and dedicated leadership in building the information society in Africa, I am honoured to request you to accept this invitation.”  

Those who may not know hon. John Nasasira, he has been responsible for the reforms in the telecommunications sector in this country, which included establishment of an independent regulator, liberalization of the sector, licensing of two major operators, a third cellular mobile operator, and several value added service providers. This reform has seen the growth of ICT in Uganda and the licensing of the FM stations and many TV stations in a very healthy, competitive environment in this country. 

At the African level –(Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: With all due respect to the chair, I rise on a point of procedure. I am now confused. I see everybody rising up and saying what everybody wants to say and yet we have the Order Paper here. Madam Speaker, may I know where we are now because –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members notified me that they have some urgent matter they want to speak about. Hon. Otada notified me and so did hon. Dombo.

MR DOMBO: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Apart from hon. Nasasira’s work in Uganda, he was also actively involved in the restructuring of the Pan African Telecommunications Union into the African Telecommunications Union, between 1996 and 1999. 

He has been active in the development of ICT in Africa under the chairmanship of the Minister Masete of South Africa. Nasasira has been the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of African Connection Center for Strategic Planning based in Midrad, South Africa. He has been actively campaigning for the development of the ICT sector, both on regional and global level.

Madam Speaker, I wish to raise this at this time because right now Uganda is joining the global forces in the Pan African Parliament. Even before we join the Pan African Parliament, many of our own have been tremendously achieving and making Uganda fly high. I, therefore, believe it is just right that this House recognises hon. John Nasasira for this Achievers’ Award on behalf of the people of Uganda and on behalf of the good leadership of this country. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do recognise the ICT Achievers’ Award given to hon. John Nasasira, Member for Kazo County and Minister of Works in the Uganda Government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still have some business to complete. You remember that yesterday we had a motion on pornography. I did say that I would appoint a committee to look into those matters. So, this is the line up:

1.Hon. Sarah Kiyingi		- Chairperson
2.Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga	- Member
3. Hon. Nabeta Igeme		- Member
4. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko	- Member
5. Hon. Dr Nkuuhe		- Member
6.Hon. Rev. Hamlet Kabushenga-Member
7. Hon. Aanimu Angupale   	- Member
8. Hon. Col. Fred Bogere		- Member
9. Hon. Abdu Katuntu		- Member

About one week ago we discussed the Immigration Department and we agreed that we shall set up a committee. So, I would like to read the terms of reference and also appoint the committee. The terms of reference for the select committee to address immigration of aliens and other related matters, are the following:
1.	Examine how the Immigration Department handles the immigration of aliens into Uganda. In particular:
(a)	Alleged cases of illegal entry, registration, work and other activities of aliens.
(b)	The determination and registration of foreign investors and other related investment issues.
2.	Examine the factors influencing the activities and performance of the Immigration Department, particularly allegations of 
(a)	Corruption
(b)	Political interference
(c)	Understaffing.
3.	To investigate any other matters related to issues 1 and 2 above, and to report to the House in February 2004 when Parliament resumes. 

The line up for that committee is as follows:
1. Hon. Dr. Kasirivu Atwooki 	- Chairperson
2. Hon. Steven Bamwanga 	- Member
3. Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba-Member
4. Hon. Ezati Wadri Kassiano 	- Member
5. Hon. Fred Ruhindi  	-	Member
6. Hon. Olive Wonekha 	-	Member
7. Hon. Miria Matembe	-	Member

That is the Committee on Immigration.

MRS  BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to make a small amendment to the word “aliens”. Could we call them non-Ugandans or foreigners? It sounds a little harsh. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the law deals with aliens. The Act under which they are governed is entitled “aliens”. 

We had a lot of matters on the Order Paper but the Speaker invited you to some kyamucation, for which those who have made it must see me this evening. So, we shall continue with business tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to try and complete whatever is on the Order Paper before we go on recess. 

Parliament is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. We shall meet in the evening at the dinner. Thank you very much for the work you have done today. 

(The House rose 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 19 December 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)


