Wednesday, 18 December 2002

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work you have been able to accomplish during this year, 2002, and during the two meetings we have held in the second session. We are about to start our normal Christmas recess, but we shall continue business today and tomorrow. Tomorrow will be our last day because it will be closest to Christmas, which is due on Wednesday. 

We shall also have an inter-denominational service tomorrow morning, to pray for peace in Northern Uganda. Therefore, you are invited to attend that service, which will take place in the Parliamentary Gardens. 

Depending on the work we shall have, we shall continue with work in the afternoon. But because we just do not want to go on recess like that, around 4.00 p.m. we will adjourn and have a reception at the same venue. That is what I wanted to tell you. But I thank you for the understanding and co-operation we have received so far. Thank you very much.

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

MR OKUPA ELIJAH (Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers the following motion without notice under Rule 40 1(k). The motion is to urge Government to invest in the water transport to avert the increasing fatal accidents on our lakes. 

Over the weekend, we lost 23 people from Soroti and Kamuli Districts. So, I am moving the motion to urge Government to do something in the water sector.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is seconded. Can you please elaborate?

MR OKUPA: Whereas Government is aware of the causes of these calamities on the waters like overloading, lack of proper transport like ferries, lack of life jackets, among others; 

Whereas Government has a licensing board, which is fully fledged to provide licenses to the water transporters; 

Whereas Government has in place the Water Marine Act and Police, which is not facilitated; 

Whereas Government enforcement on water transport is not visible; 

It is hereby resolved that the Government: 

1. Enforces the usage of life jackets. 

2. Invests in the water transport system by providing ferries on all Uganda’s lakes.

3. Enforces the patrol of waters by the Marine Police. 

4. Licensing board to license only water-worth transport vessels. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you have heard the background.  

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to support the motion because my constituency is traversed by Lake Bunyonyi. As you know, Lake Bunyonyi is the third deepest lake in the world and the second deepest in Africa, I am told. It has got a distance of about 27 kilometres, and on average a width of seven kilometres. 

Many people on Lake Bunyonyi have been dying because they have been moving in small canoes. Sometimes you find a lady carrying a baby on the back and riding on a -(Interruption)   

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: I am rising on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure, after a member has read out the motion, the motion is seconded and he should be given priority to justify the motion.

THE SPEAKER: I think he did that. Do you want to add more?

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, I remember standing up and seconding the motion. When I was in the constituency last week, two people died on the lake, and every month I have been giving reports that people have been drowning on this lake. I wrote a letter to the Minister in charge of Transport and I gave a copy to all the people concerned. I told them that Lake Bunyonyi is a risky lake because of the depth I have talked about. 

Actually, it covers my constituency, Rubanda West, and Rubanda East constituency. This is an area which is a tourist attraction in Uganda. Many tourists have been going to Bunyonyi; there are many hotels coming up. So, I think it is very important that some of these lakes should also be provided with ferries, just like they have done with Lake Victoria and other places. As you know, Mr Speaker, my area is a hilly constituency. Many people -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA: Mr Speaker, I think we are wasting time on this motion. This motion encroaches on the Consolidated Fund. I have heard of life jackets; there is money to be spent for this motion to be successful. Under Article 93 of the Constitution, I wonder whether a member who is not part of the Executive is allowed to move this motion. I beg for your guidance.

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House and the member who has left the Floor that the issue of a life jacket has not been reflected in the motion as a cost on the Government. Therefore, to try to shoot down this motion is not correct, because it has not been stated in the motion that Government must provide life jackets. Thank you. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to also inform my honourable colleague that this is a matter of life and death. We cannot continue waiting for people to die for us to make rulings on the Consolidated Fund. It is the people who make this money! So, let the Ministry of Transport and Communications come out. The member is there to highlight this for the Government to take heed.  Thank you.  

MR ATUBO OMARA: My honourable friend from Mbale used some words like, “is this House in order to waste time”; we are talking about life and death!  Twenty three people have died, and even more. People have died on Lake Victoria while going to Kasese. We have so many lakes and we have problems. Between Adjumani and Moyo, we have problems. Uganda is blessed with water; we have traffic jams in Kampala but we do not have traffic jams on the lakes. We really need something. 

So, is it in order for the honourable member to say we are wasting time as if he is a Government official? I do not know whether a backbencher has ever been a Government official. He is a backbencher; I do not know whether he wants a job with the Government. If he wants a job with the Government, really he should just move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I seem to think that this motion has a matter of emergency. I think that the gist of the motion is for the Government to enforce safety rules so that people do not die on the lake. So, it is really appealing to the Government to enforce the necessary rules to ensure safety on our waters.

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence. I am very disappointed with my friend, Wakikona, because the Bakiga have got something in common with the people from Mbale except one. 

THE SPEAKER: Leave the honourable member. Just proceed with the motion. (Laughter).

MR BAMWANGA: Well, I only wanted to inform him that some Bakiga ran away from Mbale, in an area called Bukigai, because they feared something. What goes on in Mbale, he knows better. 

Mr Speaker, you know how Kabale area is scattered; people really walk distances to go across the lakes and dig, and they come back at night. This is the situation, and I have been appealing to the Minister of Transport to make sure that they help us. 

We should ask this Parliament to urge Government; the Committee on Works, Transport and Communications should especially make sure that the Minister of Works helps us with this kind of request.

Lastly, we have been spending a lot of money on maintaining roads. There is no money we are spending on maintaining the water. This is a God- given natural resource; we are only asking. Even if it means assisting the communities to actually pay some little money, which will be able to come back to the Government, this will help the situation from getting out of hand. 

So, the next time we come back, I want us to be together and fight for ferries on all the lakes in Uganda. I thank you.

MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, first of all, to thank the Ministry of Works for inaugurating the making of the steamer to Kalangala District.  But before it is made, and I am meant to understand it will probably take two years before it actually starts moving, something needs to be done.

Kalangala has a ferry that connects it to Masaka District. Unfortunately, 90 per cent of the time, this ferry either does not have enough fuel or it is not serviced. It is not working; it is not being properly maintained, and this means that the people have to use risky boats because they have to move between Masaka and Kalangala.

Something needs to be done to make sure that the water transport is safe, because we do not want the people to be drowning all the time. We are being told, “you have a steamer, you have a ferry”, but if they are not working, it is of no use.

I would also like to say one thing about the security by the marine Police. Unfortunately, when the Marine Police happen to go on the water, first of all, they fear the water. They go round asking us for fuel and if we do not have it, then they say, “we cannot go”. I think the main issue is that they fear the water. When they go, they actually harass the people. 

If we get the marine Police there and we get people using the life jackets, we have got to make sure that enforcement is done a little bit more friendlily than it is being done now, because the people of Kalangala are really complaining. When they get them without life jackets, all the people on the boat are mistreated, and yet in cars, we think that the car has the seat belt. We do not see any reason why the people who own the boats are not the ones who are supposed to be providing the life jackets and not the individual who is probably travelling to Kalangala for the first time.

MR BADDA: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague and the House at large that even the Government-owned ferry commuting from Bukakata to Kalangala is not properly equipped with life saving gadgets, although Government is saying that the private transport owners should buy life jackets.

This Government ferry, which carries about 200 people on one route, has life jackets that can only save about 10 people. So, I think Government should also do something about the facility that it owns. Thank you.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, 13 of the people who perished in the Friday 13th accident were students of Soroti, studying in three of the schools in my constituency. They organised themselves, as the term was ending and hired a minibus to take them such that they can cross to the other side of the lake. Hardly three hours after they had left Kamuli town, the news came to the town that all the 13 had perished in the accident.

Mr Speaker, the issue of water transport, especially on Lake Kyoga and River Nile, has been talked about for a very long time. In the 1960s, we had ferries connecting Iyingo, Masindi Port, Bukungu, Namasagali - all these places; and there was relative safety. But the people of Kamuli have been praying for ferries for a very long time.

Most of the cattle that is restocking Teso region is bought in Kamuli and ferried across the lake in very – I should not say inhuman, because they are not human beings - but in a very crude manner, which risks the lives of the cattle. And this has reduced the level of business between the districts surrounding Lake Kyoga. 

Therefore, this motion should be supported, especially for the Ministry of Works to provide ferry services on Lake Kyoga. So many lives are lost every day. It is because this one was a big accident, where 23 people were involved, but almost everyday people are dying on Lake Kyoga because of the mode of transport there. I therefore wish to support the motion.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. But I would like to note with sadness that since Friday, I have not heard a single Government official make any statement of sympathy, of understanding, of anything. It is as if nothing happened on Lake Kyoga. I am sure if it was on Lake Victoria, there would have been plenty of condolences and visits. But apart from the area Members of Parliament running there very fast to help their people, I saw no Government presence at all. 

That made me question whether my people of Teso and the people of Kamuli are important enough to get anybody’s attention. We do note these things, just in case you forgot, and we worry that our people are not as important as other people in this country. The most important person quoted by the BBC was Asuman Mugenyi. That was the most high-ranking Government official I heard talk about what happened. 

I am saying this because our people are very sensitive, these days, to Government concern. The least I would have expected was a condolence message from a minister from the Teso region. But it is like nothing happened. 

I think it is sad for us not to know what first aid should constitute, what matters to our people, and how we should reach out to them. So, I am pleading with the ministers concerned. Even if they are not able to do anything when such accidents happen, they should reach out to the hearts of the people who are bereaved, the people who are affected. That way, we will have a very caring Government. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member who brought this motion up.  Really there are so many tragedies, which go unnoticed, and I would like to inform the House that even in Buvuma, we have a ferry. However, the ferry we have is just a quarter of a ferry. 

Recently the Ministry of Works tried and bought another quarter of a ferry, without the engine, which is now getting rotten in Kiyindi. You just wonder how our ministries really work. 

When we requested for a ferry, they bought another part without the engine. When you remind them they say they are working on the engine. So Government should think about water transport. 

My colleague from Kalangala has just mentioned something about life jackets; the same applies to Buvuma Islands. The ferry we have takes about 100 people but the life jackets are just for the crew. During the Christmas season, you sympathise with the poor people because the ferry takes up to 200 people, but there are just four life jackets. You imagine such a situation. 

Let me appeal to Government that since we have raised it now, they should inform their agencies to stop beating our people. One time the Police even tried to stop the ferry from crossing to Buvuma Island. But we told them that it was a Government ferry and asked him if Government was willing to see the people die. So they allowed it to cross. So since we are approaching Christmas, they are going to start beating our people. The ferry does not have life jackets and it is supposed to commute twice everyday. You can imagine such a situation. We appeal to Government to think about the lives of our people on the waters.  

Some time back I raised the issue of the marine. Buvuma County has about 56 islands. We have one marine unit and their boat engine blew about a year ago. The Ministry of Internal Affairs helped us to remove the boat and it was brought to Kigo. So now they do not have the engine and they do not have the boat. The Policemen are there but you can realise the situation our officers are operating in. Apart from drinking, what do you expect them to do? There is no safety on the water, but these people are helpless, they cannot do anything. 

So we urge Government that apart from getting fish, the Nile Perch, which is of recent on high demand in the market, they should think of the people who actually bring the fish from the water. Otherwise it will be very bad, unless Government has an intention of bringing another tribe to the islands such that if we perish they will import people and put them there to replace us. Otherwise, this seems to be intentional.

Mr Speaker, I remember the hon. Minister of State for Works informed this House that very soon a South African company, which was licensed to start manufacturing life jackets, would start to supply them. We have contacted him and nothing is coming out. We do not know whether he gave the information just to convince the members because they were urging him to say something. Really, we want to see that factory being established. If not, then he should apologise to this country. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, naturally I regret the tragic death of our brothers and sisters in the accident, which happened on Lake Kyoga. I have always appealed to Parliament that as leaders we must always co-ordinate. As a result of co-ordination, we must always be given ample time, as provided for in our Rules of Procedure, that a debate and a motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable minister, you are causing a problem. You are saying that you have not been given ample time to prepare yourself. However, you have just heard hon. Salaamu Musumba saying that this accident took place last week. She said that she is wondering that there is no statement that has come from the Government since. You mean you have to be given notice to console people after the accident? For you to talk about being given time when this is an emergency, is not proper. When you are being blamed, instead of saying, “Sorry, we did not know”; now you are saying you need time? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, what I am referring to is a matter of co-ordination. As Members of Parliament and the Executive, we have a role to play for our people. As Government we regret the death and we must do something about this. But it would have been more important if we had been informed before debating this matter. We would then have enough information to provide to Members of Parliament about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Well then, honourable minister, you are saying you want more time to respond? However, it appears you are blaming the member who brought this motion up as a matter of emergency. You are blaming the member for bringing it without giving you notice. I think this is adding salt to the wound.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, perhaps I can clarify my position.

THE SPEAKER: Finish then.

MR OKOT OGONG: Let me clarify; maybe I have not been got clearly. What I am saying is that this has come here many times. Motions of public importance are brought to Parliament and I am appealing to members that for us ministers to debate with knowledge and provide you with information, if anything is to come to the Floor we must be given ample time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what I think you can say in this situation is that you have heard, but the minister in charge of the sector is not here to make a response. However, for you to say that you need time to respond to somebody who is saying his house is burnt, that is a complicated matter.

MR AWORI: I beg to move that the hon. Speaker puts the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion by the member, about Government enforcement of safety rules on the waters.

(Question put and agreed to.)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 34 OF 2002 to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under what circumstances did the Government incur and fail to pay the following debts:

(a) US $20.5 million to Transroad Ltd, of UK.
(b) US $8.99 million to Industry 14 Oktober of Yugoslavia.
(c) US $1.972 million to Fab Famous of Yugoslavia.
(d) US $6 million to Banco Arabe Espanol of Spain.
(e) US $10 million to Iraq Fund for External Development.
(f) US $15 million to Burundi.”   

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question by hon. Omara Atubo has “two legs”. One, under what circumstances did the Government incur these debts and the second is why it failed to pay. 

I have, in compliance with the rules, supplied hon. Omara Atubo with the written answer, in a table form. It is my pleasant duty to explain to this honourable House the circumstances under which the debts were incurred and why some of the debts have up to now not been paid. The fact is that about half of them have already been paid. 

I will begin with the Yugoslavia Industry –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I heard the minister say the question has “two legs”. I wonder, for the record of the Hansard, if anybody were to read that the question has “two legs”, what would they get? I am seeking clarification on the “legs”, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Well, I do not know. English is not my mother tongue. However, I understand the “legs” to mean this. One “leg” is: under what circumstances did the Government incur the debts? The second one is: why did it fail to pay? Those are the two “legs”.
 
MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, those are two “aspects”. They are not two “legs”. I think we have to be very careful with the English language because “legs” can cause a lot of misunderstanding. (Laughter).
   
MR RUKUTANA: Thank you honourable member for that choice of words, but my choice was “legs” and I do not think there is anything wrong with that. 

If I may proceed to give the answer, for Industry 14 Oktober of Yugoslavia, this was a commercial transaction between the Government of Uganda and that company for the purchase of 42 units of construction equipment and spare parts. 

The contract amount was US$5,724,432. The company duly performed the contract but for some reason it was not paid in time. I will be informing the House why the Government could not pay later. When the Government failed to pay, the company went to court. There was an award of US$8,429,331 and the entire amount has so far been paid. 

The second company was Fab Famous of Yugoslavia. This one was also a –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for giving way. I think it would help us very much in answering the first “leg” of the question, because circumstances also include dates.  We are talking about all this and we are being forced to picture in our minds when these events took place. It would help a lot if you could put dates on when the loans were incurred, when the court cases were made, when it was pledged. It would help us to get a picture of who was responsible for what. Could you help us with that, please?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I thought I would save this august House’s time by summarising the nature of the transactions, the amounts owing and the status. But if honourable members want the dates, then I may, at the risk of taking a lot of time, go on a lengthy explanation.

The Yugoslav debts to 14 Oktober of Yugoslavia: this was in November 1987, when the contract was signed between the Yugoslav company and the Government for the amounts stated. As for the dates of the court cases, I do not have that information. But I have the outcome and the status, as I have already read. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, given the information we have just heard from the honourable Minister regarding this company from Yugoslavia and the year the debt was incurred, could the honourable Minister elaborate on the UN sanctions against Yugoslav companies since this happened? Are we still liable to pay, given the sanctions of the UN against Yugoslav companies?

MR RUKUTANA: I have told you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that I will give reasons why Government did not fulfil its obligations in time.  One of the reasons for Yugoslavia was that at the time when the debts fell due, it was under sanctions. If honourable members could wait, they will definitely get the explanations.

If I may proceed, for Fab Famous, another Yugoslav company, there was a commercial transaction between Government and the company for the supply of 50 Fab lorries. This one was in 1986. The contract amount was US $335,000. Government did not pay because of the sanctions. Yugoslavia went to court and court awarded a figure of US $1,304,658, which has so far been paid.

For Transroad UK -(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Does the 1,304,000 include the interests from the date of filing? Does it include the cost of the suit?

MR RUKUTANA: The 1,304,000 is the principal amount. There was interest of US$ 40,033, costs of 66,692 and the total amount was 1,422,721, and I am saying that amount is already paid.  

For Transroad UK, this was also a commercial transaction whereby Transroad shipped 350 railway wagons from India to Mombasa. Government issued promissory notes to cover the contract amount of US $3,992,550. This was in 1985. Government was unable to pay because of reasons I will be giving later. Transroad went to court, court awarded 12,703,669 including interest. The principal amount and interest, as per the court award is US $ 16,695,919 so far. But Government was dissatisfied with the ruling of the court and an appeal was preferred. The appeal is pending in court. (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Minister, if you could help us in your presentation. The three cases that you have dealt with now, the figures you give are different from the figures here and you are not saying which one is correct. This is a problem to us.

MR WANDERA: Aware that rule 33 allows for supplementary questions, I was proposing that all questions be stayed until the Minister finishes, then we ask questions later on.

THE SPEAKER: If the answer is not clear, then for purposes of clarification you will ask a question.  Let him answer as best as he can, then if there is anything that is not clear, he will be able to answer. 

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On that note, I wish to point out that the figures as provided by the honourable member are not actually accurate. So, where you will hear me read a different figure, you know that the figure I have read is the correct figure.

For Banco Arabe Espanol, this was a commercial loan by the bank to the Government of Uganda for the purchase of railway equipment by Uganda Railways Corporation. The principal amount was US$1 million, but the Government, having not paid in time, incurred interest of US$640,749. 

Since the Government did not pay, the bank went to court. There was an award of US$1,640,749. Government was dissatisfied with the court award, an appeal was preferred and it is pending. 

For the Government of Iraq, this was a bilateral loan of US$2,605,767. It was for financing sugar, edible oil, and cotton projects throughout the country. Iraq disbursed it, our Government did not pay, Iraq went to court and the court awarded an amount of US$2,605,765 as principal and US$3,827,042 as interest. The total is US$6,432,809. The Government was dissatisfied with the court award; an appeal was preferred and it is pending.

For Burundi, this was a contract for supply of blankets and medical supplies to the Army, amounting to US$164,904. For some time that amount was not paid. I am, however, glad to tell this august House that by negotiations between the Burundi Government and IMF, the Burundi Government has accepted to settle the debt through the HIIPC arrangements, which I will highlight later. So we no longer owe the Burundi Government.
 
As for Libya, it was a loan of US$13,498,350. It was meant for rehabilitating sugar and livestock industries. Our Government did not pay and negotiations have been ongoing –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: The honourable minister is referring to loans from Libya and the order paper has no Libya on it.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think this is a valid observation. We have sections to the question: a, b, c, d, e, f, and the last one was on Burundi. I do not see how Libya has surfaced in this particular question.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that portion and I hereby apply that it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But now you are telling us that there are so many loans that you have not paid. It was not part of the question, anyway.

MR RUKUTANA: Having said that, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to answer the second question. I will tackle the creditors in groups.  For Yugoslavia, Transroad and Banco Arabe Espanol, these are already stated as commercial creditors. 

Members may appreciate that because of our past, up to 1992, Government was not in position to service its debts due to lack of funds. In the year 1992, the World Bank stepped in and offered the Government credit, which it could use to repay its commercial creditors on condition that the creditors would accept 12 percent by bank. In other words, for any amount owing, the creditors were called upon to accept 12 percent of the amount. 

That scheme was administered by an American company called SGO bank, which invited all the creditors and offered comparable treatment under the arrangement between the World Bank and Uganda. Uganda was under an obligation not to treat any creditor in a different manner. So all creditors had to accept to be treated in the same manner. What it meant was that whichever creditor did not accept the scheme would definitely not be paid. That was because Government had already indicated that it was not in position to pay.
 
For Yugoslavia, Transroad and Banco Arabe Espanol, they refused to participate in that scheme. Government definitely could not pay and that is why they went to court. Having gone to court and used the force of law, some of the debts owing to them were paid. 

For Iraq and Burundi, the Government of Uganda is involved in negotiating debt relief terms with the First Club Group of Creditors. This started in 1992 and was an arrangement between the OECD – countries like UK, the US, France, Germany, Norway, Israel, Spain and Italy came in to assist. Under that arrangement, every creditor was called upon to write off whatever Uganda owed him. Since they were the beneficiaries of the OECD, they accepted the terms. Currently the amounts are no longer being demanded from Uganda. So that is the position.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I have two supplementary questions on this matter. The first one is, if the minister is right, and I neither doubt nor dispute his statement. It appears these debts had to wait for court action. After court action, the Government obliged and paid. In other words the issue of the inability of Government to pay without court action does not really arise. 

If the Government could pay because of a court action, does it not imply that the Government has the ability to pay even before court action? I am saying this specifically because if you look at this, the country lost a lot as a result of Government priorities being wrong. This is in the sense that it had the ability to pay but possibly it had other things to spend the money on, like most debtors, including individuals, behave. Individuals borrow from private banks but sometimes when the money they have incurred from that investment comes, they may prefer having a wedding to paying that debt. 

For example, if you look at US$5.7 million in the first case of Yugoslavia, it waited for court action and paid US$8.8 million. What is the difference? The difference is US$3.1 million. The other one is a simple US$331,000. It waited for court action and the Government paid US$1.4 million; four times the principal sum!

For Transroad, the minister says the appeal is pending. But if you look at what already court has awarded, it is UD$3.9 million, close to US$4 million. The Government is going to pay over four times the principal sum!

Banco Arabe Espanol, principal sum was US$1 million, and now the Government is going to pay US$6.2 million. 

Iraq was owed US$2.6 million, and Government is going to pay US$6.4 million, and so and so forth. 

My point to the minister is; when Government enters some of these commitments, debts and the like, does it really plan? And if the Government fails to do that, what sanctions should we have against this type of mismanagement of our economy? It is a very serious issue.

The second one is the sanctions. I deliberately ask this question because I want to open the eyes of Members of Parliament. I came across this in court action. Once in a while, when I go to court, I encounter such and I say, “Oh my God!” I could not believe that we are in a country where people are so careless. We enter into a contract, we incur a debt and this is what we are paying back. Really who is responsible for this inefficiency? The minister must clarify. Who is responsible? Is it the civil servants or is it the politicians? What sanctions should we have against the Government for this? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Supplementary on that particular issue, Mr Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that when you stand you just do not take the Floor without the Chair giving you permission. That is because there are others who have stood up also.
 
MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the minister whether he can give this House details of any other similar loans, like the one he has been talking about of Libya. 

My second question is; how much has Government paid in legal costs with regard to these court processes? 

The third question is; would the minister show cause why this House should not hold him responsible for actually causing such great financial loss to Uganda as a result of failure to take appropriate action at the right time? Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my apologies for jumping the queue. I am raising a supplementary point to what the hon. Omara Atubo called negligence on the part of Government. Not long ago in the High Court of Uganda, the Attorney General admitted that due to negligence in the chambers, Government is paying heavy and uncalled for damages. 

He added that sometimes the senior members in the chambers do not study the case properly. They put it off, notwithstanding notice from the courts of law. There was even suspicion that there is connivance on the part of the counsel, the state attorneys, and the people suing the Government. I want to know which one applies. Would the hon. Minister of Finance corroborate the Attorney General’s statement? Is it indeed due to negligence on the part of state attorneys or is it the worse scenario of connivance so that they can share the loot later on?

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened very attentively to the minister’s explanation. I am therefore disappointed to learn that most of these loans were taken by the NRM Government. When you look at the initial principal involved, this was money that could have been managed well - if we had serious Government officials and ministers. 

For example Burundi, the principal sum was about US$164,000 dollars but now they are demanding for US$15 million. Surely who is to blame for this negligence? The Government has abdicated its constitutional mandate to pay their obligations. We are exposing the country to the outside world. They now know that we are not actually performing well. 

In fact, Uganda should be referred to the international NPART because you are not performing; you are not paying your dues. We should be declared a non-performing country. Mr Speaker, really if the Government cannot pay its obligations, then it is just like some people in this country who refuse to repay the loans to the banks and we the poor people who pay our loans are penalised by paying high interest rates.

MR AWORI: Clarification, my honourable colleague. Are you implying that the Uganda Government is NPART?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to put your supplementary question, please?

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the Attorney General stated in recent press reports, these Government officials - be they ministers - should take either political responsibility or civil service responsibility to make sure that this money is recovered.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to put your supplementary question?

MR BAMWANGA: My supplementary question, Mr Speaker is, what action does the Minister intend to take, or advise the Government to take, on those officials and ministers who caused this big amount of money to be incurred? Why do you think the Parliament of Uganda should not invoke Article 118 for whoever is responsible for this kind of loss? I thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the first time I want to agree with hon. Aggrey Awori when he says that Government officials actually connive with these people in order to share the loot. Mr Speaker, we are now considering loans and I am a Member on the Public Accounts Committee. But when we get the report on how much money Government is devoting on this breach of contracts, you really wonder. Court costs can even be more than the original contract value and you wonder. Why should Government go on losing like this?  

Another question I want to ask the honourable Minister on this issue of Burundi is, if I heard him properly, he said that Government was supposed to supply blankets to Burundi. Is the Government of Uganda a business enterprise? I thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with Transroad U.K Ltd. The Government of Uganda had embarked on the exercise of paying the contract sum of 6.6 million by 1988. What made them stop paying? Was it intentional so that they could award big costs so that some officials could benefit? 

Two, the loan by Iraq, even a child knows about that loan. This was for onward lending. Who were the beneficiaries? Did they refuse to pay so that Government of Uganda should pay? It is we taxpayers who are paying the costs. Why can’t we hold the officials or politicians who were involved in making these costs arise? 

I will quote an example, the judge says here: “These costs could have been avoided, time wasted, money wasted if Government agreed to settle out of court.”

Lastly, the business in Uganda: We have talked about foreigners. What about our local business people who you are not paying in time? Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Other Members have already pointed out the fact that Government was losing a lot of money on court cases. When the honourable Minister was referring to the payment of the Transroad Ltd loan, he did indicate that the amount of money involved was in transporting 360 railway wagons to Mombassa. The question I want to ask the Minister is, can he clarify to us whether the loan as reflected in the question and in his answer, truly refers only to the transportation costs of 360 railway wagons or to the actual cost including purchase as well? 

Secondly, did these 360 railway wagons actually arrive in this country? Can we trace the remains of the wagons?  

Thirdly, the honourable Minister also said that in the beginning, World Bank restricted Government to paying only 12 percent of the loans, I think each year. The question I would like the honourable Minister to answer is; when the debtors resorted to going to court; and clearly knowing that we would loss the case because we borrowed the money; and we admitted to borrowing; did Government go back to the World Bank that going to court would mean losing lots of money? What was the World Bank’s response? If they advised Government to proceed with the cases, how much of the losses incurred, is now being met by World Bank? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The way some questions are being asked, you ask that was it to collude or not?  Supposing he says it was neither, then he will not give you an answer. If you suggest two answers that he must give one or the other and the answer is different, he will say no and sit down. So, I think we should be able to see how we frame the questions better.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable Minister has told us that part of this money has been paid. I would like to know whether the procedure, as clearly laid out in Article 154 of the Constitution, was followed? We have not seen this money in any area of the budgets. May I know whether this money was removed from the Consolidated Fund and paid direct to these people without the authority of Parliament?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, honourable members for your questions. Hon. Omara Atubo made very pertinent points. He says, why wait for court action to pay? I told honourable members that initially, before 1992, Government was not in position to pay because there was no money. That was a hard fact. Whether we wanted it or not we were not in position to pay. 

But when the World Bank came in to assist us, they gave us conditionality that they could not assist us if our creditors were going to take only 12 cents in a dollar.  Another conditionality was that “we shall not treat any creditor in a preferential manner.” In other words, our hands were tied in respect of those debts that were incurred prior to that day. 

So, even when our situation improved because of that arrangement with the World Bank under the HIPC arrangement, we could not pay. If we paid we would have breached the HIIPC arrangement and we would have lost our benefits, which I think all Members know. So, the situation is that even when it was possible for us to pay, we just could not pay without breaching our agreement with our donor partners.  

Hon. Mwandha wanted to have details of other loans or creditors. At a later date I can supply this to House with the details. But as I said, most of them have been paid. The same applies to costs in litigation. There are records for costs that have been paid. Now the question is, if we go to courts and our courts order us to pay, can we define the jurisdiction of our own courts? Of course not! We pay but when we pay under duress - when we pay by court order, it is more or less under duress and nobody will say, we have breached our conditionality with the World Bank or with our donor partners. It will not be preferential treatment; we shall have just been forced by the law to pay. 

So, most of these debts where the creditors had to go to court were paid except in the case of Yugoslavia which we could not pay because it was under sanctions. Most of them we did not pay because if we did so, we would fall outside the ambit of HIIPC and would lose our entitlements.

Hon. Mwandha was concerned on who is responsible for the failure. I think this explains that no official of Government indeed was responsible but it is because we had to oblige by those conditionalities.

Hon. Aggrey Awori mentioned the negligence in the Attorney General’s chambers. That is not for me to answer. That one can be put to the Attorney General. I do not know whether there is any negligence. But what I am assuring you is that there is no collaboration between officials of the Ministry of Finance and Attorney General’s chambers not to pay. If there were to be collaboration, there would be collaboration to pay. How do you collude or collaborate not to pay? What benefit would you expect? I thought if there was to be collaboration, you could just pay quickly and you share the spoils. So, I want to say that it is not true that there is any collaboration between the Attorney General’s chamber officials and the Ministry of Finance.

Hon. Bamwanga also was concerned about Government failure to pay. What I must make clear is that failure to pay referred to debts, which were contracted up to 1992. But I want to emphasise that Government is now punctually paying all its creditors. Yes, under the Commitment Control System, we do not take up any transaction or any contract which we are not able to pay. And all the contracts we have undertaken, all the goods we have consumed, Government has duly paid. There are thousands and thousands of transactions, which from that time have been handled by Government and the Government has adequately paid.

Hon. Member of Mawokota North referred to local contracts. As I said, we put in place the Commitment Control System and that system will ensure that we do not incur debts we are not able to pay except where we get some cash flow problems and in some delay. But all the debts we are incurring this time round are being paid. If there is any delay, it could be a delay of a short time. But payment would definitely be effected.

Hon. Mafabi asked why we did not pay Transroad. I have already answered that. We did not pay Transroad because we did not want to breach those conditions. As to whether those amounts – I think that was asked by Prof. Latigo - as to whether those amounts were only for transportation of railway wagons, all I know is that amount was for transport, clearing and forwarding. It had nothing to do with the purchase price of the railway wagons. But as I said, we have not agreed on the execution or on the discharge of the contract and that is why an appeal has been preferred. Some of those issues are issues that will be determined by court.

Hon. Jack Sabiiti asked whether we have complied with Article 154 of the Constitution. I wish to remind hon. Jack Sabiiti that court awards are statutory expenditures. When they come, we are obliged to pay them and we have complied with Article 154 of the Constitution.  

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

Question 35/02 to the Minister of Local Government:

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year, the Committee on Local Government presented a report, which was adopted by Parliament, recommending that a Chairperson of a district service commission should be a university degree holder. However, the current Local Governments Act states that any person serving on a district service commission should possess an “O” level certificate, an “A” level certificate or its equivalent, plus a diploma from a recognised institution.

(i) Would the minister clarify to the House what guidelines the district councils should follow when appointing chairpersons and members of district service commissions to avoid further confusion on the matter?

(ii) Would the Minister further clarify on the qualifications needed for appointment of members to land, public accounts and tender boards?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Philip Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, Tuma, who has asked this question. The question is, “Last year, the Committee on Local Government presented a report, which was adopted by Parliament recommending that a chairperson of a district service commission should be a university degree holder. However, the current amended Local Governments Act states that any person serving on a district service commission should possess an “O” Level’ and “A” Level Certificate or its equivalent, plus a diploma from a recognised institution.  

(i) Would the Minister clarify to the House what guidelines the district councils should follow when appointing chairpersons and members of district service commissions to avoid further confusion on the matter?

(ii) Would the Minister further clarify on the qualifications needed for the appointment of members to Land, Public Accounts and tender boards?”

Mr Speaker, the question from our colleague is short and I will also offer a very short answer. The chairperson and members of the district service commissions are appointed under section 55 (2) of the Local Governments Act 1997 as amended in 1998 and also in 2001. So, basically the guidelines and the direction we give to the local Government councils at the districts is to follow the law as it is in this Act. 

The district council appoints members of the district service commission on recommendation of the district executive committee with the approval of the Public Service Commission. The law requires that the district service commission should have a representative from urban councils in the district, a person with disability and at least a third of the membership should be reserved for women. These are the basic guidelines as enshrined in the law. 

My colleague also went on to request for the qualifications needed for appointment of members of the district service commission, local Government public accounts committee, local Government tender board and district land board. 

Briefly, Mr Speaker, the qualifications for members of the district service commission are stipulated in section 57 of the same Act as amended. These are: 

One should be of high moral character and proven integrity; have a working experience of not less than 10 years in a responsible position; - this is for the district service commission - is orderly, a resident in the district, and is not a Member of Parliament, local Government council or an executive body of a political party or political organisation or a public officer; should have a minimum qualification of advanced level certificate or its equivalent that is, a diploma from a recognised institution. 

Mr Speaker, the Local Government Public Accounts Committee basically has the same. That is section 89 of the Local Governments Act as amended; and it says a person should be of high moral character and proven integrity, has a minimum qualification of advanced level certificate or its equivalent and not be a member of a local Government council or administration.

Local Government tender board: here, members of local Government tender boards are stipulated in section 93 of the Local Governments Act as amended. And to qualify to be a member of this board, one should be of high moral character and integrity, have a working experience of not less than 7 years in public service or a recognised institution, have a minimum qualification of advanced level certificate or its equivalent. 

The Member went on to request for the qualifications for members of the district land board, which actually falls in the portfolio of my colleague, the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment. But suffice to inform my colleague that the qualifications of members of the district land board are stipulated in section 58 sub-sections 2-5 of the Land Act, 1998 and these include: 
Should be 18 years of age and above, be of a sound mind; should not be a Member of Parliament, should not have been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; should not have been declared bankrupt; at least one member of the board should have qualifications and experience in matters relating to land; and should not be a member of the local Government council. Briefly, Mr Speaker, these are answers to the question.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much!

MRS TUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to me whether it really makes sense for committees of Parliament to make recommendations, they bring them to Parliament, they are adopted and then we just shelf them.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, these questions are very clear. They were proposals by the committee to Parliament that somebody should be a graduate. That has to be translated into amending the law. But before the law is amended, what has to be followed is the law. So really, what other clarifications do you need on this one? That is the law. We have to follow the law rather than recommendations.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would not like to bog down the House over this very straightforward situation of a question by hon. Tuma. But I would like the Minister to clarify to me with respect to my district Kaberamaido. We have a new district and a new tender board has been put in place and the chairman of the tender board to the best of my knowledge does not hold those qualifications especially the academic qualifications. Who is to blame for this?  

PROF LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is also very clear. But I am seeking clarification on how the law is implemented in a situation where the law requires that nominations to the district service commission should include one-third women, at least one member representing people with disability. When nominations are forwarded to the Ministry, is it proper for the Public Service Commission to consider the names submitted while the basic requirement of the law is not met?  

I say this because in the case of my district, the names I know that were submitted, for example, had only one woman. There was no person with disability and yet probably I still do not know these names submitted outside the framework required by the law are now being considered. Can I seek clarification on what then happens? Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from the Minister’s reply, I want to find out whether he is aware that in many cases, while implementing this law, the authorities concerned are not appointing people with disabilities to these committee as laid down by the law. If he is not aware, would he remind the relevant authorities to ensure that the law must be observed? Thank you.

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. I start with the last comment. I think this should be the responsibility of all of us the political leaders and the local Governments at the national level to make sure that we comply with what is provided for in the law. It is our political duty and it is within our mandate and we can enforce it if we sustain pressure on those who are supposed to do this.

Hon. Latigo, it is not possible. We have discouraged those who are trying to implement the law in a warped manner. The district executive committees make these presentations to the district council taking into account the nature of the composition provided for in the law. Where this has not been followed, this is irregular, and I think we need to collectively work on it. At the Headquarter, our Directorate is always handling cases of this nature, trying to regularise them as much as possible.

MR ERESU: Yes, we have been asking colleagues in the districts and also in Parliament, where candidates have been appointed without the necessary qualifications, to bring this to our attention and in writing, so that we can take appropriate action. So where this has been done, we have moved very swiftly to assist the councils to regularise these irregular appointments. 

In any case, it is important for colleagues to know that where these votes or commissions are irregularly constituted, it is also possible to have serious legal shortcomings in their day to day transaction. So we advise them, as much as possible, to stick to the law. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE NOTES WITH APPRECIATION THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 21 NOVEMBER 2002 BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT REGARDING THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY IN GENERAL AND NORTHERN UGANDA IN PARTICULAR


MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa District): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank His Excellency for the address he gave us on security. 

Mr Speaker, security is the responsibility of everybody in Uganda. We should not leave it to the President alone or the armed forces. It is very sad that many people have died in the North and have also lost their property. As leaders of this country we should not put a deaf ear, but we should put a lot of pressure to see that in Northern Uganda peace prevails.

I was happy to learn that the Government of Sudan agreed that Uganda could pursue Kony up to its territory. But if they were really serious, Mr Speaker, I do not see why the Government of Sudan has not handed over Kony to the Government of Uganda. They know where this man is, and I see that they are just taking us for a ride. So if they are really serious, let them hand over Kony to the Government of Uganda or to the United Nations. 

This man has done a lot of havoc to the people of Uganda and especially to the people of Northern Uganda. So I urge Government to put pressure on Sudan to hand over Kony physically. They know where he is. That is when we shall know they are very serious -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if there is a fishpond and somebody says, “Okay, if you have a hook, you come and fish.” Are you going to say because you are the owner the fishpond, also fish for me? (Laughter)

MS KULANY: Mr Speaker, but we are talking about life, and life is being lost everyday. If Sudan is really sensitive to life; they should really hand over this man to us. There is no sane Government that can tolerate Kony. So we urge that Kony be handed over by Sudan Government.

I want to talk about rustling. Rustling has also disturbed the eastern part of Uganda, especially the neighbouring districts to Karamoja. I want Government to treat rustling the way they treat terrorism in this country. A lot of life and property has been lost. 

As I speak now, yesterday we lost somebody in Kapchorwa due to Karimajong raids. So, Mr Speaker, this has taken long. We were happy that Government took some steps to disarm the Karimajong. But we were disappointed that this exercise came to a halt in mid-course and the raids intensified. As I speak now my people are worried; they are not sure whether they will celebrate a happy Christmas. So, I want Government to take rustling as they take terrorism in this country.

The other time - you know I was surprised when the honourable member from Moroto said that this rustling, which has persisted in Karamoja, is as a result of having no institutions in Karamoja that can curb lawlessness. So, I urge Government that – I do not know whether it is a law that every sub county should have a Police post.

The other time we were told that there is only one Police station in the whole of Moroto District. I am not aware whether there is one in Nakapiripit or in Kotido. If they are not there, we are not surprised that there is a lot of lawlessness.

MR LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the member for giving way. There are Police posts in the Headquarters of Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit. Well, they are not very many but they are there. We would also want to tell you that the disarmament exercise is on course. It was only slowed down because most of our armed forced were taken to attend to the problem of Kony in Gulu and other areas. The moment that is achieved, they are coming back and we shall continue. Thank you.

MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, I have just told you, that last night we lost somebody in Kapchorwa. That shows that actually the situation has not improved. So we should urge Government to put in place institutions to curb lawlessness in Karamoja region.

The other problem, which causes insecurity in this region, is the porous border with Sudan and Kenya. There are a lot of guns, which are infiltrated through Karamoja. The security along these borders is not tight. So there is a lot of gun trafficking.  So Government should take steps to see that our borders are sealed and we curb this armed trafficking which is taking place. With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I urge that we all take security as a priority in this country.  Thank you.

MR OULANYAH JACOB (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for the speech he delivered. I also thank the Parliament of Uganda for the initiative they made so that the question of Northern Uganda, for the first time, was addressed directly by the President on that specific issue.

I would like also to thank the soldiers who smell the gunpowder every day in trying to defend our people.  

On the day the President made the speech, Mr Speaker, I had noticed in the House the presence of Brig. Aronda, who is the overall operations commander, and Brig. Oketta. I wanted to say that Parliament should have allowed these people to rise because we have the habit of thanking people when they are dead. When they are in actual service, we do not thank them. I would like this Parliament to thank these people.  

My dear fellow Members of Parliament, this motion is discussing imperative matters relating to the necessity for peace building in this country. We know that this country is one. That is why we strive to protect human rights because we recognise that the defence of human rights of anyone anywhere is the defence of human rights everywhere.  

This is why through our Constitution we endeavour to ensure workers’ rights, the minority rights, the rights of marginalised groups and the rights of people with disability.  That is why we aspire, Mr Speaker, to protect our environment. This country is one, whether we like it or not. That is why we gather here today to insist on the rule of law and to advocate for an enduring structure for peace in this country rather than enabling conditions for war in this country.  

We know we are one. We know it is our responsibility to assert this oneness and to challenge the forces of fragmentation, disunity and of war, which deprive us of our claim to a common humanity, a common country, and a country where mutual respect and tolerance is the order of the day, Mr Speaker.  

At this moment this country faces a possibility of war. People are beating war drums all round the country. That is why the President’s speech becomes very important. We already have enough wars in this country, Mr Speaker. We recognise the urgency of this moment.  We perceive the assertion that war inevitably dismisses the power of the human intellect and the human spirit to try another way.  

I am standing in this august House today because we still have the option of trying another way to solve the problems in this country.  We understand the necessity to develop this and make it an operational principle for the people of this country, that we do not have to revolt in order to evolve as a country.  We have to work together for peace.  

I support the President’s statements but disagree with some of them. Mr Speaker, we have, in this country, laws that were passed by this Parliament and laws that were passed by the previous Parliament.  We have the Constitution in place, and all these laws make provisions for avenues of resolving conflicts peacefully. There are written down very clearly. But we still see, we still hear, we still –(Interruption).

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, when the President was making the statement, I was seated next to hon. Aggrey Awori, and as the President was talking, hon. Aggrey Awori categorically stated, advising the President, that had hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Reagan Okumu been given a ministerial post, the war in the North would stop. I was surprised that the two distinguished members could not challenge this view. 

I am seeking clarification from the honourable member whether if he were given a ministerial post, the war in the North would stop. I would also like to find out from Government whether the Executive is prepared to offer these posts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you for the information honourable member from Masaka. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has developed a dependable system of criminal justice.  As a moral obligation not to abandon this system for political expediency, investigations, arrests, charge, prosecution, speed trial are the cornerstones which will restore confidence in the people. The systems, which we have established, have the capacity to resolve conflicts peacefully and lawfully. Once we lose this confidence, Mr Speaker, we shall resort to resolving our conflicts through unlawful and mostly violent methods.  

No nation committed the rule of law or undertakes extra judicial measures or detentions, which are illegal- they are rampant in this country- of denying habeas corpus. We had submissions of honourable colleagues on the cases in their constituencies failing to notify suspects of the charges for which they are held.  Mr Speaker, these are the problems.  

Herein is the basic connection between basic standards of justice and the protection of human rights. Herein also lies the pre-conditions to public confidence in our systems of law and faith in the institutions mandated by our Constitution to make sure that the rule of law is observed and that conflicts are resolved peacefully and lawfully.  

We urge all institutions of Government, the people of Uganda mandated the President with the power he now holds, the President has a duty to be generous and to be charitable with that power. History has taught us that those who do not act charitably with power that is given to them by the people are taught the hard way lessons of generosity. We do not want this to happen in this country again.  

Go to Britain and ask about their history, how many Kings were beheaded for holding on to power unnecessarily and at a tremendous cost to the people. We are saying, Mr Speaker, we are at the position where we have to make a decision that is expedient and will help the political development of this country.  

There may be no serious threat to the real power that the President holds, but it is true that the cost of ascertaining the power will become so astronomical in terms of human life, and the budget strain on the national economy, enough to warrant a reconsideration of the choices we make today as a Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, can we prevent war? Can we prevent violence in this country? It is time to make non-violence as an organising principle. We as Parliament have a responsibility to protect, prevent and intervene in situations like this.  These rules have already been attributed to many institutions in this country.  

We have the responsibility to prevent this war through ensuring good governance, respect for the rule of law and respect for human rights. The responsibility to intervene in terms of authorisation of military intervention, through the budget process, and creating a policy criteria for protecting populations that are threatened by mass killings, genocide, ethnic cleansing and war related deaths.  

The right and responsibility of legislators in national reconciliation cannot be over emphasised.  We have been in this august House, Mr Speaker - as I wind up- because we have not lost confidence in the political process. That is why we are here. There are people who have lost confidence in the political process, maybe prematurely; we can say that they are in a hurry. But do they have a cause? Is there anything we have done as a country to cause other people to think of violence against the people of Uganda?  Whether the answer is yes or no, is immaterial. But the point to the fact is that we have a collective responsibility as Parliament to avert war in this country.  

Mr Speaker we hear on the radio waves people talking of war, and threatening war.  There is war in northern Uganda, 17 years it has lasted. But, I beseech this House as we walk out for this Christmas break; I want us to think as legislators.  I want us to think and know that we have a right as the representatives of the people of this country to avert this strategy. We have to talk to our people; we have to prevent the things that are happening in Northern Uganda to happen in any other part of this country.  

Mr Speaker, what has happened in Northern Uganda should not be allowed to happen in any other part of this country -(Applause)- even Rwakitura, I am being informed. It should be recorded in history that when the time was bad and the threats were clear, this Parliament of Uganda stood up to change it. I thank you Mr Speaker, and I support the motion.

MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the President for having got time to come and address Parliament about the security situation in the North. 

On the onset, I would like to say that this war in the North is very unfortunate. It is also unfortunate that Kony and his group are looking at this war as a trade, as a way of life and as a means of survival. In fact, I do not expect Kony’s atrocities to abate just because these atrocities are a form of advertisement on the part of Kony and his group. These advertisements are aimed at those that are interested in sponsoring terrorism and instability in Uganda. 

Fortunately, for Kony, I would say while other people, say in Government departments and in the private sector have to pay for the advertisements to be run in the media, Kony’s advertisements are running in the media free of charge. 

It is also unfortunate that Kony does not have a political programme. Why do I say Kony has not got a political agenda?  It is because the rebel groups that I have known that have got political agendas can never indulge into such acts like forced recruitment, abduction, killing and mutilation of civilians, leave alone looting of civilian property. 

Another unfortunate thing is that Kony and his group have no interest in peace talks. Why do I say they have no interest in peace talks?  One is because they cannot fit into the society where they have committed atrocities.  

Two, the life Kony and his group are leading in a rebellion is too expensive to be maintained. I heard the President saying that some of them say they can never eat vegetables. Who can afford giving these people meat? So, with that, I would think that those are the reasons why Kony is not interested in peace.  

You can remember when we had peace talks organised by Betty Bigombe. While the peace talks were going on, Kony was ferrying arms from Parajoko in Sudan.  The President has gone ahead and instituted another negotiating team headed by hon. Eriya Kategaya, and Kony is not bothered and has not reciprocated the act. So, that goes to indicate that Kony is actually not interested in peace talks at all, and whoever thinks he is going to talk to Kony I think is wasting time.

That is why I would want to support His Excellency the President’s decision to increase expenditure on Defence. However, while I might want His Excellency to increase expenditure on defence, I would urge him to look at two main aspects. One; the element of corruption in the Army because I feel maintenance of say, ghost soldiers on the payroll in the Army has got an effect on these operations against the bandits, because resources will be drained from the system. Secondly, when the commanders are told to deploy, they will be seen on the ground and this one will bog down the operations. 

Then number two, is the need for adequate training for our commanders, because I feel with inadequate training, we are bound to lose personnel and equipment and these are usually acquired at very high costs. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank His Excellency the President for his address to this august House on the security situation in this country and in Northern Uganda in particular.  Mr Speaker, I have two concerns to make. One, I will just touch on the general issues that have caused conflict in this country; and two, I will touch on the Northern question very briefly. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has experienced a lot of bloodshed; we have gone through turmoil for a long time. If one had to look at the statistics of what has happened since 1966, one would say that Uganda is ungovernable. I have been reading through a number of papers and I have been trying to compare all the regimes that have governed this country.  

Look at the UPC from 1962 to 1971 with a few periods that may not have been directly under UPC. If you look at what happened during that period, over 20,000 people were killed, over 3,000 people were imprisoned without trial, over 8,000 went into exile, and over 12,000 were displaced. During Amin’s period, 1971 to 1979, over 300,000 people –(Mr Awori rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You want to give him opportunity for clarification?

MR SABIITI: Let me first make my point, Mr Speaker. I am sorry, honourable member, you will derail me, and my argument may not be as consistent as I want it to be.  

Mr Speaker, during Amin’s days, for those of us who lived here and saw what happened, over 300,000 people were killed. If you read the newspapers and journals, this is the figure normally quoted. There were more than 30,000 imprisoned without trial in the various prisons of this country. Over 40,000 people went into exile and over 200,000 people were displaced in various parts of this country.

We come to 1980 to 1986; nearly similar situations happened. Many people died, many people were displaced, and many people were imprisoned without trial. And then we come to the Movement Government, in 1986 to 2002. Over 500,000 people have died in this period. Over 1,000 have been in prisons without trial. Over 50,000 people have gone into exile, and over 700,000 people have been displaced. 

What lesson do we learn from all these figures? Every regime - Obote, Amin, Museveni, all these things have happened. What is the problem, Mr Speaker? (Interruption)

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Thank you very much, hon. Sabiiti.  You know we share the same birthday. So, hon. Awori should -(Laughter)

Honourable colleague, you are giving very important statistics. I am however interested in knowing the source, so that I can follow up for future usage.

LT. COL. KATIRIMA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member, for giving me the opportunity to seek further clarification. It would have been useful statistics to us if you also referred to the population of Uganda at the different stages. So that, for comparison purposes, we zero down on the relative percentages of the times and all-round challenges that have been at hand. I thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank these honourable members who have given me that information. But really, anybody who has been interested in the policy of this country and he reads; these figures in fact are so conservative that even the numbers are much higher.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, death is death, irrespective of whether the population has increased or not. Once a person is killed, whether one or twenty, people have been killed.  

My argument is that, if you look at the graphic profile of the cost of the leaderships during all these regimes, the cost has been high in terms of human loss and property destroyed. What is the cause? That is the issue. What is the cause? We have had two systems; in the multi-party system we have had problems - people have died. In the Movement system, people have died. What is the problem? 

Mr Speaker, there are areas that we must look at.  We tend to look at an individual, Kony or X and Y, but there are fundamental things that we must look at if Uganda has to be stable. I believe that the conflict in this country hinges on three areas. 

One area is lack of freedom and human rights. In all these governments that have ruled this country, this basic requirement is lacking. Some governments have given a little bit better than others have, but this particular fundamental issue has not been touched properly. 

There is lack of democracy and giving genuine democracy to our people. We have staggered around the Movement, multi-partyism and whatever, but we have not given our people the democracy they deserve.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, lack of good governance based on institutions, and not on individuals. We have tended to govern this country as individuals. You found Obote governing as an individual, although he claimed he had UPC. We found Amin governing with the Army, but he was governing alone. I want to add here that even currently, under the Movement, the leadership is so individualised that the decision-making process, policy formulation, implementation of these policies and decisions, tend to hinge on an individual rather than institutions.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, when we are talking about wars in the North, it is not the money. However much money you gave Obote, or Amin, or Museveni to do the work, without sorting out these problems, in my opinion, there is no way that these wars would end. (Interruption)  

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Sabiiti. Hon. Sabiiti has given us information as to what the causes of insecurity and wars in this country are. I would like to refer him to studies by Kituo Cha Katiba. These are people who have studied constitutionalism in Uganda very carefully - academicians, professors, lawyers and so forth. I leave it to him to go and find out for himself how the people of this country prioritise what they think their problems are. I thank you.

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With reference to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 40(1)(K), allow me to move a motion without notice on a matter of public importance, namely, the need for a resolution of Parliament on a peaceful settlement of the war between the Lord’s Resistance Army and the Government of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas we the peoples’ representatives continue to note with concern the upsurge of rebel activities, to wit; abductions, ambushes and brutal killings of innocent Ugandans living in communities in and around the Northern Region of Uganda; and 

Whereas the untold pain, loss and suffering inflicted upon our people living in the aforesaid communities by reason of the now 17-year-old and on-going war disheartens us; and 

Whereas it is the wish of the people’s representatives to continue participating in the effort to bring stability and peace in the said region; 

Appreciating all Government efforts, both in the past and at present, to bring an end to this brutal war;  

Noting and further appreciating the President’s efforts in bringing stability in all areas of Uganda and the Northern Region in particular, and more so in the appointing of the negotiating committee;

Now therefore, it is hereby resolved by the Members of this Parliament that-

(a) In the strongest terms the members condemn, with all deserving contempt, the unlawful, gruesome and wanton abductions, and brutal killings which have led to untold human suffering and destruction of property as a result of the prolonged war.

(b) The Government of Uganda, in the execution of its constitutional obligation of protection of lives and property, expedites its operations to put a complete end to the aforesaid war by all possible peaceful means, including arrangements for talks with the Lord’s Resistance rebels, within or outside Uganda’s borders.  

(c) His Excellency the President of Uganda continues to make all efforts to pursue peace through dialogue, as he has encouraged and helped other nations to engage in solving their conflicts, to the problem of the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels in the Northern Region.

(d) His Excellency the President, having appointed the negotiation committee, creates favourable conditions and helps the committee to start, hold and conclude the peace talks with the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels for a peaceful Uganda. 

(e)  Mr Speaker, this is a very important pledge - The Lord’s Resistance Army is equally urged to reciprocate to Government’s peace initiative intended to bring peace in Northern Uganda. 

(f) The Members of Parliament, as the people’s representatives, do pronounce ourselves with the peace talks to be held with the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels and do hereby express our full support to the said talks.

(g) The Government of Uganda do continue to use all possible means at its disposal to urgently provide relief and humanitarian assistance to the suffering population in the region.  
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is supported. You can justify it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I will be very brief.  The Speaker has already announced that we have joint prayers for peace tomorrow; is that prayer enough? We are going to pray to God that he harmonises the spirits of the fighters and everybody, so that we can sit on a round table to attain peace. 

Hon. Omara Atubo yesterday told us that since this insurgency started, the Lord’s Resistance Army has abducted as many as 1000 people in Otuke County. Let us go to the Constitution. One of the most prominent students of political science, who doubled as a philosopher as well as a practical politician, is Edmund Burke. He said that the role of a Member of Parliament is to represent others as well as to cause peace and pursue the taxes people pay. 

Let alone the taxes; the issue of peace is a cardinal obligation to every responsible Parliamentarian. So, this motion I have moved is exactly toning up with Edmund Burke to emphasise the role of a Parliamentarian, and you are Parliamentarians.

Mr Speaker, I would like to quote Article 79(1) of the Constitution, which is going to emphasise the importance of this motion: “(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”  

The motion endeavours to make Parliament realise its responsibilities to make laws that can cause peace and security in our mother country, Uganda.  My motion is exactly up to this very endeavour.

Mr Speaker, Parliament recently passed a motion moved by hon. Bright Rwamirama, seeking assistance for our brothers in northern Uganda. We have raised as much as Shs30 million.  By raising this money, we were not saying that we want war to escalate. No! We are trying to help our brothers who are suffering, with the aim of assuming that war should come to a complete end.  

Parliament is not prepared to raise more money next year for the same purpose when the war is still continuing. We raised the money to ensure that war comes to a total end, and the time is now, Members of Parliament, for us to devise ways and means to ensure that war comes to an end. War is bitter. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know what you are trying to do. Are you trying to amend the motion we had so that it includes a resolution, or is this independent from the motion that was before us?

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is a resolution, and I am ending.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to tie your resolution to the motion that was on the Floor? Because the motion on the Floor was to appreciate what the President said about the situation in the North. Are you just adjusting it so that we include this resolution?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am appending this resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so you are really amending the other one to include that part?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Absolutely! Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I would be very unfair if I did not quote some of the most outstanding cases of character sketches of Presidents who are known to be warlike. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: If hon. Lukyamuzi is amending the other motion, couldn’t he have allowed me to finish my submission and then he appends his? Because he took over, and he was allowed!

THE SPEAKER: You had not completed?

MR SABIITI: No, I had not. I was just half way.

DR OKULO EPAK: I really like hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s motion, and I would want to support it. But he says he is moving a motion under a rule for moving a motion without notice. Now, that is a motion. Half way, you have asked him and he said he is just amending the motion we have on the Floor.  

Secondly, if we accept that motion, as he would like to insist that it is his motion without notice, what do we do with the motion we already have on the Floor?  

THE SPEAKER: This is exactly what I told him, because I saw a problem. If it was independent of the other, then we should have disposed of the other first and then come to this one. But I see that what he is trying to do is to tie up this with the motion that the Minister brought. Because the President addressed us, and I think he must have wanted a solution. He must have wanted support from us, and I think this motion is intended to do exactly that.  

If that is the case, what should be done is to amend the motion to include this part. We will then continue debating the motion as amended, so that other people can contribute. Would you agree?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Agreed, Mr Speaker. Can I conclude?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but then how will you conclude? Amend it formally and then we proceed with the motion as amended.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with respect to what you have said, I beg to move that my motion be appended to this main motion.

THE SPEAKER: We see your intention, but I think it has to be put in such a way that - do you want some time five minutes or so? Honourable member, you will appreciate, because we would be having two motions. One is independent of the other, so we would be debating two motions at the same time. 

Actually, the intention was to amend the Minister’s motion so that in conclusion, we appreciate the speech but at the same time make this declaration, which the honourable member has read out. I hope it is clear. Honourable Minister, do you have anything to say?

PROF GILBERT BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I have read through the intentions of hon. Lukyamuzi’s motion. If it is to facilitate the appreciation of the President’s speech, in his speech the President mentioned the need for peace talks but that Kony has not yet appreciated that up to today. If we are going to support him, I have no problem with some of these being part of the appreciation of His Excellency the President’s speech, but not a formal motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what we can do is to draft something, so that you can read what you actually want to do with the motion on the Floor.  But we can continue with the general debate. If you want somebody to assist you, you can get somebody. 

Hon Sabiiti, I will give you just two minutes because you had addressed us for over five minutes.

MR SABITTI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I was interrupted, I was trying to argue that the two systems have exhibited certain unprincipled stands. We have deviated - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me help you, hon. Lukyamuzi. In your case, you can quote Rule 42 because that is on amendments to motions on the Floor.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect, my motion has been standing for some time.

THE SPEAKER: We are going to debate it, honourable member. Procedurally, we could not have two independent motions at the same time before we disposed of one. As I have said, I see it is connected to the motion that was originally moved on the Floor, and therefore, you can only move after amending. You can amend the original motion under Rule 42 to include part of yours; there is no problem.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I was advancing an argument that the two systems, the Movement System and Multi-party System, have deviated from the basic principles on which they stand. For example, in the Movement System we have certain characteristics such as broad-basedness, inclusiveness. If you want to have the people of Uganda governed under one body and this one body cannot allow others to operate, you must adhere to the inclusiveness. So, this principle, if not followed properly, causes more conflict and confusion in the country. 

If you look at the entire structure of Government, when we talk about broad-baseness and inclusiveness, suddenly many shades of our society, in terms of parties, regions are not properly handled. This also causes conflict.  

Mr Speaker, the politics of manipulation is another issue. That is one of the things that have caused conflict in the past, and it continues. People want to manipulate the Constitution because they want to continue. 

I will read the words of His Excellency the President, when he was addressing us. He said: 
“We are still here; gakyali mabaga. We shall clean the place. Somebody is saying 16 years of the Kony problem. But it will be solved, because the problem has lasted 16 years but NRM has also lasted 16 years.” 

To interpret this statement, it means it does not matter if these problems are there. As long as the system that I have continues, no problem.  

So, Mr Speaker, much as I appreciate what was presented by His Excellency the President, I think we should look at the past and know that no one is indispensable in this country. This country is for everybody. You come, govern, and go; another one comes, governs and goes. Otherwise, we are sowing seeds of conflict and confusion.  

Mr Speaker, I think the northern problem would have been sorted out if the Movement or the Government had known its weakness and limitations. War is war. War is not a cup of tea. Therefore, when you talk about poor weather, poor terrain, poor leadership, limited equipment; surely if you are a General - and we have many Generals in this Government - these are the basics when you are training for war. 

When you are training to be a military leader, to start talking of weather and rain when you are operating in the same area where your enemy is; you are at par! Therefore, the explanation given here, to me, is not enough. If we demand for more money to go to the North, I would not mind if this money is properly utilised. But to complain of these three variables and you forget that even the enemy is using the same variables, it means there is something wrong somewhere.  

As I conclude, I would like to thank our soldiers who have done a good job in the North. But I would like to request the Executive, particularly the Presidency, to know that everybody has got limits. No one is a genius in nearly every area, and so he should work with others to make sure that peace prevails in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for his detailed address on the security situation of Uganda, and I have two concerns. 

According to His Excellency’s address on pages 10 and 11, there were a lot of weapons given to Kony from the Government of Sudan. I quote: “These were very dangerous terrorist weapons against civilian vehicles, buses, lorries….” I would like to know, perhaps from the Minister of Defence, where have these weapons been kept? Are they far from the UPDF? If at all they are near them and they use them, it is clearly indicated here that they are dangerous weapons and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was referred to in the beginning, but now there is a change of attitude. As somebody else pointed out, Sudan is now co-operating. I think that was a historical perspective rather than what is prevailing. Don’t you think that we should address the situation as it is? We need to move to the future. We are not looking backward. As far as this issue is concerned, we are looking at a way of improving it. If you look backward, don’t you think it will complicate matters?

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance and I leave that point at that. 

Secondly, I propose that the Defence Review Team, which has been put in place, should include an arrangement for rest and recreation for our UPDF. According to this, these words beginning with the letter “r” are not in the vocabulary of the UPDF. I propose that since we have the Defence Review Team, they should plan this for our soldiers so that we protect our people in order to achieve peace in our country. Thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by personally thanking you. It was out of your understanding and acceptance of the request that Parliament made that a formal invitation was made to His Excellency the President to come and address us.

Secondly, I would like to thank His Excellency the President for very positively responding to our request, which in any case is part of his duty. However, there is one thing, which I would like to start with. Peace and security are very fundamental for development in any country. While we are talking about security, we should not look at it as being only of physical nature. There is also the psychological insecurity that our people have continued to be tormented with.  

Mr Speaker, while we are concerned about the 17 year-old war in Northern Uganda, at the beginning of this month, we also noted with heavy hearts the military hardware being amassed and stationed in West Nile. There is an English adage that says; “When a coward sees a weakling he opts for a fight.” The unnecessary amassing of military hardware in West Nile for the last two weeks is uncalled for. The people of West Nile have come out of the bush, they have come back from exile, they have settled. It is very unfortunate that settled minds are being reminded of the bitter days that people went through, with the presence of heavy military movements and more so, the war fatigue equipment.

You will realise that even to an ordinary person who is very peaceful, when he or she sees a soldier in combat or moving in a Mamba, an APC or a tanker, then he already knows that there is a war going on. What am I saying? I think it is high time Government consolidated its efforts and resources in containing the war in Kitgum, Pader and Gulu Districts, rather than stretching itself beyond these parameters.  

Why has this war lasted for so long? Mr Speaker, time and again we are told that we are pursuing the enemies of this country in neighbouring countries. At the same time we are assured that the Uganda Government is a signatory to the Lusaka Peace Accord. But as we move on, even this week in the Government’s daily paper The New Vision, we see that the UPDF is already stationed in Ituri region in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.

Why do we have to stretch ourselves that far when our own house is not in order? While we agree that in October we had to painfully cut 23 percent of the national budget, it was done without following proper procedure. While it was for a good purpose, we also felt that the procedure that was adopted was not constitutional. Since then, nobody has come to the Floor of the House to tell us under which law or regulations the 23 percent of the national budget was cut to support the efforts of UPDF in Northern Uganda. 

War is not just about fighting. Even when you are fighting you also need to help the innocent civilians that are caught up in the crossfire. Mr Speaker, there is a project under the Office of the Prime Minister known as the Project for Internally Displaced Persons. I was personally responsible for this project in as far formulation of its conceptual framework in 1999 is concerned. This is a project, which among other things, was supposed to focus on the welfare of the displaced people. However, this project has also been affected by the 23 percent budget cut.  

Surely, if we are to see to it that peace and tranquillity exist in the north, it is high time that we fulfilled our national obligation of ensuring that Government plays a leading role in as far as provision of social welfare for its people is concerned. Thousands and thousands of women, children and the elderly have been displaced in camps for the last 17 years. Issues like UPE that Government boasts about are a dream to the children of Northern Uganda. Issues of shelter and health are also neglected.

If we go to New York, we will see that the way they grade us favourably, in as far as committing and achieving our goals of the UN, is not a true picture of the people of Northern Uganda.

Through this debate I would like to request the relevant arm of Government that part the 23 percent of the national budget, which was cut off for this war in the North, should also be used to care for the displaced persons in these camps. That means, therefore, that the funds should be channelled through the project, which is already in existence in the Prime Minister’s Office.

As I said earlier on, war is not a matter of a physical nature. There are also wars of words. This month, and more so last week, some members of the front bench were waging wars of words. If there is a problem and you are a Cabinet minister and you stand up in public places and say, “Kill them, why are they there? What is the point of negotiating?” then those words are carried in the national media. What are you doing? You are a leader and instead of pacifying you are inciting people into war! 

I think the front bench should realise that they are leaders and therefore any utterance that they make can be misunderstood and/or taken to reflect the official position of Government. I therefore urge members of the front bench to be very responsible and restrain from making very provocative and irresponsible statements.

Mr Speaker, when we started this afternoon there was a motion moved by hon. Okupa. I stood up to contribute but realised that if I contributed then, I would most probably not have another chance of catching your eye. Hence I reserved what I wanted to say for this occasion.  

While we are talking about insecurity, we also need to talk about it in as far as movements are concerned, that is, how people travel. For quite some time now, the West Nile region has been completely cut off. A safe passage to that region is missing. In September, we Members of Arua and Yumbe Districts did make a statement. It specifically referred to the insecure mode of movement of our people across Lake Albert. 

There is a ferry, which is not so sound mechanically. When it reaches in the middle of the lake, it keeps turning around. The ferry is as dangerous as confronting Kony himself. If the people of this region matter to Government, the promise that the Ministry of Works made should be respected. It should go ahead and ensure that the ferry works properly. It is designed to have four engines but right now it is operating on two dilapidated engines. At times they fail to operate, in the middle of the lake. They should repair them and also give us more engines so that that place can be a good escape for the people of that region.

I think this is the time, as we wind up to go for the Christmas break, to say this. The prayers that we have been invited to tomorrow will be meaningless if we cannot come up with purposeful programmes and actions to translate our heartfelt concern about the people of Northern Uganda into reality. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute and probably support this motion.  

I thank the President for his good speech and specifically for having tamed the Rwenzori Mountains. Let me hope that there is no other negative force today, which will use the Rwenzoris badly again. However, according to the Hansard the President said; “The Rwenzori is now tamed. It belongs to the Central Government of Uganda. We are living there permanently. It does not belong to bandits: Kinyamusithu, Mukirania and Irimangoma”. 

Mr Speaker, this is a sad statement to me. The same issues that pushed President Museveni to the bushes of Luwero also led Mukirania, Kinyamusithu and Irimangoma into the same situation.

In 1982 Irimangoma suspended this struggle. Kinyamusithu remained in the mountains and President Museveni allied with him. They were all called bandits by the UPC Government. Kinyamusithu is dead, Mukirania is dead and Irimangoma is in the USA. What I am asking the President to do is to respect the dead. They were all once called bandits, including President Museveni. These people are resting in peace. My father is dead and so is Kinyamusithu. They cannot be bandits in hell or in heaven. President Museveni should respect the dead, if we are to move forward. 

If he wants war he can start it with Irimangoma who is in the USA. I understand the Government of Uganda is paying his expenses there.  

Whoever introduced the method of barbaric guerrilla warfare in this continent of Africa killed the continent and is responsible for all these troubles. This is a challenge to the whole continent. It is not a matter of an individual country. It is a shame for humanity and therefore a challenge to mankind.  

Mr Speaker, Africa cannot cope with the challenges of war. But why do we create war? We must avoid this situation. The same conditions were imposed on the American people. Abraham Lincoln said, “A country divided among itself cannot stand permanently and prosper.” The Americans had the resources, they had the willingness, and they had the manpower to rehabilitate the Northern States after the war. I doubt whether Uganda can do the same for Northern Uganda! 

What is the way forward? It is national dialogue. Let the people underplay this but some of us will continue saying that national dialogue is the way forward now. What do I mean? When we talk of national dialogue people ask us, “what issues are you putting to Kony? What issues is Kony putting to us?” We may not talk to Kony but we should defeat Kony. We should fight those issues that create a situation of war. Mr Speaker, it does not need an expert –(Interruption)

MRS MARGARET KOMUHANGI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. You are suggesting that we have a national dialogue and of course it is very right. However, I have a strong belief that if the dialogue does not involve all the parties equally, if Kony cannot come up to participate in the dialogue, if all other functions cannot come up to participate in the dialogue, that dialogue will not be useful. It will actually not be a dialogue. Can you propose to this House, or give a clarification on how this dialogue could be practical and workable? Thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA: Mr Speaker, I believe in conflict resolution and the member is not very young. She is a politician. I know that a conflict is on even in this House. It is those conflicts that breed people like Kony. We must resolve these internal conflicts; it is called house cleaning. 

I can give our own experience of the Rwenzururu that Museveni talked about. We fought for separation from Toro and for us we were militant. Those who believed in negotiations negotiated with Idd Amin. One of the reasons that we were fighting is separation. Idd Amin said, “give them the district.” So our reasons to continue waging war were defeated. Why don’t we resolve these internal issues so that the reasons for Kony to continue waging war are defeated? 

Mr Speaker, it does not need a political expert to know that this country, since colonial times, is permanently divided. The north-east against the south-west, and in the Southwest we believe in kingship. The northwest was republican. Since then, that division has remained and no successive Government has tried to have a national dialogue to bridge the gap. 

That is why for us in the southwest we believe in the Movement because it is nearer kingdoms. The north, the republicans, have said, no. Is this not an issue for us to dialogue over so that we defeat those reasons of war that warmongers are trying to promote?  

What I am calling for in order for us to agree on our proposal of national dialogue is that we should stop being politicians. Let us try, for the sake of our country, to be statesmen and women. Let us look ahead of us. 310 years from now, who will be there? It will be your daughter and my son. Do you want them to inherit this division of the north versus the west, northeast versus the southwest? I do not think it is a correct move. 

Dialogue amongst us is the beginning to solving this northern conflict. We condemn Kony, Mr Speaker, and so if I had time I would assist our forces to look at the weaknesses of Kony so that they could finish him off. I would give them the strong points of Kony and why Kony has persisted -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to me to give you some days off and -(Laughter)

MR MBALUBULHA: I think so. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Kony has weaknesses that our forces can exploit to defeat him. Kony, as a sole leader of his movement, is not highly educated to carry on a war in modern times for such a long time. This leads us to believe that for almost 16 years he has failed to map his political programme to rally the support of the ordinary citizen. 

Mr Speaker, we were all born in the bushes. If Kony has failed to mobilise an ordinary person in Northern Uganda to give him support, there is no justification why he should go on for this long. That alone, the fact that the population in Northern Uganda is hostile to Kony, is enough for our soldiers to exploit and defeat him. 

Kony is not a military genius person by all standards but he has managed to create a guerrilla force worth talking about. Mr Speaker, if we were talking about the person of say, Col Mande, we could understand, but Kony is not a military person. Really, why don’t we exploit this? 

I commend our forces that are in Northern Uganda. We have boys from Sundhurst; we have boys even straight from Luwero training to counter insurgency operations. Why should Kony continue terrorising them? Kony has turned out to be a hostile force against the civilian population, which puts him in an awkward situation of being rejected by the population. 

Mr Speaker, when we rejected the ADF we were armed. Why can’t we use the same method and arm the population of Northern Uganda to fight for themselves? Kony forces are composed of his abductees, who are forced into the rebellion against their will. 

I do not understand this. If these people are forced to fight, why can’t they escape whenever there is an opportunity? I always read that they are now surrounded. Why can’t the abductees who are forced to fight run away? I think this can be exploited by the Government of Uganda to defeat Kony. 

Kony has remained a local force. I mean he has almost dominated one tribe, waging a devastating war against his own people. This is a paradox also. Someone is waging war against his people, and his army is dominated by the same tribe! This is a situation that we can exploit to win Kony. 

The elite of Acholi land has rejected Kony. If they accepted and joined him, they would have formed a political wing and hence the political programme that Government is demanding for. Why don’t we exploit this? The leadership of Acholi land has rejected Kony. Why don’t we do it? Why don’t we finish off Kony? 

Mr Speaker, Kony has also got strong points. That is why he has defeated us all along. Kony exploits both the anti-northerners and the Movement sentiments that existed during the liberation period by the NRA/NRM. Here we simply need to apologise and show the population of Northern Uganda that we mean good for them. 

Kony has exploited the disorganisation and corruption within the Army as an institution seen in the Byakutagas and what have you. Mr Speaker, we can deal with this as a country and stop it - the ghost soldiers and other weaknesses. I thank the President for being there to correct those anomalies. 

Kony has exploited the armed conflict in the Great Lakes Region. To address the Kony question effectively, the conflict within the Great Lakes Region must be addressed. I thank the President for Burundi. He should do it in Rwanda, the Interahamwe, Congo and even Sudan. I don’t agree with the Member who said that Sudan can simply hand over Kony. If Sudan can do it, then we simply hand over Garang. Those are the two elements in the northern question.  

Kony has exploited the anti-Islamic sentiments in the World and in the Great Lakes Region. Islamic fundamentalism; how do we address that question as a country? It will give us a way forward. (Interjections) I have been given two days. Kony has exploited the internal political weaknesses of the day. We have a weakness, and hon. Jack Sabiiti explained that agenda very well. Kony has exploited unprincipled and unco-ordinated international laws and treaties, the anti-terrorism, and the non-interference in internal matters of another country even when people are dying there. 

Terrorists are a threat to human security anywhere. There is a coalition against terrorism in the world. Why can’t we seek help from these guys, especially the ones who are leading this struggle against the terrorists? 

Kony has exploited the lack of peoples’ participation in counter-insurgency operations. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of getting people from their villages and putting them in camps, puts our soldiers in a very difficult situation because they do not even access information.

They leave Kony free in those areas where people live in those bushes, eating their cassavas and whatever. I would recommend that people should be armed, go back to their villages so that our soldiers can access information. Kony has exploited the terrain and geographical location of the Acholi sub region -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please honourable Member, wind up because the other- (Interruption)

MR MBALIMBULHA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. It is in the President’s speech that there is no specialised unit to fight in the Imatong hills. They should borrow a leaf from Alpine Force probably and the terrain whenever there are tall grasses our soldiers cannot do much. 

I am wondering; Kony has exploited his personal quality and character, the charismatic, coherent appearing weak while consistent and persistent, brutal and inability to have an organisation with structures. He is amoeba even UPDF cannot access him. He has no structures and what have you. Those are some of his strong points. Kony has exploited lack of the elite among his ranks, and as a former Catechist, he lacks the capacity to organise politically. A Catechist, Kony has exploited the lack of Government commitment to make peace and genuine national reconciliation.

There is a lot of mistrust and lack of confidence on both sides -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MBULABULHA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I have a lot of information on Kony -(Laughter)- really I kindly request the Minister of Defence to liase with me so that we pass this information to him to finish this man. He is a problem to all of us. There is no way we can take sides in the matters of Northern Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Still continuing on this one, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi have you now finished the formulation? Read it so that we proceed.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to read the formulation. The House notes with appreciation the address delivered to Parliament on Thursday, 21 November 2002 by His Excellency the President, regarding the security situation in the country in general and Northern Uganda in particular and in realisation of its constitutional obligations resolve as follows:

THE SPEAKER: Is it clear? Seconded?

HON MEMBERS: Seconded.

MRS MARGRET ATENG OTIM: (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. The President’s Speech was indeed very timely for me. I am saying so because I heard at that time there were a lot of accusations coming from the people saying that we the people from the North have encouraged Kony and that is why he still lives within us. But if you read the very first words of the President, he said: 
“The insecurity in the North is a classic case of terrorism supported by regional states against our civilian population.”
That was a sigh of relief for me! That was the beginning of it and I hope that will help to get rid of such a connotation from the minds of the people because it was stated very clearly.

Secondly, if you go to the ground in the districts that are affected, you will hear Government officials stating that the situation is now calm, you can go back to your homes. But I would like to say that all these phrases are made without linking them really to the sane mind. They say them because it is what they are supposed to say. 

The day LRA attacked Lira Municipality, we were in Ngeta where Radio Wa was destroyed and the Assistant RDC said, “the situation is now calm, you can go back to your homes.” That day, we Members of Parliament, who were visiting, managed to come back to Kampala, and we reached here at midnight, but it was because of other duties. Meanwhile, the very RDC who said this went and slept in Apac. All Government officials were sleeping in Apac. Why do you say what you do not mean? That is very bad! 

On 30th of November this year, we Members of Parliament - we were four in number, I think some of you read in the media - because of this citation saying that the situation is calm, you can now go home, we went to Otuke. That meeting was supposed to involve many cadres of people including the Office of the RDC, the education officers, but to our surprise, it was we Members of Parliament, two LCV councillors, the deputy Chairman who went from Lira town. There was no one else and to our annoyance, when we were almost through with the meeting, words came in that Kony was surrounding us. So, we had to flee for our dear lives.

The question then is, where was the Office of the RDC? They knew about this meeting, they knew about the situation on the ground; why didn’t they liase with us? Why didn’t they inform us? What I am trying to point out is that we are together in this situation. We should be one unit, if we want to achieve the peace in the country.

On another note, I have listened carefully to statements made in the House. I listened to speeches made by some Members yesterday stating that the situation we are facing today is because of political reasons, and Mr Speaker, I think you asked to be clarified and I would like to take this chance to clarify that matter.

Persistently, it has been said: ”You people have not voted wisely.” Several officials in the district, and even in this House have said, “You people, if you had voted properly, things would have been otherwise.” Therefore, we are watching. In addition to that, the Prime Minister said it in this House that people who are not grateful should not be given more.

At a later date, even the Second Deputy Prime Minister said so, that we did not thank for the food. I believe if something is given to the people as I have always watched on television that Lira has received food - I see the members there receive them with happiness and they really thank for these things. The question I am raising is, whom do you want to see thanking? You know clearly that if you have children in the house and continue spanking one child consistently, it will cause you problems.

Therefore, I am not happy about these citations here that we are not grateful. I am not happy and I do not want to continue hearing any more of that!

I would like to bring to the House the point of view of the community we serve. When we visit these people, they appeal to the Government to assist them and protect their lives and property because it is stated in the Constitution. 

It has been said by many Members here that what we are demanding for is a human right, therefore, why do you think the people are saying it is stated in the Constitution instead of demanding it as their right? This is because they know there is something fishy; there is a plan. 

At this moment, I would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda very much for the move it has taken to identify with people who have no hope. Parliament, you have done a good job, I thank you very much for the contributions you have made and I think this is the beginning of showing the people nationalism and I encourage you to do that! 

I am taking this moment to urge that the numbers of soldiers on the ground is really not enough. When we went to Otuke we realised that there were so few. If you go to the ground, you will find that the number of soldiers that are there are so few that they cannot contain the situation. 

We were reliably informed that the soldiers have been instructed to live at the Gombolola headquarters and that is where we found them.  These problems we face are at the borderlines, therefore, if it is our people to protect the soldiers by guarding them, then I think it is a wrong strategy. The soldiers should be clearly put at the borderline and the numbers should be increased. We have asked for this so consistently, ‘please increase the number of soldiers if you want to have an impact.’ 

At this moment, therefore, I would like to thank the Government and donor agencies for all the aid they have given. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do not worry, honourable members. I see we cannot finish this debate, but I have noted those who have stood. I will give them the opportunity. If I don’t give you today, definitely I will start with you tomorrow. I have noted.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members of Parliament. First, I would like to thank those colleagues, particularly who have remained here consistently since this debate started because it shows the seriousness we are taking this issue with. But I particularly, want to thank hon. Sabiiti and hon. Oulanyah because their contributions kind of drew me to some distance, and the fact that they remained here I think demonstrates that they want to hear. This is what we are telling our colleagues in Parliament that what do you respond so that we can find a solution.

Mr Speaker, hon. Oulanyah has talked about effective institutions so that we can manage our society better. Hon. Katuramu yesterday talked about evacuating people from the North, get them out of the fire and put them somewhere else as we sort out this problem. It sounds out of the way but he had given serious thought to this issue.  He is concerned. Our people have said that the problem we are dealing with is political, that if we solved the political issue, then we can go home. 

A number of Members have called for dialogue and hon. Kabwegyere called for further studies.  Obviously, the issue we are dealing with, colleagues, is very serious. Our people in Northern Uganda have been under war for more than 15 years.  When you count the cost today, it is very high.  Even if the war ended today, we shall not have finished the cost. There is more cost to be paid by being under war for so long. In the Rwenzoris, as you heard my brother hon. Kibanzanga explaining, we are still paying for having been under war for so long.  

Let me say upfront, Mr Speaker, that the President has not in any way implied that he is the only solution. That is why every so often either through our invitation or through his initiative he comes and expounds what he thinks is the solution. And as is our tradition, we are expected to debate as we are doing, to say “I think on this count, the President is having it right, or here we think there is a shortage and we want to support this shortage by proposing the way forward.” 

So, I think the first point is, let us all look at the President as someone making a contribution. He is saying we have a problem on our hands, let us think together and find how we can move to end this problem.

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kiyonga for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the NPC, hon. Kiyonga, is whether he is assuring this House that the contributions and resolutions we have made over the years about this matter were reflected in the President’s last address.
 
DR KIYONGA: I thank hon. Bigirwa, and I think as I get to the later parts of my contribution, I will be able to respond to that. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, once war has started, it picks its own momentum. Once there is a war, it picks its own momentum over and above the cause of what has caused it, so that when those of us who were saying it is a political problem or something else, once the war is there it also must be faced given its own momentum. We must not think, for example, if we have agreed that there is a political problem, and you solve it, that immediately the momentum of the war itself will end. It may actually still continue for some time. Therefore, in looking for the basic cause you still have to deal with the momentum that the war has picked. 

My honourable sister from Lira has just said, and I agree with her, this may very well be right, that in certain places, there are just not enough soldiers. You have to deal with that situation and the President was quite eloquent, indicating the hardships that the Army is facing because of not having certain supplies. 

The President, I think, is the very first one to indicate the weaknesses within the Army, to outline what he thinks the Army needs in order to deal with the momentum of the war where it has reached. I think the President went to a very long extent to try and demonstrate the inadequacies within the Army, which nobody has disputed since we started the debate. He gave us a list of the African countries and their Defence budgets so that we are able to compare and see where Uganda stands given the challenges it is facing. 

So, I think that is an established fact that the Army may have weaknesses. There maybe corruption; there maybe ghost soldiers, but even without those, I think we should agree that there are shortages that we need to deal with so that this momentum that the war has picked can be able to be handled properly.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Kiyonga for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to Dr Kiyonga is that much as he has appraised the figures of Defence expenditures in Africa as appended to the speech of the President, I do not see any time for joy, because Uganda remains one of the 20 countries in Africa that spends most astronomically. The figures speak for themselves; I have done the research.

DR KIYONGA: Well, that is a matter of interpretation but if, for example, I just get out one figure; look at Tanzania and Kenya. We are talking about a momentum of war, which has been going on for 15 years in Uganda nothing of the equivalent in Tanzania and Kenya, and yet they have a much higher budget. Clearly that should convey some message.

Let me go to other points. The theory that there is a political question here that needs to be sorted out - hon. Sabiiti definitely remembers very well. Hon. Sabiiti was in the bush; he saw ills in this country and felt that he needs to join that path in order to deal with this problem. I like hon. Sabiiti’s analysis except that as he got down, the connection got lost. He outlined regime after regime how long it lasted, how many people he thinks died, and how many people were displaced. 

I would like to remind honourable members and particularly hon. Sabiiti that the war waged by the Movement believed there was a political problem. And on arrival here, political methods were applied given the belief that we had formed a broad-based administration. That started a pathway that would allow maximum participation by the population and political forces in the administration of the country. We all recall that a Constitution was made through a broad consultative process. We could have made the Constitution by sitting here as a House but we thought that by going –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kiyonga, my friend, the National Political Commissar, for giving way. I would like, because there can be a very serious conceptual difference between what harmonises society. Is a broad-based government in anyway similar to a government of national unity?

DR KIYONGA: Well, it depends really on who is making the definition. Traditionally, and if you are purist, a Government of national unity would mean that you have forces recognised, and you agree on some kind of share parity when you eventually take power and move on. 

In our case, broad-based meant that we recognised broadly the political forces that were in the country. We recognised the problems that we are trying to sort out. We did not quite take that pathway of saying how many shares for DP, how many for UPC; we just managed to get people from all these elements, get together and start a process of discussion. 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my good colleague, the Movement Political Commissar. We are discussing a very important concept in Government and I think it is important that all of us who are lawmakers must be clear in our minds what we are talking about to avoid distortions and misleading Members. I want clarification on this point. From the perspective of the Movement Political Commissar, will you say a Government is broad-based when it is based on selecting individuals in their individual capacity and leaving out the main political forces in the country not represented and not having a voice in a political process, which you are talking about?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda, which we greatly respect and honour, does attempt to answer the yells of what Dr Kiyonga is anticipating with reference to Article 70, which says: “The Movement political system is broad based…” According to what Dr Kiyonga has said, they picked individuals from various political parties. How do you justify what the Constitution says with reference to what you picked at random?

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask my colleagues to let me complete my analysis and then we can see about this critique of it. So, as I said, knowing that there was a political problem, we came and formed what we considered a broad-based administration, so that the people can air out their views on how they want to be governed, what type of Constitution they want, and the commission went all over the country and brought views. 

We ultimately went to the Constituent Assembly where I think hon. Lukyamuzi, as part of the broad-based was able to come and participate, and we made the Constitution. I thank people like hon. Lukyamuzi who keep quoting the Constitution. I thank people who say we must follow constitutionalism because outside that we are going to have trouble.

Using our Constitution we went to a referendum in the year 2000 still searching are our people satisfied. They gave their views we made a Constitution but we said, “people, here again is an opportunity, here is a referendum; what do you say?” And the people made a decision. But because we are still searching to further resolve the political question, we have said, no, there should be another Constitutional Review Commission. Let people come out and say, how do they evaluate the constitutional process to date, what are the gaps that the people want to fill? 

At the time we passed this Constitution, we know how many negotiations the Movement had carried out with different groups. Even today, as you know, despite the motion that my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, wants to move, the process is on; that if Kony is willing to negotiate, come out and we negotiate. The high powered team has been named. 

So, I go to the question of national dialogue. I am not discarding this, but I want us to give it further thought. First, we want to follow constitutionalism. There is a Constitution that gives us a pathway. We are also saying national dialogue in the face of a constitutional review that is going on, we need to tie these otherwise opposing concepts. (Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you Dr Kiyonga.  Is the National Political Commissar aware that the on-going process of the Constitutional Review Commission has turned out to be a sham, and that there are people who are being coached on what to do and say, and that in some places information is not known and very few people are turning up to give views? Will the views collected by such process constitute a fair view of what all Ugandans think?

MRS BIGIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to get a clarification from hon. Kiyonga. It seems he has so much faith in the Constitutional Review Commission. I do not have faith in it, because of what has been going on in the countryside. A few people are gathered at their centres through the popularly known Chaka Mchaka and the only resolution that they come with out at the end of it, at least which is publicised, is the third term. I do not know whether the Constitutional Review Commission is about the third term, and if the third term is going to resolve the political question of this country; I have my doubts.  

MR SABIITI: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Kiyonga knows very well what he has gone through and is a result of such a magnitude of political manipulation in this country. It did cost a lot. If we continue at this trend, again manipulating society by pretending that we are doing the right things when we are doing the opposite, this will plunge this country into more chaos more than what Kony actually is doing. 

It is better for this Government to work administratively and sort out the problems for the future instead of trying to manipulate to be in power at any cost.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Kiyonga, you have five minutes only to wind up.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you. I see Ndugu Nabwiso standing up but, my time is now very limited. I have described a pathway that the Movement Political System beliefs would be able to help us to sort out this political question. Obviously, there are views like hon. Bigirwa has; that the Chaka Mchaka is intended to rig the Constitutional Review Process.  

I have myself been going around the country closing these courses; I do not share the view of hon. Bigirwa that on every Chaka Mchaka this is the resolution being passed. In any case, if a resolution is passed at a Chaka Mchaka, this is not presented to the Constitutional Review Commission; and we come from different areas of the country. 

I cannot claim to have full sight all the time, but it is our responsibility as members of Parliament who are concerned about this country that as a process is going on, if we detect that there is any problem going on, we should come and take a resolution.  We should come and sort it out.  It is the responsibility for everyone to know that there is a problem. We should not keep quiet until two days down the road and then we make different claims.

If I could go towards concluding and picking particularly the questions raised by hon. Bigirwa, hon. Oulanyah and hon. Sabiiti. I think sometimes our own procedures here tie us; they make it difficult for us to operate. You know, like this discussion which is going on; it is so rich but at the end of the day, it is in the Hansard. We pick something else.  

What I would propose, Mr Speaker, if our procedures will allow it, is that at the end of this debate, we could pick a small committee, not the usual Select Committee, some small committee with people who are committed to sit down and look at the Hansard.  We come with ideas and critisize what is going on.  

We can also look at the Constitution and see the alternative pathway and say; this is what we present. That will take us some distance. But if we just come here like my good friend whom I thought would be here, hon. Omara Atubo. He is a historical; he talks; immediately he has finished, he walks away because he wants the Press to capture him.  That will not help this country.

Once we have picked views here, let us follow them.  Only yesterday I was in Kyankwanzi with the Permanent Secretaries. I have advised them, and they have agreed, that every Permanent Secretary should get a copy of the Hansard everyday, because they do not know what we are saying except what they see in the Newspapers. 

People should not think that if we made mistakes, then people will just say Museveni is the one who made mistakes. Hon. Odur was in the Parliament, hon. Sabiiti was in the Parliament, hon. Bigirwa was in the Parliament, what did you do? People will ask! So, if our procedures will allow, I want to be part of that group and show my belief in this process and listen to other people so that we can have something cohesive which we can present to the country, to the President and for ourselves. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable Minister, I think that is a good idea. Besides that, I think this Parliament’s records are in the Hansard and we assume that other arms of Government, including the Executive, follow what is being said here.  

Whereas I think it is a welcome idea that we can have this committee, but I would say that even on the part of the Executive, it is free to set up its committee to analyse what is in the Hansard, and see how best to utilise what is being suggested here. Because for us we do our job; we do it here; we get recorded, then it is for you to follow and see whether we make sense or not. 

At the same time, it is good for us to do this, but we will just be duplicating our work because for us, we follow what we have said. It is other people who should pick up it and implement. But it is a welcome idea and neutral proposition, which can be followed.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to make a brief response to that. First, really we are part of the body politic; we would not be getting full mileage from our work if we do not notice the weakness. Weakness in Parliament, weakness in the Executive, weakness in the Judiciary; and we have a historical role, those of us who are here now, to be able to know that there is a weakness there and then go an extra mile ourselves to try and cover up for any weaknesses. 

But more importantly, Mr Speaker, here hon. Oulanyah will stand and give a view of strong institutions, someone else stands and says no, the problem is lack of political space. If the Executive get it, it will not be a line of consensus. But if we are together as Members of Parliament, then we can say, “You, hon. Oulanyah, why did you say about institutions? You, hon. Omara Atubo, why did you think it was the political process”, so that we are able to tie together our ideas and come up with a viable proposal, otherwise the ideas will remain in the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: I think he has finished, but I will give you opportunity tomorrow.

MS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted some clarification from the hon. Minister and National Political Commissar on this issue; because if every time we debate we have a committee, will this be the precedent of this House?  

Secondly, I think there are also other channels in this House, which can be used. For example, we have the Equal Opportunities Committee and he can come before this committee as National Political Commissar and tell us about equalisation in the political arena; because all this is really referring to equal access to resources in the different arenas.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think, the hon. Minister has concluded.  This is the appropriate time really - we have sat here for quite long and I think this is the convenient time to adjourn. We will definitely conclude this debate tomorrow. As I have said, I know people wanted to contribute and I will do my best tomorrow to cover you.  

We are concluding the motion originally moved by the Minister, which was amended in that apart, and we shall be resolving certain position. I think you go and think about this. Maybe those who will be addressing us tomorrow should concentrate on the measures that are being proposed, so that we get something tangible for which the Executive should look at. We are not dealing with execution of policies. We look at the oversight and advise; and then it will be up to the Executive, those with merit to see whether we make sense, and then try to scrutinise what we shall have pronounced ourselves on. 

I thank you for the time you have given and for the good contribution you have made to the motion. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 December 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)




