Wednesday, 12 December 2007

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I am happy to welcome to Parliament international students from Ohio State University, led by Prof. Krydill Dave. They are paying a courtesy call on you. You are most welcome to Uganda (Applause)

2.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter that I had shared with you, but before I go to that brief matter I would like to make a small clarification. I saw today in the New Vision a report on performance of Members of Parliament, which graciously scored me as the best performing Member of Parliament. Unfortunately, I am a scientist and I know something about statistics, therefore I would like to correct the impression given. 

As Leader of the Opposition, I am not a typical Member of Parliament and therefore it would be very difficult to assess my performance as Leader of the Opposition; it cannot be assessed against the performance of other Members of Parliament. I know in the past, Mr Speaker, various newspapers ranked me quite well and I would have stood my ground on that basis. However, in this particular case, I think if any credit is to come my way, that credit belongs to the Opposition and to the entire Parliament. I just wanted to make that small clarification.  

The matter that got me up was a matter that I shared with you, Mr Speaker. This morning around 11 o’clock, two of our former colleagues, Mr Jack Sabiiti and Maj. John Kazoora, were travelling to Bugweri. Everybody knows that that has been the recent political Mecca. His Excellency the President has also just been there and many of our colleagues were there on numerous occasions. So they were, as it were, responding to the call of their former colleague in Parliament, hon. Abdu Katuntu, that our presence there would give him comfort. 

On the way, at the junction of Tirinyi-Mbale Road, they were stopped by Police. About ten policemen came and told them that they were needed by their boss. The two gentlemen then drove with the police to Busesa. When they reached Busesa, the boss was not there. After a short while, another policeman came and said, “You are under arrest”. When they asked why they were under arrest, they told them, “You will wait and the boss explains”. 

Hon. Harry Kasigwa called me to inform me about this. I immediately called the Inspector General of Police. He was not aware of what had happened and he said he was going to call the Regional Police Commander and get back to me; I am still waiting for him to get back to me.  

I also called the Secretary of the Electoral Commission, Mr Sam Rwakoojo. Initially he did not answer my phone call, but about an hour or so later, he may have heard me speak on the news and he called me and I explained to him what had happened. He also said he was going to get to the people in the field and get back to me; he has not got back to me yet.

Mr Speaker, I think it is not right that things like these happen during an election that is being redone simply because of rigging and allegations of violence or manipulation; that was the basis of its redoing. We thought that is important that the country, through this Parliament, also knows about this and maybe we would get a formal response from Government. Our wish is that the election tomorrow be left to be a free choice of the people of Bugweri. Making sure that the process goes on well is the responsibility of various parties, and as long as we do not breach any rules of the Electoral Commission we should be left to do what we can. 

In the last by-election in Ntoroko, we had agents whom we had assigned to go to various places. They went to Ntoroko centre and as they were having supper in the evening, all of them got rounded up. In the morning, the Police said, “Why are you here?” and things like that. Eventually, around 10.00 p.m. they were released but the job they were supposed to go and do was not done. Now, even if we lost the election because we did not have support, when such things happen you do not feel happy about it. Like they say, if we are going to practice democracy, the taste of the pudding should be in the eating. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. Yesterday, I received in my pigeonhole two documents; one is headed “MPs’ Statement on the on-going Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) Negotiations.” The preamble reads: “We the undersigned, Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) and national parliaments in East African countries, met at Entebbe, Uganda, from the 15th to the 16th of October 2007 to deliberate on the status of the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPA) negotiations and their implications to people’s socio-economic interests and rights. 

We, as people’s representatives, reiterate that EPAs’ processes and outcomes should serve to foster sustainable human development, regional integration and economic growth in the East African sub-region.” 

The preamble continues: “Significant issues: we note with dismay that our governments are under undue pressure to conclude EPA negotiations by December 31 2007 in spite of significant divergence on substantive issues, which include the following…” They go on to list a number of items and then they say, “We remain concerned that there has been limited interface between the negotiators on one part and EALA and national parliaments on the other part regarding the likely impact of EPAs thus negating our cardinal duties of representation, legislation and oversight.”

The second document is headed: “EPA Flash News Issued by the Directorate General for Trade, European Commission: The 1st East African Community–European Commission Meeting on Negotiations of an Economic Partnership Agreement, 14 November 2007, Brussels. Joint Conclusions”

The statement in part reads: “Ministers from the East African Community and Commissioners from the European Union met in Brussels on the 14 November 2007. The East African Community delegation was led by Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya, Chairman of the East African Council of Ministers and First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs of the Republic of Uganda. The East African delegation also included Ministers from the United Republic of Tanzania and the Republic of Uganda and Plenipotentiaries from the Republic of Kenya and the Republic of Rwanda. The EU Commissioner for Trade, Peter Mandelson, and the Commissioner for Development, Louis Michel, represented the EU.”  

The statement goes on to say in paragraph 3: “The parties acknowledged that the East African Community is a Customs Union and will therefore engage in the EPAs’ processes as one entity and that the interim agreement will be concluded as a separate configuration. They therefore agreed to conclude an EAC-EC EPA text.

The Ministers and Commissioners noted that within the very short time remaining until the expiry of the Cotonou Agreement trade regime on 31 December 2007, it will not be possible to conclude a comprehensive EPA that fully addresses the aspirations of all parties. They, therefore, resolved to work towards a framework agreement as a stepping stone towards an EAC-EC EPA that would comprise of trade in goods/market access, development cooperation and fisheries. The framework agreement will also provide a mechanism for continuation of negotiations beyond 31 December 2007.”

Mr Speaker, of late we have noted that there was a signing of an agreement on EPAs, which included our Minister of State for Trade. This Parliament has not been notified at all about all these negotiations and yet they are important. There is a blackout on information in this regard. I wonder whether there is any arrangement for Government to notify Parliament on what is going on at the earliest possible moment. These agreements are of extremely important implications to our economy, our trade and our relations, but there is a total news blackout. 

I request you, Mr Speaker, to use your good offices to urge the ministers concerned to notify this Parliament, even if for the sake of telling us what stage the negotiations have reached or the text of the agreement that was reached, so that we know how we can move on from here. 

MR GODFREY AHABWE: Thank you very much, hon. Kawanga, for raising that issue and for allowing me to give you information. Mr Speaker, it is a very sad situation I must say. I am the chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which has been following up this subject. As a committee, we have been engaging the ministry on the progress of these negotiations. 

Initially, the negotiations were between Eastern and Southern African countries under COMESA with EU. There were meetings that were held between us and the ministry. There were even meetings that we held outside Uganda under the auspices of COMESA. There are issues that remained unresolved; issues that were not agreed upon between the two parties. It is only in one meeting, one summit in Nairobi, where there was a proposal that the East African Community negotiates as a block. That issue was not even concluded, Mr Speaker. 

The workshop that hon. Kawanga is talking about took place in Entebbe. Some civil society organisations volunteered to inform Members of Parliament of Uganda and members of the East African Legislative Assembly and they came up with that kind of statement. 

I kept pestering the ministry to update us on the progress of these negotiations and they were supposed to interact with us towards the end of October. We had agreed that they would interact with us to give us an update on where they have reached, but they decided to keep quiet. They did not even inform us the reason why that kind of meeting could not take place, only to be surprised through the press. I think for the last two weeks, members who were interested must have seen in the New Vision and in the Daily Monitor pictures. Yesterday, the permanent secretary in the ministry was interviewed by the New Vision; the interview is there in the press. 

When I realised this, I called my committee and alerted them on the developments. We held an emergency meeting out of which we agreed that we write to the minister to give a comprehensive statement to Parliament. Mr Speaker, we gave you a copy of this communication and we also gave a copy of this communication to the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. 

Members wanted to raise this issue on this Floor much earlier, but I insisted that they do not and that we give the ministry about one week in which to respond. I interacted with the minister in charge of the sector and she told me she was going to alert her minister of state to give a statement to the House. Mr Speaker, we have been waiting and up to now we are still waiting. The interpretation I get out of this kind of silence is contempt of some form, that this Parliament is not respected for the job it is supposed to do.  

I must say at one time I raised this subject in a meeting of NRM Members of Parliament at the beginning of this Parliament and I said these ministers of ours - our colleagues, our friends - sometimes behave in a funny manner, that they do not possibly deserve our friendship – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, you stood to give information but as I see, you are now making a contribution. Can I ask the Minister – (Interruption)

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to the House is that I have officially written to the ministry to clarify on this matter, and the ministry is simply quiet and we are not very happy about it. That is the information I want to give you, hon. Kawanga, in case you are not aware. The committee is not happy.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard the concerns expressed by hon. Kawanga and the chairman of the committee and maybe the entire House about the lack of information on the situation on this particular subject. How soon do you intend to give us a comprehensive statement on the status of this particular subject?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, tomorrow the ministry will make a statement.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow we shall receive a statement –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I thought I should give a brief response to the statement made by the honourable Leader of the Opposition.  Of course, as the Leader of the Opposition knows –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, the other subject is closed; tomorrow we are getting the statement.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I will request the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to this House and give a statement after having carried out investigations on the matter that has been raised by the Leader of the Opposition.

3.02
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national concern. This regards the activities of the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) in West Nile, in particular the Special Revenue Protection Unit of URA. 

Mr Speaker, by law if the Special Revenue Protection Unit of URA confiscates goods which are suspected to have been stolen or smuggled, they are supposed to keep those goods in the customs warehouse. On many occasions, many traders in Arua have complained that their goods like sugar, motorbikes and kerosene are impounded by URA on the question that they have not paid taxes. When they raise the money to go and clear the goods, they usually find the goods missing from the stores or from the warehouse. On many occasions, many businessmen have complained about their motorbikes which are impounded and when they go and clear, they find these motorbikes have been sold by the enforcement officers of URA.  

Mr Speaker, on another note, there was a moment when the URA suspected a motorbike to have been stolen or to have been brought from Congo illegally to Uganda. They involved themselves in chasing this man on the motorbike and it happened that this man overturned and URA operatives ran over him in a Uganda Police truck. Up to now, there has been nothing like compensation or they have not come to sit down with the family of that boy who died due to the activities of URA. 

The people of West Nile are very concerned about this and we ask the URA head office in Kampala to come and intervene in this issue. Indeed we appreciate taxes have to be paid, but we do not understand the manner in which the enforcement officers are carrying out their duties in enforcing tax payment. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I seem not to see any minister from Ministry of Finance. However, since hon. Adolf, the acting Leader of Government Business, is here, I think he should take up this complaint about irregular performance of URA work in Arua, so that a statement is made in respect of that suspicious subject.

3.05
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say something about the first matter that was raised by the Leader of the Opposition –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think this matter has been reported. The Leader of Government Business has promised a response. Let us get the facts maybe by tomorrow and then we will be able to debate. He has received the complaint now and we cannot start debating this matter.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am talking about the assessment of the performance of Members of Parliament by the Africa Leadership Institute. 

Mr David Pulkol is a former Member of Parliament, former spy chief, former everything. I remember sometime back when this organisation distributed a questionnaire here, hon. Kakooza, the Parliamentary Commissioner, advised that members should not fill in the questionnaire and we thought that the matter had ended there. However, what appeared in the New Vision of today is very harmful and unfair to the majority of Members of this Parliament. You cannot count lines in the Hansard without talking about the quality of the contribution and you say somebody who has got more lines is the best performer. 

Mr Speaker, I am also looking at your position and that of your deputy; although you preside over the proceedings of this Parliament, you are still Members of Parliament representing your constituencies. Now, if we are to assess by counting lines, I do not know how many lines you will have because you are not supposed to participate in the debates. This does not mean that you two are poor performers.  

More importantly, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether everybody is free to come here and do research on us without our consent and go and write anything. Are we not supposed to give consent if one is supposed to do research on us? I think it is unfair to take the attendance book, for example, look at it and say “these are the people attending parliamentary proceedings everyday.” I can sign the book, go away and I do not enter here; you cannot count the number of times that I have signed the book and say that I am the best performer or the best attendant. So, I think we should really guide people who come here to do research about us so that it is done fairly. 

Mr Speaker, in the Sixth Parliament, the Daily Monitor was doing it but it was doing it in a much better manner than this one. I think whoever is concerned should be advised to do a better job; a job that would reflect the true state of our Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Well, honourable member, I have heard what you have said, and maybe hon. Otada wants to say the same thing, but the good thing is that you have been informed through the newspaper that this report or research will be officially declared tomorrow and I think the place has been named. I would suggest that to help those who made this report, you participate in the ceremony and raise these queries. 

On how they came and what authorisation they received, as far as I am concerned they never approached my office to say that they were conducting this research. I think they had their own methods of getting the information through one way or another. The last time I heard about something like this was when Commissioner Kakooza was advising you to ignore the documents that had been sent to you. However, I have noted your concern, hon. Okello-Okello.

3.11
MR OTADA OWORI (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Thank you for the opportunity, Sir. I want to associate myself to what hon. Okello-Okello has just said. Mr Speaker, I notified you that I wanted to raise the same thing on this Floor today. 

This is a matter that directly touches on the integrity of this Parliament. I believe that lack of information by some of these friends actually leads to no information at all on their part. Whereas you would want to inform the public about the on-goings in this Parliament and yet you are not aware about what actually is going on in terms of the facts on the ground, then it leads to misinformation of the public. For example, as the Speaker, whose stewardship is credited by many of us, this shows that you do not call us to order and yet you do so.  

Mr Speaker, some of us expect that an assessment of Members of Parliament should be an assessment of all Members of Parliament. You do not just pick about 40 or 50 and you talk about those ones and you do not talk about the rest. That amounts to the first level of unfairness. When you talk about the lines, like hon. Okello-Okello said that is not a fair assessment at all. 

I spoke to Mr Pulkol before I came to this House and he confirmed that indeed they were using lines from the Hansard and the attendance book. Mr Speaker, it is not mandatory that members sign that book. I can even sign and not appear in this House. So, we expected that first of all, other important issues like the number of motions a member has moved, how far the motions are, points of order and all these are the precise and correct methods of assessing the performance of members. Even with the attendance, they can establish a more formidable way of assessing or establishing attendance by individual Members of Parliament.

There is a gentleman who called me from the New Vision before I came to this House and he actually told me that he also felt that this was unfair. I am actually one of those whose names appear that out of 89 sittings, I have only sat in this House four times. (Laughter) He also saw that that was a bit unfair because in the same newspaper, very unfortunately, on a page called “Inside Politics” focusing on Parliament, they were talking about –(Interruption)

CAPT GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, the organisation which is said to have carried out this report on the effectiveness of MPs is an organisation which Mr David Pulkol chairs or administers; he is a very senior person. David Pulkol has ever been a member of this House and a minister; he ought to know that it is true there is legislative business, but in our contemporary Uganda a Member of Parliament’s responsibility is not only restricted to sitting in this House. (Applause) In fact, the majority of you, if you persisted and sat here – that once you are here then you are an MP - the rate of attrition in 2011 will be extremely high. You sit here much of the time, you do not attend to your constituency, you do not follow this or that; I can assure you, you will never return in 2011 -(Interjections) - Pulkol, where is he? (Laughter) 

MR GODI: Thank you, hon. Otada, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issues members are raising about David Pulkol are very serious. David Pulkol, from what I read in the library, was a member of the CA. If you go through the Hansards of the CA, his records will even cause some of us to mourn. 

To me the issue here is that assessment of a Member of Parliament would best be done by the constituents and his or her work in the constituency. As hon. Okello-Okello said, as the Speaker you are a Member of Parliament for a constituency, but by the laws of this House you do not participate in the debate. However, there is a place where you participate to guide the whole of this House and the country at large. How does Pulkol assess that? 

When you go out to represent this country or the House in many fora, how does he get that record and how does he know that that carries weight to the work which you are doing in this House? How has he rated the Speaker? Has he got 0 or 100 percent, because there are times when he does not attend? If hon. Otada has been here – and I have been seeing him - and they have said that he only attended four times, what about if the Speaker is on leave? Thank you.

MR OTADA:  Mr Speaker, I just want to say the following: You are ably in the stewardship of this House as far as we are concerned, and that members do not sit in this House sometimes for various reasons but most of those reasons are brought to your attention. I just want to talk about our colleague from Amuria, hon. Rhoda Acen, for example; many of us know that she was not here for a reason that was genuine. So, if you say she is not here and portray a picture that she is not a responsible Member of Parliament, I think that is the highest level of unfairness. I would also want to say that I have been unavailable in this House but with your leave, Mr Speaker, as you know. 

I also want to urge Members of Parliament that we should disassociate ourselves from this article of today. Whereas I believe that Members of Parliament must be assessed, the assessment must only be fair. I would also want to demand that we express our displeasure at this move or ploy that is intended to water down the integrity of this Parliament and especially the integrity of Members of Parliament. I want to put it on record that the African Leadership Institute must be aware that politicians struggle for their political positions; to just play around with somebody’s crowds simply amounts to something very dangerous.

I would like to assure this House, and more so assure the people of Kibanda County, which I represent in this Parliament, that I am a very effective Member of Parliament. My attendance of the House and my callings or the callings of my duty are not in doubt at all. I, therefore, want to move that we express our displeasure about this article that came out today and demand that the publication, which is coming out tomorrow, is a fair assessment of all Members of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since this report is being published tomorrow, and assuming what was published in the papers is correct, I hope I will be able to get a copy of the work of hon. David Pulkol and then we shall see what action we take. I will use the appropriate organs of Parliament to discuss this matter with the author, who is alleged to be David Pulkol. 

3.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Possibly, I would not be the one speaking because I was among those who were rated to be the best, but I saw unfairness in it. 

Coming to the issue of the committees, this is the very NGO which has been attacking Members of Parliament, that they are paid heavy allowances. We know very well that committee members are paid based on attendance. For Mr Pulkol to allude that members are paid for no work done is wrong. He has gone ahead to attack the administration of Parliament, that the records were not available for committees; then how do they go ahead to say members are paid yet the payment to the committees is based on the attendance? So, alluding that Members of Parliament are paid for non-attendance is wrong. 

I think Mr Pulkol must get his facts correct because in every committee meeting, whether sessional or standing, there are books where we register, whether it is a witness appearing or the ministers and the Members of Parliament. For Pulkol to come now and say, of all things, that there are no records of attendance in the committees, where they have been alluding that members are paid hefty allowances based on attendance, I think is not in order.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Commissioner Justine Lumumba.

3.23
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This article is not a simple one. They may have praised some today, but we do not know what will come out tomorrow. It is not an issue of an individual; it is an issue of putting the image of this institution at stake. 

Mr Speaker, as the head of this institution, I suggest that you talk to the board chairman of the paper, that is, the New Vision, which has brought out this report. A bit has come out today and it has damaged the image of the institution by implying that the accounting officer of this institution, the Clerk, pays people who have not done work. That is bad. This means that taxpayers’ money is eaten by MPs for no work done. It means this institution then cannot stand to demand accountabilities from the Executive. That is wrong. It means that our accountability committees do not have the moral authority to sit and call others to come and explain certain things. 

This is a paper where some percentage of shares is owned by Government. Parliament is part of Government because it is an arm of Government. We cannot just sit and watch and wait for what will come out tomorrow. Assuming what comes out tomorrow is worse, it may even go for the apex of this institution, that is, the Office of the Speaker. (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker, as well. The information I would like to give is that we, members of the Opposition, have two reasons to question Pulkol’s credibility and suitability to head such an organisation. You have given one reason and the second one is that we have known Pulkol as a spin master who has worked for a spying organisation. So, he is going to use that organisation to destroy us politically. (Laughter) 

In my opinion, Uganda has got the National Bureau of Standards that assesses industries and other institutions, and we have the National Examinations Board (UNEB); if Members of Parliament are supposed to be assessed, then this Parliament should create a national assessment board for Members of Parliament. This board would also be checked by another board. To whom does Pulkol report apart from the donors whose money he has been eating? First of all, the credibility of Pulkol is not enough to credibly assess a Member of Parliament. So, that thing is null and void.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my position is that instead of now attacking the paper which is publishing what it detected in a report, I think we rather wait for tomorrow as they have said, so that we get the actual report itself, analyse it and then deal with it. We do not now quarrel with the New Vision. 

I think let us get the report and through the appropriate machineries here, - our agencies and structures like the Business Committee, the Commission - we shall be able to handle this matter and report after we have read the context of the actual document.

MS KASULE: Mr Speaker, I am of the view that we should not wait for the report to be seen in the papers tomorrow. Assuming the words in the papers tomorrow – let me translate from my local language - are words that are going to cut off the Speaker’s head? We cannot wait for that. Any organisation that is sure of its work would have had the courtesy of giving the head of the institution a report. If they are going ahead to publish without even giving the head of the institution the report, we have been warned; tomorrow may be worse. We cannot wait. I want to move that we give the responsibility to the Speaker, who is the head of the institution. (Interruption)

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I just want to inform the member that actually, if we waited for a particular report to come out, the damage that will have been created will go beyond what we expect. This is the print media that has done this and the agenda of the electronic media is determined by the print media. So, what has appeared today in the print media is certainly going to become the topic in the electronic media with effect from today up to the weekend. So, for us to wait for a certain report, I think, the damage will go beyond what we expect.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, you should be careful on how you handle some of these situations. First of all, now you are dealing with the freedom of the press. We are trying to protect ourselves but the other people will talk about their freedom to publish. (Interjections) Yes, that is a fact. You must know that even the courts have said the press can publish something which is false - there is a decision - and that is their right. 

I think we rather take time - we are going to get the report tomorrow - look at the actual report so that when we give a response, we do not direct it only to the newspaper report but we give a comprehensive response, including on the report itself. How many responses are we going to make? We give a response to the media and then the following day we give another? No, we do not have time. I think let us give one response after we have got to see the document. I have said I cannot give two responses. When I give a response, it will be comprehensive not only to the New Vision but on the report itself.

3.31
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I agree with honourable members about the concerns they are raising, but I am just requesting colleagues not to panic. The Speaker has already told us that this organisation never contacted the Speaker’s Office. Tomorrow another organisation is going to come out and write anything about this Parliament because that is the law we passed - freedom of expression. So, we should be firm. We are very strong in our constituencies and we are deliberating. The Speaker will take the responsibility of informing those who have been misinformed. So, do not panic, honourable colleagues. 

3.32
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This year when I was in Arusha around September, I received a threatening text message from the Leadership Institute that if I do not respond, I would get negative reporting and that I should please call back. I sent back a text message saying, “It is you who want to get information from me; let it be up to you to call me back”, and they called me. There is a tendency of intimidation. I want to agree with hon. Latif that this thing which came out in the papers is of no consequence. To even spend time debating it means we are adding value to it. 

My opinion is that it should be the responsibility of the Public Relations Officer of Parliament to respond appropriately. However, I do not see how this rating will affect the performance and popularity of Members of Parliament nationally and from their constituencies. 

What hurts me is that we are a kind of donor-driven country. You find that many NGOs come up in the name of improving the process of democratisation and good governance in this country - the Leadership Institute is one such organisation - and they get money from donors. I think our biggest concern should be whether such a report is worth the money given by donors to this kind of organisation. 

I think as representatives of our people, we should not only ditch this organisation but we should analyse and identify more of these organisations so that we tackle them one by one. We should also urge the donors who are giving them money, in the name of giving money to the people of Uganda and the government of Uganda, to really be a little bit more serious and give money to more responsible organisations that will have an impact. 

I do not see how you carry out research from an attendance register here and you are paid a lot of money, and then you publish nice books and pamphlets and at the end of the day you continue drawing money from donors. I think as Members of Parliament, our concern should not even be about the reporting; it should be about the money some of these organisations get from donors. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I have two points and one is that as we labour to clear this image, we must be very careful not to shoot in the wrong goal. I do not think the New Vision has any crime whatsoever; they are not reporting an allegation that has been hidden under the bed. I think they are reporting what they have received. So, for us to stand here and say that what the New Vision has published is wrong, is not correct on our side. I do not want to deliberate on the subject directly but indirectly because I think I have been satisfied by the contributions of my other colleagues.  

My second point is to request or ask for your guidance, Mr Speaker, because this same organisation wrote inviting us to the launch of this report tomorrow. For minimisation of disagreements amongst ourselves, I thought we would agree on whether to go and attend or not. There we would have acted as a solid Parliament in one direction. So I beg that we get directed on how to behave in that election. I thank you.

3.37
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to say that I am rather perturbed. This honourable, august House should never be put in disrepute by this kind of organisation. The hon. Fungaroo has just said that the managing director of this company or the director is Mr Pulkol. How can he, as a former spy, try to destroy organisations like Parliament? For example, I want somebody to challenge me because as regards that report, members of my party, the Democratic Party have not appeared anywhere as if they were never in attendance in this House. 

I want somebody to challenge me, even you Mr Speaker, on a day you have been in this House without me being seated here or members of the Democratic Party being in attendance! It is as if – now outside in the public people are thinking that the party or the people they elected to go and represent them in Parliament are not there. This is a not a matter we can say that because of freedom of association and freedom of press, we should let it go. You all know Members how the public says that we are just increasing our emoluments everyday, everyday. Today you are being accused of drawing money, which you have not worked for. How can we accept such an organisation do damage our reputation? Tomorrow they will officially launch the very report which they have in the press today -(Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Honourable member, I would like to give you some information. Two days ago we were in Makerere University for a public debate organised by the Makerere University Convocation. The public debate was organised on the theme, “Assessment of multi-party governance.” The information I would like to give you is that while we were there, one of the members of this organisation moved in and said, and it is on record, that without Parliament, Uganda loses nothing and that Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni should dissolve Parliament so that Uganda goes back to the NRM days where there was no Parliament; when it was a small group of military people to run the country. So the information I want to give to you is that Pulkol is the spin master; the brain behind the dissolution of Parliament. So wait to see Parliament being dissolved. I thank you.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information. So Members, you can see how somebody has started spinning even the parties. In a Parliament where you have a multi-party system and parties are sidelined in a report like this one when everybody knows that Members attend plenary on a daily basis, then I think that Mr Pulkol has other intentions either to destroy the multi-party system or to work for his masters.  

You remember that first he joined the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), he then left FDC and has gone back to spying. I think this is a very serious matter. I do not mind him going back to spying but my concern is how come this is the very man who is giving a report on the House? Mr Speaker, with due respect, we have to protect the image of this House; we have to protect your image as a Leader of this honourable House so that we are not seen in the public as doing nothing. For example, this evening you do not know what is going to be in the press -

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, why don’t you want to analyze the report itself and then show that it is rubbish rather than using a newspaper? You do not have to deal with the messenger; deal with the author of the message. The message is coming from somewhere else; the newspaper is just a messenger. Why don’t you wait for the report? Tomorrow will dawn; you will get a report, analyze it and determine whether it is well founded or not. Yes!

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: We cannot blame the New Vision; they have nothing to do with this. We are blaming the organisation itself and, therefore, we are asking the newspaper -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, why don’t you get the document itself, analyse it and see the weaknesses? Hon. Okumu Reagan had talked about donors giving them money, so it is important that you show the donors that this is rubbish and that their money has been just wasted. Why don’t you wait for it tomorrow? Two days to come, we analyse it and have a very comprehensive and effective response.

3.42
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also agree with you that we should not blame the New Vision. The New Vision simply got out a mirror and put it on the report. As we said, we are the ones who passed the law on freedom of expression. However, honourable members are not wrong to express what they are feeling today. In your wisdom, Mr Speaker, you are asking the why Members cannot wait until the whole report is out and then they analyse it? I think Members are actually right -

THE SPEAKER: Suppose what the papers published today is inaccurate, how will you handle that? So, why don’t you wait for the evidence? I am a lawyer and I work with evidence. Why don’t wait for the evidence?

MRS OKURUT: Mr Speaker, the New Vision would not get out such a story unless it has been authenticated. But as you said, there is no way we can stop this report from coming out; we cannot stop it as a House; it will be launched and I wanted to agree with you that we should wait until the whole animal is out and we analyse it before making different presentations. I thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, in lieu of that I think it calls for one or two things. One is that they have awakened us that Parliament as an institution must do something to portray our image better. We can do this through putting out some counteracting statements so that such negative reporting about our performance is countermanded. I am saying this because sometime back you remember how they rated your Chair at zero performance? I really sympathised with you because you always sit here from 2.30 up to almost -

THE SPEAKER: And in any case I did not react simply because it was rubbish; you cannot be here when I am not here or when my deputy is not here; so it was very clear.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: That is why, Mr Speaker, I am saying that let us continue with the business of defending ourselves because tomorrow they will come out and talk about who is the smartest; who is the prettiest. You remember the other time they were looking at the legs of lady MPs? So I think let us put out a mechanism of how to countermand such utterances; such appearances in the newspapers especially through our public relations office. That is my view.

THE SPEAKER: Let us end with her.

3.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I can appreciate and I do share the concerns of my colleagues and all of us as an institution. However, I would like to say that after we have let out the steam and the pain that is in us, I implore colleagues to understand that just this afternoon, we cannot do anything to stop the publication of that report. 

I am saying this because my understanding is that we probably need a court injunction, but the lawyers of this Parliament cannot run around to secure that injunction. So this publication will still go on and it is on that basis that I inform Members that we will just have to struggle with the reality and defend ourselves as individuals until probably tomorrow or when we will choose either to go to court, respond or choose to leave the public relations office to do the interim measures for us. That is what I am imagining. 

Otherwise, I also find a lot of things that need to be discussed at a later date with this type of approach. This is important because when it comes to assessment or even appraisal, there is what they call participatory appraisal. You no longer can appraise me without dialoging with me. In modern management, we now appraise people in a participatory way. 

Anyway, I just want to implore Members that for now, we really cannot do anything to stop publication. We, ourselves, passed the law in this House and these people are exercising their freedom to do all these things. So, I do not know what else we can do but I believe that for tonight, as we have always done, let us go by the counsel the Speaker has given us and see what happens tomorrow. Thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 35/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

3.47
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): “Is the Minister of Energy aware that seven years after Government promised to extend electricity from Soroti to Katakwi, this noble cause continues to be ignored?”

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Energy.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Jessica Alupo for the question. I would like to inform the House that it is true Government promised to construct the Soroti-Katakwi line, which has a T-junction to Amuria, at a cost of Shs 13.3 million. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying million or billion?

DR BATARINGAYA: I mean billion shillings, and we are not only going to construct that line in that region; we also have the Soroti-Kaberamaido line, which is 48 Kilometres and expected to cost Shs 8.3 billion. In the same category of lines, we have the Mubende-Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo line. We also have a line from Sironko to Namalu, Nakapiripirit, Amudat and Kakitekile. So, these were the packages with the line that my colleague, hon. Jessica Alupo is talking about.

We made an advert some two years ago but it attracted very few companies. So among the other lines which were taken by these companies were Kibale and Kanungu lines. It seems the others were attractive to them -

THE SPEAKER: You see honourable minister, you are expanding yet the question was specific and talking only about Soroti-Katakwi. Please, respond to only Katakwi and Soroti lines.

DR BATARINGAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. What I want to say is that Government has not ignored the promise. We are trying to get funds so that we are able to do this line, which is going to cost Shs 13.3 billion.

We have to mobilise our own resources since the other lines never attracted the companies that would have otherwise constructed them.

MS JESSICA ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I am happy to hear that the honourable minister is aware that there were Government plans to extend power to Katakwi District. However, I would be very happy to also hear the exact date when the construction will start. I am saying this because he has not mentioned it; he has only told us the figures without giving us details. Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has just told us that the tender was advertised but that it attracted only a few companies. I take it that there was money, but as he was concluding he told us that they are looking for money. How do you advertise without having the money? If you diverted the money, please tell us because you cannot advertise when you do not have the money. Of course if you hadn’t deleted the Serere-Kasilo line, which needed rehabilitation, I would have loved to get an answer from you on that as well.

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I cannot commit myself on the date of commencement because you recall very well that early this year, the parliamentary Budget Committee had proposed that our ministry under the rural electrification project be given Shs 19.5 billion. We did not get that money in the budget. So what I can say is that we are now waiting for the next budget of 20008/2009 –(Laughter)- yes, because that is when we shall put our request to the Ministry of Finance and it will be by that approval that we will be able to tell exactly when the line will be constructed. Otherwise, it is in our plan.

Let me also respond to the second question by my colleague, hon. Okupa as to why we advertised when we had no money. What I was saying was that we had these six lines as a package and we made an advert for companies to work with us. However, it seems that these companies did get attracted by these lines apart from the other two; the Kanungu one and the one to Kibale. So as Government we are continuing to design plans and we shall now use our funds, which we get, to do these lines. Also when we get the funds from the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has just mentioned that out of the package only two lines attracted contractors and these two lines happen to be in the same region. Is it a coincidence?

MR GODI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the same statement which the minister has made, puts a contradiction in my head and I seek clarification on that. Last year when a similar issue was raised on the Nyagak power line, which was to connect the entire West Nile –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this question is Soroti-Katakwi, because I see another question for other places. Let us concentrate only on answers in respect of Soroti-Katakwi. 

MR GODI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am only bringing a connotation - on the issue of Serere-Kasilo, when you make a bid –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Serere and Katakwi are not in the same location –(Laughter)

MR GODI: When you advertise, you should have money ready so that when the tender is successful the highest bidder will take charge of that contract.

THE SPEAKER: That is an argument. I think we should be strict on this. The question is answered. The best you can do is to ask a supplementary question arising from the answer given.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to allay my fears about the affordability of power when it eventually reaches Katakwi because experience elsewhere shows that power is unaffordable to rural Ugandans. Thank you.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have concern over the nature of the answers we get on questions raised for oral answer. The Member is raising this question with a view to explaining to the constituents in Katakwi about what Government has promised to do in respect to this promise. But I have concern when a minister comes and says, “we will do this when we get money.” It is very empty for me. There is no way hon. Jessica Alupo can go and start explaining to the people of Katakwi – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. To summarise the answer was that they are not ignoring it but they have a problem of money and they are looking for the money and that they expect to get the money next financial year. That is his answer. 

MR ODUMAN: My understanding is that the minister was saying that they will do it, “when Finance gives us money”. My view is when we ask questions to the Executive, we are asking the Executive as a team. The difference between Finance and the line ministry is not for us. Government must tell us when they will allocate money for that project. They are in control of the act of allocating that money. We do not want to be drawn into conversations between Finance and the line ministry. Could they put their act together and come here with a straight answer, that it will be financial year 2008/2009, not when Finance gives them money? I think it will water down the major objective of raising questions to ministers. I have that concern.

THE SPEAKER: There are no clarifications. You just ask a supplementary question.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am talking about the Soroti-Katakwi line and I am hoping when the project starts the ministry will actually connect power from Soroti to Katakwi not the way it was done in Kanungu where it was supposed to be extended from Rukungiri to Kanungu, then to Rugyeyo but the ministry just stopped on Kanungu and did not extend to Rugyeyo where there is a factory. So I just want an assurance from the minister that he will not stop halfway the way it was done in Kanungu; and maybe to assure me that he will complete that second phase in Kanungu. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: I am inclined to stop the supplementary questions. Please, answer those already asked.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start with the one of Kanungu. I think we have taken note of that. After reaching Kanungu town our focus is now Kayonza where the tea factory is and we shall extend that one. 

One Member - I have forgotten the name - talked about advertising without money. I have already said that when the government has some little money, we concession these areas so that other companies join us and it never attracted any. That one I have already answered. So, we are continuing now to solicit more funds from the Ministry of Finance and I also said, my dear colleague, that this year the Budget Committee recommended that we get Shs 19.5 billion but Finance did not provide that money. We expect that money in the financial year 2008/2009 and we shall be able to do this one. This is what I was saying, Mr Speaker.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the minister a supplementary question on Katakwi-Moroto [Hon. Members: “No!”] Yes, I know what I am trying to say because I remember they told us they have got money; we shall benefit from Katakwi direct to Moroto. Now that it has not reached even Katakwi, the people of Moroto Municipality and Karamoja at large want to understand. When will it now reach Moroto and proceed to Kotido?

Secondly, on the same line, in the budget of I think 2003 that line - if it is connected to Moroto - will go where the limestone is being mined and the factory could be constructed there. It will cost about Shs 6.5 billion to take light there; it will earn Shs 92.6 billion annually and it will employ about 700 people within that industrial area. I do not know whether this one has become abandoned or it is still in the pipeline. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, we end with hon. Odit. 

MR ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from the minister’s response, can the minister assure us that there will be sufficient power to service this new line, which is going to be extended from Soroti to the new district?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I did not get the answer of the minister very clearly for the simple reason that the sound system to me is not very clear. This new sound system is worse than the old one we had. I just cannot get the answer clearly. I do not know what he answered. Could he repeat everything for me? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that cannot be a question to the minister. It can be an observation made so that the Speaker takes up this problem.

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, with your permission let me respond to the question raised by hon. Odit. He asked if there will be enough power for these lines once they are constructed. The answer is yes. Currently our generation capacity at our dams is 200 MW. We also have thermo power of 100 MW; very soon there will be the Mutundwe one of 150 MW and also in 2009 with our oil production we expect to inject in the main grid 100 MW using our HA-4 from our own oil. I am also happy of course to report that Bujagali dam is on course; construction has commenced and we are also discussing that. 

My colleague, hon. D’Ujanga, is handling the issue of Karuma also to start construction early next year. We are also in the process for Ayago South and North where we expect to generate 450 MW. So that is where we are. On top of that we have the mini hydro station of Bugoye in Kasese, which is going to be generating 13 MW; we have Isingiro and other small ones with which we expect our generation capacity to increase in order to meet our demand.

My colleague hon. Loote, I want to assure you - of course the question was talking of Soroti-Katakwi and that is the line which is also going to your place, to Moroto. I did not mention it. You know I talked of the other one and when the Speaker guided me I talked of Sironko, Namalu, Nakapiripirit, Amudat on the border with Kenya and then we cross over to Katikekile. That is for our limestone for cement production. So the other one is also in the same line with - once it reaches Katakwi you expect it to also reach Moroto. I thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 27/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS

4.09
COL TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): “Successive Ministers of Energy have promised the extension of electricity supply to Rugombe, Kyenjojo, Kigumba, Katooke and Muzizi in Kyenjojo District for more than 15 years now.
a)	Can the Minister explain why it has taken too long a time for the said area to get electricity supply?
b)	Will the Minister now tell the House the exact date when power will be extended to the said area?
c)	Will the Minister find time in the near future to visit Kyenjojo District to explain the matter to the District Council?”

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my senior colleague, hon. Col Tom Butime for the question regarding power to Kyenjonjo. We had already discussed the answer with him but I want to put it on record that Kyenjonjo is already on course. Kyenjojo is under SIDA II; there are four districts in that SIDA II. The biggest project, which is in Northern Uganda, is that of Kilak Patongo Abim, of 130 km. The next project is Bundibugyo, that is Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Nyahuka, for 90 km; and the third one is Kyenjojo, which is for 45 km, then Bugiri of 30 km. In short it is on. 

What is taking place now is procurement and construction will start early next year, to be precise, January.

COL BUTIME: Mr Speaker, around March this year we were informed that by September 2007 procurement would be complete. The minister is now talking about January 2008. January 2008! This is 2007! Could you explain to me why you have now moved from September 2007 to January 2008, and won’t you move from January 2008 to January 2009? 

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, the SIDA II project is a donor funded project 100 percent. In august we had to submit the bid documents to Stockholm and it took them two months to send them back to us. In fact even hon. Prof. Latigo is a beneficiary together with hon. Otto. They have been in touch with us so we got the bid documents, which were returned in November. From there we advertised. Once you advertise, you have to seek a no objection and I want to inform you that we received the no objection on Monday, yesterday but one. This is when we received the no objection from Sweden. We are now to start the procurement process, in other words to negotiate with the contractor.

As I talk now, as a ministry we have already invited the contractors, the negotiations will start tomorrow and we shall conclude next week and then send back what we have agreed on with the contractor and that will be towards Christmas. That is why I said we shall be on the ground in January and I want to assure you that you will also be in Kyenjojo when we are breaking the ground, and also Bundibugyo and Bugiri, then Pader. We shall be there. That is why I said in January construction will start because of what we have already received from our development partners, SIDA.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the Minister of Energy to these dates. He says, “By this date, by that date”. I remember the line from Kayunga to Busana was to be done by June 2006 and as we talk now we do not have that power. Would hon. Butime be rest assured that by January 2008 this will be done? Thank you.

4.13
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind the Minister of Energy that sometime back when we were at Kyankwanzi, I got a note from the State Minister of Energy and Mineral Development saying that a team was in Kyenjojo District to make preparations and to assess how they were going to do the work. I went back to Kyenjojo and found that the team had not been there. So my sincere request to the Minister of Energy is that Kyenjojo should not be promised byoya bya nswa. It is very important for the ministry to send either the minister of state or some high level person to give reassurance and hope to the people of Kyenjojo. Otherwise, 15 years of waiting is a very long time. I thank you.

4.14
MR OTADA OWORI (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the minister has committed himself on question 27/1/08, I would like to know from him whether his ministry, while making budgetary provisions, also budgets for money to compensate people whose property is destroyed in the course of this construction of the power line. This is because the ministry is known for not compensating people whose land and property are destroyed in the course of this construction. For example, for the Apac-Masindi line, which is in the Kibanda County area, they have not compensated people. Should hon. Butime rest assured that his people will not be victims like many are? Thank you very much.

4.16
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If there is a change in the programme, in this particular case from September to January, would it not be prudent for the minister concerned to come out and inform the people concerned that there is change, or that this programme was supposed to start but will now start like this? Should it wait for the Member of Parliament concerned to come here, put a question and then the minister is woken up?

4.17
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I really want to find out what criteria the ministry always uses to extend electricity from one spot to another. For instance on the Kigumba line, electricity has been extended up to Bweyale trading centre and the nearby trading centre, which is only three kilometers away. Katulukile has a mission station, a secondary school, a health centre and has a very big trading centre. They have been moving to the ministry to extend power to them, which is only three kilometres away. So, what criteria do you always use to stop at the spot however near an area of need is? Thank you.

4.18
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Could the minister tell this House when we will have a renewable energy policy which should promote decentralised energy sources as opposed to everybody urging for interconnections and decentralise energy sources with more than remote rural electrification in this country? Thank you.

4. 18
MR BADHUL KATONGOLE (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to get clarification from the minister. In his answer he indicated that provision of electricity to Kyenjojo district will be under SIDA II and that construction will begin next year. But earlier on when responding to the question raised by hon. Alupo, he indicated that there is a line from Mubende to Kyegegwa, via Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo that could not attract contractors. Can I be told as to the fate of provision of electricity to Kyegegwa trading centre in Kyaka County?  

4.19
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I thank you. From the way I understand it, the position of Government is that every district headquarter has electricity, has water and is served by a tarmac road. We happen to be talking about energy today but many of our districts do not have those services that we have been promised by Government. Could we know from Government when all these new districts that have been initiated of recent will have those services? Even if it is going to take five years or more, we need to know when we will have those services to our people because we have promised them. I thank you.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the question raised by hon. Sarah Nyombi and for assurance to hon. Col Tom Butime about the construction in January, I have already said that. However, what I can also say is that I am going to invite Col Tom Butime and Members from Kyenjojo to come to the ministry and confirm what we have just said, that come January, construction will start.  

Hon. Joyce Kwebiha has requested that we the ministers or officials from our ministry go to Kyenjojo to assure our people. We have taken note of that and we shall do that, Mr Speaker.  

Hon. Otada talked of compensation; that is the “way leaves”. Normally with this one there is a cost. I can give an example, like where there are transmission lines, the people are compensated. So I think that one is also taken care of. 

Hon. Okello-Okello talked of informing our colleagues of any change - like this one that happened - that in August there was a change and that we should have informed our colleagues the MPs who come from those areas. As I told you, indeed we had interactions with some of them. I discussed with hon. Tom Butime, I also discussed with hon. Aston Kajara, and the Chairman, Byamukama, because we are in the same place. As I was passing by, I had a discussion with him and I explained that we have this delay because of the documents, which have been sent to stop over, where SIDA has to give a no objection first.

Hon. Reagan Okumu asked what criteria we use for the extension of power. Actually, it is already good and hon. Mary Mugyenyi has mentioned one of them. In our policy we talk of district headquarters first, and then institutions like schools, health centres and strategic areas like wet coffee processing factories, mining areas and others. We also talk of fish landing sites like Majanji and Wakawaka. If you want power and your area is within the concession area, in other words, which is now currently being run by UMEME, you should go to the offices of UMEME and say that you want a connection here and there. If probably you want to put up a factory, they will always connect you. 

Hon. Badhul Katongole is asking me the fate of the Mubende-Kigegwa-Kyenjojo line; I told him that of course it was in the other lines but it is still on our list for funding. I want to assure him that once we get the funding, we will work on it. This is also one of the lines that are together with Soroti, Katakwi and Moroto.

Hon. Mary Mugyenyi said that their districts are not connected. Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament we were just 56. We went on to become 69 districts, now they are around 80 districts. Of course we have to plan to extend power to some of the newly created districts. So our policy statement which will be coming this financial year will reflect the connection of these districts’ headquarters. So I want to assure hon. Mary Mugyenyi that since Kiruhura is now a district - previously it was under Mbarara but now that it is an independent district - we shall also extend power to Kiruhura district headquarters. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE VOTE STATUS OF THE UGANDA NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY AND THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS

THE SPEAKER: I hope honourable members have the report. So hon. Odit, you will just summarise. 

4.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, this report was distributed yesterday and I imagine that all Members should have copies of it because there were sufficient copies. Nonetheless, they have put the copies around; we will request that those who do not have can be provided with. 

As you guided, Mr Speaker, this is a short report, which is more or less straight forward. It arose from the time when Parliament was pronouncing itself on the Budget process and in the course of appropriation Parliament learned that two Votes had no money. This was Vote 154, which is the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; and Vote 157, which is the National Forestry Authority. These are statutory bodies whose Votes were established by Parliament here and accordingly, the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises was directed to examine the circumstances under which this happened. 

The committee invited the permanent secretaries of the two ministries that are responsible for these statutory bodies, the representatives from the Ministry of Finance attached to the two ministries, and the chief executive officers who are the accounting officers for the two statutory bodies, that is, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and the National Forestry Authority. 

Under the National Bureau of standards, we learnt that the institution was established by an Act of Parliament and is responsible for matters of standard development and implementation, quality assurance, laboratory testing and methodology. Its overall objective is to increase industrial competitiveness, protection of consumers against sub-standard items and to ensure fair trade, and this is very important for us in this country. The mandate of the institution includes the import, inspection and exports clearance scheme that is drawn from UNBS inspection and clearance regulations of November 2002. 

The committee learnt that since it started its operations in 1989, the UNBS has been getting financial support through a subvention system under its line Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. It was noted that effective from the year 2006/2007, UNBS became a Vote holder as opposed to receiving subvention from the ministry. However, on 28 July 2006, the Executive Director, UNBS requested the Minister of Finance to withdraw from the Vote status for the following reasons:

1.	UNBS could no longer utilise Appropriation-in-Aid even in the face of budget cuts. For example in the months of July to September of Financial Year 2006/2007, a total sum of Shs 609,417,000 was withdrawn by the Ministry of Finance, thereby paralysing the operations of the bureau. The holding of Appropriation-in-Aid also affected wages and salaries for employees. Management explained that there was no fallback position since the Appropriation-in-Aid, though declared during the budgeting period, had to be remitted to the Treasury. 
2.	It was further reported that considering the nature of UNBS operations, that they are wide spread countrywide, the Vote system was found not to be operational as funds are almost always required to handle many unforeseen activities such as market surveillance, purchase of laboratory chemicals, transportation of samples, and from various border entry posts, and facilitation of travel. 

Mr speaker, under the National Forestry Authority, this too was established by an Act of Parliament under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003, and its functions are clear. I should, therefore, move to the reason why they decided to withdraw from holding their Vote. 

The Ministry of Finance had earlier on advised the creation of a Vote; that the creation of a Vote would lead to a loss of flexibility of some of the units, which would not be able to spend more than their budgeted appropriations and that units receiving external support or generating their own revenue will not be able to utilise those funds, if set up as Votes, as they are limited to spending on the appropriated amounts. For this reason, NFA opted for withdrawal from the Vote holding status. The NFA’s current chart of account is also designed to cater for forestry-based activities and therefore management finds it difficult to realign it to the one used by Government departments.

The non-tax revenue and commitment control system was also an area of concern and management explained that remitting non-tax revenue to the Consolidated Fund would not be in line with the National Forestry Tree Planting Act, 2003.

The committee observed as follows:
It noted that given the importance of UNBS to the country and having noted His Excellency, the President’s directive to the Ministry of Finance to increase the bureau’s budget to Shs 12.4 billion - I hope hon. Members also got the attachment of the President’s directive to the Minister of Finance - the Ministry of Finance should immediately restore its vote of 154 for UNBS. Similarly, Vote 157 for NFA should also be restored. The Minister of Finance should henceforth ensure that funds meant for the two institutions are never channelled through line ministries.  

It was learnt that the decision to withdraw their votes was effected in the second quarter of the financial year 2006/2007, which did not distort their own accountability. Therefore, restoring the votes will not affect accountability in any way.  

The committee further observed that line ministries’ budgets are distorted by autonomous organisations funds, which in actual fact do not belong to those ministries. The accounting officers in the ministries are also in favour of the vote system. In fact, they wanted it earlier especially the two permanent secretaries who appeared before us. 

The committee also observed that the money received by the two institutions in Appropriation-in-Aid should continue to be expended from source considering the strategic importance of UNBS and NFA in Uganda as development efforts. For example, the regulatory function of the bureau is critical in the trade and manufacturing industry as well as in safeguarding people’s health and safety.  

Mr Speaker, we were treated to a situation where laxity by UNBS could cause some of us in this country to get very wrong drugs. An example was where capsules appeared as the real capsules but inside they were packed with sweet potato powder, this has happened. There was no clear case in our country but these were cases cited by UNBS to argue that if they are not vigilant, there is a strong possibility that we can get substandard products into our market without their notice. So, it is very important that we strengthen the capacity of UNBS.

The committee received amendments concerning UNBS and its capacity to fight counterfeit products on the market. The proposed amendments have been forwarded to the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for further scrutiny. The committee further recommends that the accounting officers of NFA and UNBS expedite the transfer of all funds to the votes of their statutory bodies without causing further delay. 

How the statutory bodies will manage their votes will determine whether or not they deserve more funding. A vote holder who cannot manage the vote should consider withdrawing himself or herself to give way to competent and experienced people to be appointed. Voluntary withdrawal from holding a vote is a clear sign of incompetence or an attempt to avoid direct accountability to public funds by these accounting officers. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much. Hon. Members, I think during the consideration of the budget we thought it was the parent ministries that wanted to get the money of these two organisations. But apparently, it is now clear that the initiative to fall under the subvention system was by the organisations themselves and not the accounting officers of the ministry. That is clear. Now, they have told us that they think the vote should be restored so that they run their votes rather than going under subvention.

4.38
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this report that has helped us understand what transpired and especially sorting out the dilemma that we had during the budget process.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to wholeheartedly concur with the final paragraph that has been made by the committee. I would also like to emphasise that the essence of the autonomy of the National Forestry Authority and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards was expressed by the lawmakers and they thought it had a very strategic role to play. Therefore, the people who are charged with the mandate to run these institutions must not deliberately decide to undermine the institutions. The very fact that they were meant to be autonomous was an attempt to emphasise the crucial and strategic role the two organisations have to play in our country.  

I would like to ask the committee to go beyond investigating the desire to undermine the institution or be autonomous. This is because I think the staff who decided to amend the law did so without recourse to this House.  How can they shift position on their own when our Constitution provides for how autonomous bodies should be funded and how they should provide accountability? How can they decide on their own to go back and have an understanding with their ministries and also with Ministry of Finance? First of all, I think this is abuse of office and these people should be cautioned. It is not sufficient for us to just let them go like that. They have no power on their own to amend the laws of this country and therefore undermine the understanding that gave birth to those institutions.  

Secondly Mr Speaker, while the institution probably looked at this as a survival mechanism, they should go back to Ministry of Finance and bear with the difficulties institutions are sometimes subjected to. I think we should also call on Ministry of Finance to be a little more serious when they are dealing with autonomous organisations because they have portrayed reluctance in allowing not only autonomous institutions but also other ministries to operate fully simply because they hold the pass and determine the performance of other ministries. This House should, therefore, explore ways in which Ministry of Finance can be encouraged to allow other organisations and ministries to flourish fully as per their constitutional and legal mandate. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.42
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only two points to make. The first one is that, I strongly support the restoration of the budgets for these two bodies. I think I should be cautioned concerning National Forest Authority because this body goes around planting signposts. They find a cluster of trees and put a big NFA signpost and this is causing a lot of land disputes. Even in the North where people are still in the camps, they go around - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Actually, in my language, the signpost they put there means, “nafa”, - I died. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I think we should learn that language. They should be careful when they do this. Thirdly, I think the President had good intentions in writing this letter to the Ministry of Finance but we have a budget procedure. The Minister of Finance does not do budgeting for any other organisation. Therefore, I think it would have been better to request the Minister of Finance to ask these bodies to go back to the budgeting procedure because this is for 2005. To say that the figure should be Shs 12.4 billion every year may not be fair to the organisation and I don’t know who took this figure to the President because that figure should have come through the normal budgeting procedure. However, to direct the Minister of Finance to create a budget, I think is outside the law. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.44
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for a very good report. However, I wanted some clarification on two areas: When you look at page 4(1) of your report you discover that for the month of July to September of the financial year 2006/07, the total sum of Shs 609,417,000 was withheld by the ministry. I thought you would go a little bit further since the lack of that money paralysed UNBS functions completely to the extent that they didn’t even get their salaries. What happened to the money? I am saying this because sometimes funds are withheld by the Minister of Finance and sometimes they don’t even end up in the national coffers but in individual pockets. I want the committee to probe further and find out what happened with this money so that we don’t just put it on paper that money was withheld and UNBS was paralysed. 

My last contribution is on page 8. There is a very strong recommendation in the third sentence that states: “The committee further recommends that the accounting officers of NFA and UNBS expedite the transfer of all the funds to the votes of their central bodies.” That is fine but I thought that it would be PSs of those ministries to expedite the transfer because the accounting officers of those bodies cannot expedite as they are not accounting officers until the money is transferred to their accounts. I thought the committee would look at that and urge the PSs since they are in conformity with what the committee requires, to transfer the funds to the votes so that the accounting officers will be able to access those funds. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.47
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for a good report. Just two issues: I want to agree with hon. Alaso that these institutions do not have the power to negotiate with the ministries and reject having independent votes. Therefore, some reprimand should be recommended for them because they may set a bad example for the other institutions. Like the National Bureau of Standards, we know they are not doing a good job because of the capacity of the institution. So, they are further weakening themselves by refusing to have an independent vote yet we have a lot of fake products on the market, which actually endanger our lives. 

Secondly - I don’t see the Minister of Finance here but I hope somebody is holding the portfolio - I have seen the letter from the President. I think it is okay for the President to advise the ministry but I wanted assurance from the Ministry of Finance on the kind of criteria and instruments that the ministry uses to allocate resources to various sectors. I know we have the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which has five pillars that define priorities but when you look at the way money is allocated, and the way the medium term expenditure framework ceilings are set, sometimes they are not in tandem with the priorities, which have been agreed on. 

I think sometimes the processes are not participatory to ensure that Ugandans participate in setting these priorities. So I wanted to be assured by the ministry on what criteria or instruments you propose to use to allocate money to priorities. If we agree that the UNBS is a priority, why don’t you put money aside for it because sometimes my feeling is that, money is allocated to areas, which are not priorities? What instruments and criteria do you use and how do Ugandans participate in the process of allocating resources to where they matter? I thank you very much.

4.49
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Representative Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this report. These two institutions are key to the development of this country. UNBS has clearly stated in this report that its mandate is: “To ensure that we guard the people of Uganda on health and safety in the consumption of any commodity either manufactured here or imported in this country.”

One of the problems, which we have in this country, is the red tape and bureaucracy in appropriation of funds through the Ministry of Finance. These autonomous bodies like UNBS would be performing better than what they are doing today if they had channels that enabled them to expeditiously carry out their activities. 

I want to thank UNBS leadership that despite the constraints that they have been undergoing in doing their work, they have tried to show that they are capable once they are empowered. I wish to appreciate the committee on the reasons they have given here for the formation of NFA but they should not have stopped here. One of the functions of NFA is to develop and manage all central forest reserves. I would expect that in its duties and therefore in support of having their autonomous vote to identify areas for economic prosperity for this country, we have our neighbour in the south -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, this report is dealing with just one issue. It was inquiring why such and such votes disappeared. That is all. We are not dealing really with how good the policy is. The concern is, are we satisfied with the findings? Have we known the circumstances under which these organisations surrender their –(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance and I wish to concur with the committee report that accounting officers for these autonomous institutions should be accountable and should directly be responsible for the funds that are given to the votes on the activities which they are supposed to do. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your guidance that the committee was supposed to look at the votes and so on and so forth. But to me I feel that the committee would have used this opportunity to tell us more about the operations of these institutions because I feel that only restoring the budget vote may not be the only issue which is actually required for effective operation of these institutions. For example, when you look at the roles of these institutions -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the reason that this committee was given special assignment arising from the suspicion that was clear from the Members when they were told that these votes are not there. But there are other committees responsible for overseeing the activities of these committees: There is a committee on trade; there is a committee on agriculture or environment, something like that. These are the ones now that have that money. But this was a specific mandate to deal with the circumstance and its ability of continuing or not continuing with the vote. That was their restricted mandate.  

MS NALULE: Then, Mr Speaker, could I just ask a question. Now with the restoration of the votes, do they feel that the work of these institutions will be perfected?

THE SPEAKER: Committees will report on that. This was a special assignment for one task of finding the circumstances and then make recommendations.

4.55
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the committee report on page 4, I find it strange that effective from financial year 2006/07, Uganda National Bureau Standards became a vote holder, and the financial year begins in June 2006; and hardly a month later in July 2007, when the financial year had just started the organisation writes wanting to operate as if withdrawing from a vote holding.  I would like to find out from the committee chairperson whether utilising Appropriation-in-Aid could easily be an incentive for organisations wanting to do this and whether there are any loopholes through which money could be drained.  

Secondly, how do the organisations account for Appropriation-in-Aid? This is one of the problems which I want to raise here. I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources and when we were scrutinising the budget of National Forestry Authority, they were highlighting the contributions from the donors and the apparent little contribution from Government but they were persistently failing to provide information about money generated from the internal activities of the organisation. I think as a Parliament and the Committee on Statutory Enterprises beyond this, Mr Speaker, it will be prudent that they go a step further to find out how these organisations account for Appropriation-in-Aid.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Budget Act has provisions for that and normally, for instance, these days, we receive – we post through the Ministry of Education and Makerere and others they have a way the Budget Act deals with that issue.

MR DOMBO: Finally, Mr Speaker, I wanted to find out in trying to do this, did these organisations breach any law in writing to be -(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, for giving way, hon. Dombo. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House and to make an appeal to Government to come up with a common position as far as utilisation of Appropriation-in-Aid is concerned. Given this report, we have found elsewhere that some institutions are given liberty to use the money they collect at source and others are not.  So, there is no common position as far as this utilisation of fund is concerned. 

Therefore, I would like to make this appeal so that a common policy is given. I can give you an example of Masaka Regional Hospital. I went there last week with other colleagues. But we all found that the hospital is paralysed because it can not use the funds it is collecting. We went elsewhere and found that the money is used fully. So, there is lack of consistency. I thank you.

MR DOMBO: post Finally, when you read further on page 4, you will note that the justification for these organisations wanting to use Appropriation-in-Aid at source would be that there are other issues that emerge and therefore it is difficult to anticipate. Then this would even defeat the very purpose of budgeting and planning which is the essence of this Parliament wanting to create a board system so that expenditure can be tracked. I think this report says a little bit more than what has been stated here. Through our respective committees, we would want to venture to find out exactly how best we could improve the accounting system of these organisations. However, I support the recommendations of the committee.  

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE (WATER AND ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Janat Namuyangu): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank hon. Odit and the committee for the good report.  From the outset, I do support this report especially as far as National Forestry Authority is concerned as a sector that we oversee as the Ministry of Water and Environment.  Basically, what I want to clarify especially for hon. Okello Okello who says that National Forestry Authority is putting signposts everywhere is that, where you see these signposts, this is just an indication that that is a central forest reserve which was gazetted by Government. Do not bother which Government, but at least by Government either in the 50s, 60s or 70s. Until we de-gazette these forest reserves, we cannot run away from that fact.

All I want to appeal to colleagues is that, we can take advantage and mobilise our communities to apply for these forest reserves, plant trees and own them because we have such an arrangement. They own them and benefit from them. This will help us to conserve the environment but also to better the incomes of our people. (Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and minister for giving way. The information I want to give you is that in my constituency, where people have lived for the last 30 years or so, and they got displaced into protected camps, at this very moment as we speak people are trying to get back home only to find that the areas have been planted with trees and signposts put. And this is raising a lot of conflict between the people and National Forest Authority. They have been living there for more than the last 30 years and some of the places where I was born and some of my age mates were born, now they cannot leave the camps and go back home because the places have been planted with trees and this is undermining the resettlement of our people and is likely to develop a lot of conflict. What should the people do? Should they go and uproot the trees and get back to their homes? Where else should they go from the camps? It is a reality.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, hon. Okumu. Again you are aware that in the 70s, His Excellency, Idi Amin, while launching the economic war did direct people to go back to the forest reserves. I suspect that this might be one of such reserves. But I want to appeal that you iron it out with us, you come we look at the map, the reserves that we have -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I was involved in the economic war operation. Economic war had nothing to do with forests; it was about the shops formerly owned by Asians. I was a member of one of the committees that gave out the shops. (Laughter) There was no involving forests or anything else. 

Two, the forests and forest reserves, even when land was still Government land, we had instruments of acquisition; either a letter from the commissioner of lands saying this is now a forest reserve or a gazette. Recently, there was a dispute very close to Kitgum town. I sent the forest officer of Kitgum here to get that instrument of acquisition. He looked and got nothing. If the minister can come up with instruments of acquisition, saying forest A and forest B were gazetted on this and that date, there will be no dispute.

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t we really diverting from the gist of this report.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, just allow me to answer hon. Okello-Okello. I am not speaking as a minister but I am speaking as a professional forester. The reason why we lost forests like Mabira is because Amin directed people to the forest and produce more. So, when you say that the economic war during Amin’s time did not affect forests, it is not a fact. 

In conclusion, I just want to appeal to colleagues that our offices are open; if you have a problem regarding central forest reserves, just come to us and we sort it out. We will show you the maps and instruments and the year when these forests were gazetted. Unless Parliament wants to de-gazette some of these forests, as far as we are concerned now as custodians of forests, we still consider all these forests that were gazetted central forest reserves to be still under our charge on behalf of the people of Uganda.

5.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I think all honourable members that contributed were very positive and for the simple reason that we should respect our institutions and public officers should be responsible. It is in that respect that vote holders should live to the occasion. 

The other thing that I should mention is that UNBS should be demanding a sum of Shs 3.8 billion as recurrent budget and development budget amount to Shs 1.0 billion to be transferred to their vote.

Secondly, National Forest Authority, their budget reflects a recurrent expenditure amounting to Shs 200 million. There is nothing stated on development fund and that is what we should take interest in and yet they have a lot of money.

Finally, the question of Shs 609 million as demanded for an explanation, I think this is the very reason this statutory body quickly withdrew from the vote status. When they declared this to the Consolidated Fund, which became a control of the Ministry of Finance, it became very difficult for them. In their own opinion, they wanted to quickly spend the money, but I think there were requirements which they had not fulfilled so it became very difficult and it was futile. They therefore voluntarily opted that, if this is the way to go, it is better they raise their own resources and manage them on our own. And that is the only reason why they quickly did that. 

The other area as the Speaker has guided, as a statutory body, the Auditor-General is still examining their accounts; detailed reports will follow on their performance. Sessional committees will also look at the policy component. I think in the end we shall have a well informed debate when we have sufficient information in the other areas of concern.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and members of the committee. The motion is that we adopt the report of the committee on the two votes. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON POST BANK

THE SPEAKER: Well, reports have not been distributed. I think then we will consider it tomorrow.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, this is a very big report; it is a 45-paged document because of a backlog which we have had to handle. It will not be proper that I present a report before Members access the document. So, tomorrow when we come, we shall just present the summary since Members will have gone through the document.

THE SPEAKER: Is it your request that we push it to Tuesday because if you say it is a big report and Members have to internalise it, maybe they will not be able this evening to internalise it? 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, if we are not very much engaged tomorrow, we can be able to look at it. But if the Members feel that they need to internalise it we have no objection for Tuesday; but for us we will be prepared for tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have disposed of the business we had for today. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 December 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


