Wednesday 12th December, 2001

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

REV. DR. KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity to say something about some controversial and misleading statements, which have been appearing in the Papers. These statements have been about myself and also about the work of Africa Foundation, an NGO that offers food, shelter, clothing, medical care, education and counselling to street children, which started in 1971. I have thought it appropriate to make a personal statement to this august House.  

I began this work in 1971 with homeless children, whose type was later to be referred to as street children, with the economic war at its height.  I was assisted by my Dutch Professor’s wife, Anky Rookmaaker, in Holland. By then I was a lecturer at Makerere University, School of Fine Art.  

At the same time, I taught these children in Sunday school, and I was fascinated by the capacity of these children who had never been inside a classroom but were able to memorize scriptures. The number of these homeless children grew bigger each day as the unkind conditions deprived them of their parents and homes. My work was interrupted, as I had to flee into exile in 1974.  

I returned in 1979 as a Member of the interim Government, and I resumed my work with the homeless children. By 1980, I had over 850 children undergoing rehabilitation at Lukumbi - this is a farm on Kampala-Jinja Road. There were literally no children left on the streets then. Instead, there were several beggars along the roads, and they lived outside banks and shop verandas. I started a shoe repair project for these beggars and they too were rehabilitated.  

With the panda-gari era, the number of children under my care shot up to 3,500, with the influx of the panda-gari cases. By now I had eight homes in Lukumbi, Kireka, Kasisi which is in Fort-Portal, Ntooke, Kayunga, Seguku, Mengo, Namirembe. And I was yet to buy more land in Dandira, Mukono to put up a mother home and a school near my residence. With these children, we started the school there.  

To-date, I am proud to say that I have got several graduates in the fields of medicine, education, engineering and the private sector. Some of them are working in this country and others have gone to work in South Africa, Rwanda, USA and elsewhere. I have several other success stories of resettled children.  

Churches have supported this work, and also church-related organizations in Holland, Australia, Germany and America. This has been supplemented by a family poultry project that sells one-day old chicks to farmers. Unfortunately, of late, the in-coming funds have dropped due to global incidents. For example, a supporting friend, Joanna Conti’s attempts to fundraise in Colorado failed. Other donors in USA also discontinued their support due to the September incidents in the USA.  

On the 25th of October, my Professor’s wife’s organization, Stichting Redt Een Kind, in Holland also stopped its support. Since my Professor’s wife sustained a stroke, the new management have been sending only 30 dollars per child, which is below the needed support to sustain a child per month.  

I have been caring for 508 children. 241 children have had regular support from donors, 150 have had no support at all, and 117 have been having irregular support from the said donors and churches. These have had to share resources of the sponsored few. They attended primary schools, secondary schools, tertiary institutions, and I have had to make do with the little money sent in. This explains the illegal misuse of funds reported by the media.  

Let me express my dissatisfaction with the print media who rush to print stories from abroad before verifying their contents with the concerned local residents. 

May I also say that seven of our boys, who were quoted by the newsmen, were not fairing well in their academics, and so they started doing odd jobs like crushing stones. These were sending complaints to donors. I have seen their pictures in the media.  

If out of 508 children, only seven fail to do well, I do not think that can be counted as a failure, especially given the fact that since 1971, over 6,000 children have benefited from my programmes. I want to assure this House that these unfounded stories and reports will never discourage me from continuing with the work I have done for the last 30 years.  

I want to recognize the good co-operation that has existed between my work and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Government, for the fact that matters concerning the children, orphans and vulnerable children are clearly enshrined in our Constitution, especially Article 34. 

You will recall that for two consecutive terms, from 1997 to 2001, I have served as chairman of the National Council for Children. I thank this Government for providing a comprehensive law, the Children Statute, in 1996, which gives a framework for the legal protection of the Ugandan child.  

Resettlement is a gradual process, like rehabilitation, and I want to report that there has been a good working relationship between my organization and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in providing transport and resettlement for some of the children who have been under my care, and this exercise still continues.  

Some other NGOs like Kids In Need, Bethel, and some individuals like the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, the most Rev. Livingstone Mpalanyi Nkoyoyo, have taken on children who had nowhere to go. Some guardians, relatives and parents have already undertaken to support their own children. 

I want, again, to thank the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Community Development for the plan it has to use Kampiringisa as a remedial measure in repatriating street children from urban areas. This will make Kampala a safer place.  

I wish to thank other NGOs who do the same work as mine, and to caution those who are perpetuating the children’s influx on the street, such as those who feed them on the street instead of homes. I thank those who have responded to my call for support. Let me assure you that many young children will continue to be rehabilitated and resettled by Africa Foundation, with or without external support. I thank you –(Applause).

MR.CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora South, Kasese): Mr. Speaker, one week ago there was breaking news in the media that a son to one of our hon. Members, hon. Byanyima Winnie, was being trailed and harassed by state security agents. To some of us, this is child abuse. 

I would like the following Ministers to explain the circumstances under which that young boy, actually, a baby, is being harassed by the state: The Minister of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs. And the Ministry of Gender and Labour, especially the Minister in charge of children welfare, should explain to us the steps being taken to rescue that young boy, Anselm, from state harassment. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to respond to the question raised by hon. Kibanzanga regarding that newspaper report, which he read some time last week.  

I would like to state here, categorically, that there is no grain of truth in that newspaper report. The son of one of the hon. Members here has not been harassed and was not under surveillance. There was nothing like that by the state security agencies. 

As far as we know, that child is not a security risk to this country. There is absolutely no truth in that newspaper report, and I would like to assure the hon. Members of Parliament that that was a false report. It was alarmist, and we should disregard it. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE AMNESTY (AMENDMENT) BILL 2001

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you remember, yesterday we had finished clause 1 and we were dealing with clause 2. There was an amendment by hon. Oulanyah, but because you complained that you did not have copies of the text of the amendments, you were not in position to competently and effectively deal with that amendment. I hope now you have received copies of these proposed amendments, and therefore, we will be able to proceed to debate the proposed amendment.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Namusoke): Mr. Chairman, I am hesitant to come to the Floor because I do not know whether I should be the one to re-introduce the amendment, because I am not the mover of that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you mean that there is a new formulation of the amendment?

MS. NAMUSOKE: Yes, Sir.

MR.OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The amendments as I proposed them yesterday, were circulated this morning. But they have been reviewed, in view of what transpired on the Floor of the House yesterday, in respect of lack of a definition given to ‘exceptional circumstances’.  

I have tried to introduce a definition, which now is contained in the list of the new proposals. I wish to withdraw yesterday’s proposals and bring in these particular amendments to the Bill. They are to this effect: 

Section 6 A(1) remains as it is, so I read from (2):
 
“(2) Where a person mentioned in subsection (1) of this section demonstrates to the Commission that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the provision of subsection 1(a) shall not apply to that person.  

(3) Exceptional circumstances shall mean one of the following: 

(a) that the person has been abducted since the last grant of amnesty;

(b) that the act was committed under duress, coercion or undue influence.”

The original (5) now becomes (4), and it reads: 
“Where a person to whom subsection (1) applies indicates that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the court before which he or she is being tried shall adjourn the trial and refer the matter to the Amnesty Commission.”  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MS.KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, in principle, we agree with the amendment and the intention of the amendment, to ensure that people who are innocent do not suffer under the amendment that we are trying to bring.  We agree with amendment 6(a)(1), that was passed; and we would want to amend (2) to read: “where a person mentioned in sub-section (1) of this section demonstrates to a court of law that exceptional circumstances exist in his or her case, the provision of subsection (1)(a), shall not apply to the person”.

Mr. Chairman, the reason I am proposing that amendment is that, the functions of the Amnesty Commission do not allow it to judge these exceptional circumstances.  If somebody appears before the Amnesty Commission, the role of the Amnesty Commission is to receive the person and take him or her through the process and ensure that they are re-integrated into the society.  But the Amnesty Commission, if we say that it should carry out this duty, it is going to be involved in investigating, to ensure that indeed, if somebody is under exceptional circumstances, that is what it is.  Because there are some people who may come claiming exceptional circumstances as they are listed here, when in fact they did not go under those exceptional circumstances, and the Commission does not have the mandate according to the Act that was passed by this House to handle that.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Oulanyah proposed an amendment, and the Minister has also proposed an amendment to the proposed amendment by hon. Oulanyah.

MR.RUZINDANA:  The amendment of the Minister amounts to deletion of number 2, and substitutes it with number 4, and deletes the reference to the Amnesty Commission.  I think that is really what it amounts to, that number 2 is deleted and substituted with number 4, and then the matter is not referred to the Commission as suggested in number 4, but decided by the court.  I think that is what I understand the amendment of the Minister means.  And I thought the Minister and the Mover should have harmonized on this one, because, if the Commission does not have this power, that must be a matter of fact.  If it does not have the power, then it cannot deal with exceptional circumstances; and even in 4, referring the matter to court.  It would also not work out to the Commission, if it does not have that power.  I am not sure whether the most appropriate way to deal with this, is not to give the Minister and the Mover about five minutes and they harmonize and they come back to the House.  Otherwise, they should have done that before.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I get the impression that the amendment proposed by the honourable Member for Omoro County, is to give an opportunity to a person who is confronted with court proceedings in terms of this Statute.  Therefore, I think the amendment in my opinion tantamounts to a defence when the accused person appears before the court of law, and is confronted with a charge that, actually, he had been through the hands of the Commission before and therefore, he should face the charges.  And the accused person will then come and raise a defence in terms of paragraph ii as well as iii;  ‘that I am here again because of circumstances which were not under my control, including having gone there under duress or having been abducted to go there’.  For me, these are matters which would be appropriately investigated and are adjudicated upon by a court of law.  

Arising from a charge under 6(a)(1)(b), indeed the Amnesty Commission is really not mandated to investigate into the criminal aspect of a conduct of a suspect or of an accused.  Therefore, I will really with great respect to my colleague, the hon. Member for Omoro County, re-consider the amendment and go by the original amendment by the Minister.  I am not so sure even whether the Minister completed her amendment, in respect to paragraph 2, because to me, all those are matters which would be raised by an accused person as a defence and therefore, would be matters outside the ambit of the Amnesty Commission.  Thank you very much

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the person who wants to benefit from the Amnesty Commission, obviously admits himself or herself, that she has committed acts that are mentioned in the Act, but only says, ‘please, let me take benefit of what is provided for in the Amnesty Act’.  The question of not having done so does not arise, because, if you have not done anything, you do not seek for amnesty.  I think that is clear.  But now, I think hon. Oulanyah, is saying, ‘yes, he might have been involved in for two years, but there are exception circumstances which caused him to be involved in the way he was involved.  Now, the position of hon. Oulanyah is that whether the Commission should determine the exceptional circumstances.  On the other hand the Minister is saying, ‘no, because this person must have been apprehended and charged for having been involved in the activities, let him or her show these exceptional circumstances to the court which should decide whether the exceptional circumstances exist or not’.  So the difference between the two amendments are on which body, is it the commission or it is the court? 
I think that is how I see these amendments.  Is it not the case? (Interjection) Let me find out from the hon. Oulanyah.

MR.OULANYAH:  Mr. Chairman that would be the situation, but the amendment as I proposed it, shows two situations, which don’t seem to be reflected in the Minister’s Statement.

The amendment proposed in (4) takes care of those who have been arrested and are facing prosecution. Two, it takes care of those who voluntarily come to the Commission again, they are not facing any prosecution, they are just there, they have escaped, maybe from their second abduction, they have dashed back to the Commission and say, ‘here I am, I was abducted again but I am here, I want to denounce whatever I have done, I want amnesty’.  So there are two situations in this case, which are distinguishable.  If the person is already facing prosecution in court, and this is where (4) applies, and that is why we handled it from there and –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying that the two situations will be decided by two different bodies. Those who have been arrested, the special circumstances should be determined by the court, but those who go voluntarily, the decision should be that of the Commission.  Is that what you say?

MR. OULANYAH:  Mr. Chairman, that is not the position in (4).  It is that, when the person is already facing trial in a court of law, and he raised statements on circumstances that make him likely to fall under those exceptional circumstances; then the trial court will adjourn the matter and refer the matter to the Commission on that particular issue –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you mean without deciding whether the special circumstances have been proved?

MR. OULLANYAH: Without the court deciding on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: What would be the problem of the court deciding in those circumstances that needed the special circumstances to exist?  Does it prejudice anybody?  Let us exhaust this - (An hon Member rose_) - I shall come to you hon. Member. Let us finish this.

MR. OULANYAH: Mr. Chairman, the seconder of the motion will help me on that.  But what I am saying in the proposal, in (4), is that the question of determining exceptional circumstances, even if the matter is already before a court of law, it happens in other instances.  For example, in the Magistrate’s court or a high court, if a person raises that the matter you are talking about raises the constitutional questions, the matter shall be referred to the Trial court to adjourn the case, and it is referred to a constitutional court for determining that particular issue first.

Now I am saying, if this is going to be the suggestion, it will be an improvement on what I have proposed, and it should come as such, but not as a misinterpretation of what I have presented here.  I have done this consciously.  Thank you.

MR.MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The two situations in (2) and (4) are different, namely, as hon. Oulanyah has said, the exceptional circumstances in (2) refers to those people who surrender, someone who has been in rebel activity. He participates in rebel activity in one way or another, maybe, by aiding a rebel activity and out of his own volition, reports to the LC or reports to the Commission.  The Commission should be able to grant this person amnesty, despite the fact that he had got amnesty earlier on but he was re-abducted.  That is what the situation (2) is trying to cure. 

The situation in (4), as it has been explained, is where someone is going through the deep process of law in court and raises special circumstances, but here, Mr. Chairman, I think we should add that, “court must be satisfied”.  The court should be satisfied that these special circumstances have been established and then referred the matter to the Commission.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, that is different.  Now it appears, maybe, the formulation of the amendment in (2) –(Interjection) No, let us start with (2), where a person mentioned in subsection (1) of this Section, surrenders to the Commission and demonstrates – I think, it should be clear, so that the person you are mentioning in (2) is a person who has voluntarily come out of the bush and has surrendered to the Commission and demonstrates to the Commission, the exceptional circumstances that caused him to –(Interjection and Interruption) Let us first get hon. Oulanyah.

MR. OULANYAH:  Mr. Chairman, that will be okay.

REV.MBABAZI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification, where we say that a person that surrenders - there are two circumstances that could arise in the first scenario, someone renounces the act and surrenders to the Amnesty Commission, but there is a second scenario, where a person is in a tight corner and they say, ‘if I surrender, I will re-organize myself,’ and it might appear voluntarily, when actually they could be intending to repeat. So in these circumstances, how can we give a legal safeguard, such that a pretender will not exploit this provision?

THE CHAIRMAN: What I was trying to suggest to hon. Oulanyah, is to clarify his policy behind a suggested amendment in (2).  That for him, he has given two scenarios; one, is a voluntary surrender, that somebody on his own comes out of the bush and goes to the Commission and says, I have been engaged – because you see you have to admit that you have done something – I have done this and this and the other.  Then the scenario (4) as he says, is where somebody has been apprehended.  He was carrying out his activities in the bush and he is arrested; obviously he is taken to court.  So if he is taken to court, he is charged and he admits ‘yes, I have been doing this, but the exceptional circumstances are these,’ and that is where hon. Adolf Mwesigye has come in to say that, the court must be satisfied, and therefore, it means it is the court which will decide that the exceptional circumstances do exist, and once it has decided that one, then go to the Commission to deal with the formality. (Interjection) Is that okay, hon. Minister?

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I think that is agreeable to us.  If it is clearly stated that in (2), we are talking about people who surrender, although I can identify with the hon. Member of Kinkizi’s concern, but I am ready to let that be.  As long as we are saying that, a person mentioned in subsection (1) of this Section surrenders to the Commission and demonstrates to the Commission that exceptional circumstances exist, that is fine with me.  

Then in (4), where a person to whom subsection (1) applies, indicates that exceptional circumstances exists in his or her case to the satisfaction of the court before which he or she is being tried, the court shall adjourn and so on and so forth. That is okay.

MR.AYUME: Mr. Chairman, I am worried about the word ‘demonstrates’, why don’t we use the words ‘satisfies the Commission’

THE CHAIRMAN: We can put ‘satisfies’ instead of ‘demonstrates’. Is it okay?

MR.RUHINDI:  Mr. Speaker, I am wondering in sub-section 2, whether the intention of the mover of this amendment - when he says the provisions of sub-section 1(a) shall not apply, whether that would mean that the provisions of 1(b) would apply!  

THE CHAIRMAN: No, because if one is granted amnesty, then you do not prosecute.

MR.RUHINDI:  As it stands, it is not so consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, I think we can say 1(A) rather than small (a).  Is that okay?  But the learned Attorney General says that instead of using ‘demonstrates’, we use ‘satisfies’.  Is that okay?  Now I put the question –(Interjections)- no, there could be other amendments but let us dispose of this one. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS. ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to bring in an amendment to (3) on a motion by hon. Jacob Oulanyah, and I would like to introduce (c) to read that “a person who is below 14 years” and that I think could take care of children who are below 14 years. They would also be treated under exceptional circumstances.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, now you have heard that?  Hon. Minister or Attorney General, do you want to say something about that? In the amendment that we have approved, she is introducing a third category of exceptional circumstances.

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I think that amendment would be redundant because when we talk about the people who have been abducted, we are talking about people who have been taken against their will.  So, a child will also be considered under such people, and if the person is under age, that is a child.  They will be tried accordingly if indeed, they cannot prove these exceptional circumstances.  They will be tried in the normal courts of law for children.  But we cannot say that age per se should qualify a person because we know that there are children who have committed crimes, and that is why we have children’s courts.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, it is clear, hon. Alaso.

MS.ALASO:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I am not satisfied because I brought in that amendment thinking that while the children go in there, we would like to exploit whatever opportunity we have to ensure that the children are immediately rehabilitated.  That was my first thinking.  

The second thinking I have is that, sometimes while we think it is their will, that is really an age of experimenting with so many situations.  So, taking them through the whole process of court and all the delays - and I thought if you were thinking of exceptional circumstances to rehabilitate them at the most immediate opportunity, I would think this would have been included.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but you see, you will not avoid that because section (4) concerns people who have been taken to court.  It is only on arrival in court that this person will say, ‘you know, I have been in this but after all I am below 14 years.  Another person persuaded me.’ Again you will not avoid court in (4).  But in (2) it will not be a court situation. It will be a question of this person surrendering to the Commission. Again he will not have been exposed to court if the situation is in (2), but in (4) you cannot avoid appearing before the court, and then they tell court about your age.  Okay?

MR.MBALIBULHA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted the lawyers in this House to help me, because there are other exceptional circumstances under which the returnees find themselves back in the bushes. For instance, there is harrassment and intimidation by the State agencies.  This is a living example with us in Kasese.  People who returned during the NALU times on 17th March 2001, they were alleged to have participated in the destruction of Kasese Town, and some of them actually I hear are now in Rwanda again.  So, how do you handle such people if they return seeking for amnesty?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Katuntu, you want to help?

MR.KATUNTU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must confess, I did not get his question, but I will be very much willing to help if he can repeat it.

MR.MBALIBULHA:  With your permission, Mr. Chairman, my question is, some of us who come from war areas, we have seen this and we can testify.  Let me illustrate it by way of example.  Those people who jumped into narrow ranks, they benefited from a presidential pardon, and thereafter, these people were subjected to harassment and intimidation by the State agencies.  On the 17th March 2001, Kasese Town was destroyed under mysterious circumstances and they were the first people to be pointed at. They were harassed, locked up and intimidated. Even when they were released, the intimidation and the harassment continued.  Some of them I hear are now in Rwanda, and might be again trying to engage into subversive activities.  If such people are convinced again to come back, can they benefit from the Amnesty law? How do you handle those exceptional circumstances?  You find yourself that the only alternative is to go away, and later on compose yourself and seek for amnesty.  Thank you very much.

MS.KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the hon. Member, and I think, what he is proposing is catered for in (b), under duress, because that is what he seems to be suggesting.  So, if they can prove that they were under duress, then they can benefit.  I think it is well catered for. 
 
MR.KATUNTU:  I must say I disagree with the Minister. The issue raised by the hon. Member first of all, it is not legal.  

One; there was no law that provides for the presidential pardon.  I think the President just used his prerogative.  The presidential pardon is provided for when somebody has gone through a court process.  He has been prosecuted, he is convicted and at the end of the day the President pardons him.  The category the hon. Member is referring to, is not of people who have gone through a court process. And I think those who were pardoned by the President at the time, did not have the backing of the law.  At that time there was no law that provided for it. 

The category of the people who are being referred to now are those who have been pardoned under the Amnesty Act, and they have gone through the process of pardon under the Act.  I think those are the people who are being referred to now, not the sort of category the Member is talking about.  Thank you.
  
(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to)

MR. BITANGARO: Mr. Chairman, in criminal justice, there is a doctrine that goes that, ‘you are presumed innocent until proven guilty’.  Now, to address the fears of the Member for Kinkizi, hon. Mbabazi, I was proposing that we add another amendment; it becomes 5, which reads: “The burden of proving exceptional circumstances shall lie upon the person pleading exceptional circumstances”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do we need to make that provision?  Actually we have used the words “to satisfaction”. Therefore, if it were satisfaction, we would have carried out the burden.  So, I do not think we need to.

The Title:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “Amnesty Amendment Bill, 2001” be read a Third Time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill entitled: “Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE AMNESTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2001”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations! (Applause)!

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. Matembe): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001” be read a Second Time.

AN HON MEMBER: Seconded.

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to begin by thanking you and this hon. House for the support you have given to my office.  I noted with pleasure the recommendations made by the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee on the Directorate.  I wish now to particularly thank the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, for the speed with which they have handled this Bill. 

This Bill together with the Leadership Code Bill was tabled before the sixth Parliament and was never addressed.  It is hardly months since I tabled this Bill before this House and it is now before the House for debate.  I would therefore be a mean person, if I did not express my gratitude to the Seventh Parliament, for the seriousness with which it is handling its business- (Applause)- I am now appealing to the hon. Members to emulate the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, in expediting the debate on this Bill.  

Since the establishment of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity three years ago, we have identified a number of constraints that hinder our progress in the fight against corruption and building ethics and integrity in public office.  One of these constraints is a weak legal framework.  The laws relating to investigation, prosecution and adjudication of corruption cases and other cases, have got many flaws that have made enforcement very difficult.  The law governing the Inspectorate of Government is one of such laws, Mr. Speaker.

An Act of Parliament established the Inspectorate of Government in 1988.  The 1995 Constitution elevated the office to a constitutional one.  It was given some new powers and functions, while all other functions were taken away.  However, the Inspector General of Government has been operating on the basis of the old statute, and it has been quite difficult to move forward.  I am therefore, bringing this new law to operationalise the provisions of the Constitution, as reflected in the preamble of this Bill, particularly Articles 225, 226, 230 and 232.  The new law therefore, proposes the following:

1. That the Inspector General of Government Statute be repealed and replaced by the new law.

2. That the new law creates a second post of Deputy Inspector General of Government, because of the enormous work so far, and the opening up of various offices in the district.  Because when the Inspector General of Government was established, it was operating as one office.  It has now opened about seven offices in the regions, and this has necessitated extra resource.

3. The Bill also proposed that the Inspector General of Government and his two deputies be granted security of tenure.

4. That the Inspectorate should take on the additional function of enforcement of the Leadership Code of Conduct as provided in the Constitution.

5. That the Inspector General of Government be given special powers to prosecute as given by the Constitution.

6. That the IGG be empowered to make such necessary orders and give directions regarding transactions that may be connected with investigations during the course of his or her investigations.  

7. That the jurisdiction of the IGG be extended to a broader definition of corruption, to include theft of public property and funds, false accounting, false claims, causing financial loss and all fraud related cases.  

8. That informers or whistle blowers are rewarded with five percent of any money recovered. The reason that this was thought about is because it has been quite difficult for informers to come out and give information, even when they have it.  First of all, they say, ‘what is in there for me, because when I report I cause insecurity to my life; I do not even have protection’. Secondly, even around the job, some people are chased away from the job. So, to motivate people to inform, once the information they have given leads to recovery of the amount of money, they should get five percent of the money. 

9. That the Inspectorate of Government should have budgetary independence to enable effective implementation of its activities.

There are no direct financial implications of the amended IGG Statute warranting clearance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The only indirect implications, like the creation of an extra post of Deputy Inspector General of Government, are purely operational and can be handled within the existing budget procedures, and should, therefore, not be a condition for amendment of the Statute.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Adolf Mwesige): Mr. Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001.  

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs scrutinised the Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001 as required by the Rules of Procedure of this House.  

The Inspectorate of Government Statute 1988 established the office of the Inspector General of Government as an independent office. It was charged with the duty of protection and promotion of human rights and the rule of law in Uganda. It was also charged with the duty to foster the elimination of corruption and abuse of public office.  

The 1995 Constitution transformed the office of the Inspector General from a statutory office to a constitutional office, redefining its functions and powers.  The Constitution gave the function of protection of human rights to the Uganda Human Rights Commission.  

The Committee held discussions with the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity and her staff, the Inspectorate of Government staff, and the Director of Public Prosecutions. We also received memoranda from the NGO Forum, although they were not able to appear before the Committee.

The Bill seeks to repeal the Inspectorate of Government Statute, so as to bring it into conformity with the provisions of Chapter thirteen of the Constitution. 

The proposed amendment is also aimed at addressing problems experienced by the Inspectorate in investigating and prosecuting cases during its operations.  

The Committee observed that most of the provisions in the Bill are the provisions from the Constitution, and some are borrowed from the Inspector General of Government Statute of 1988. Among these observations is the definition of corruption in the Bill. The Committee observed that the definition is narrow, and therefore, should be broadened.  

Another observation is in Article 223(2)(b) of the Constitution, which provides, 
“The Inspectorate of Government shall consist of- 
(b) such a number of deputy Inspectors-General as Parliament may prescribe.”  

The Committee observed that the workload and demands of the Inspectorate have increased due to the additional functions given to it by the 1995 Constitution. There is increased awareness on the evils of corruption, and seven regional offices of the Inspectorate have been opened countrywide.  This, therefore, calls for more than one Deputy Inspector General of Government. 

Another observation was on the removal of the IGG and Deputy IGG as proposed in clause 5 of the Bill. The composition of the tribunal and the procedure for the removal of the IGG and his deputy are not stated in the Bill. 

In its proposed amendments to the Bill, the Committee proposes an elaborate procedure for the removal of the IGG and the Deputy IGG. 

On recruitment of staff, it was observed that by the nature of the functions of the Inspectorate, it is important to employ people who have high integrity and competence.  

On the functions of the Inspectorate, under Article 230 of the Constitution, which empowers the Inspectorate to enforce the Leadership Code, we observed that the Bill indicates that the Inspectorate’s role is merely supervisory. We, therefore, intend to amend that by stating that the Inspectorate shall enforce the Leadership Code.  

On the powers of access and search, it was observed that vital evidence, such as documents and items, could be found on the body of a person being investigated. The Bill makes no provision for searching a person. 

On limitation on investigations by the Inspectorate, Clause 19(c) reads, “The Inspectorate shall not have power to question or review any of the following matters: (c) any matter which is sub-judice”. It was observed that this has caused frustration, where one party files a case in court not withstanding the fact that the IGG has already commenced its investigations on the same matter.  

The Committee recommends as follows:  

1. The definition of corruption should be widened to give effect to the Constitution.
 
2. The Inspectorate should have two Deputy Inspectors General of Government in order to cope with the increasing workload, and to ensure adequate supervision both at the headquarters and at regional level.  

3. Integrity and competence should be emphasised during the selection of the staff of the Inspectorate.  

4. The Bill should be amended to reflect the Inspectorate’s enforcement role of the leadership code as provided in Article 234 of the Constitution.  

5. The IGG should be given powers to search a person to avoid loss of evidence that could be found on the body of a person being searched.

In conclusion, it is important to pass the Bill into law to enable conformity with the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, and to provide for other matters experienced during the Inspectorate’s years of operation.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I have got a very brief question to put to the hon. Minister, on a matter of the capacity of IGG to act. Listening to the hon. Minister, and going through the Bill and what I have heard from the Chairman of the Committee, this Bill makes IGG almost toothless.  The capacity to bite is not there. I can give an example. Yesterday, I listened with horror to the hon. Minister for Justice, telling us that the Inspector General of Government objected to a tender being awarded to a South African company to print the ballot papers, and the Electoral Commission with the compliance of the Ministry of Justice, defied him when there was room to believe that, indeed there is corruption in awarding this particular contract. 

If the Ministry of Justice can defy the Inspector General of Government, do I assume his capacity to bite has been incapacitated constitutionally or the person himself, or there is more to it than we see?  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister for Justice or the hon. Minister of Integrity.  What is happening to the Integrity of the Government, Electoral Commission and IGG?  

DR.JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee and the Minister for this Bill, because I think it is long overdue.  The IGG’s office has been established but more or less based on the Constitution and the Statute.  By the 1995 Constitution, we should have really put in place a law governing the office of the IGG.  Why is this important?  It is important for governance; the office of the IGG is very, very important for governance in a young democracy like ours.  As it is, we are being challenged.  Corruption as we know is rampant and that is another attempt to put a nail in the coffin of corruption.  But, whether we succeed will be another matter.  

I have a few observations to make.  In other countries, the office of the IGG really, the equivalent is what they call the ombudsman.  The ombudsman is an official appointed by a government to investigate and report on complaints made by the citizen against Public authorities.  But in our case, the IGG is more or less charged mainly with good governance, fighting corruption, and so on.  So, in our case, we really do have a person who carries out that function, to be an intermediary between government and the citizens, because by nature, government has a lot of power and so on, but the ombudsman in other places, sits there and mediates between the excesses of government and the citizens. But that of course is not the subject of this debate. But I think that is something that the Committee will have to think about or Parliament will have to think about in future.  

Now, one other thing we have to think about in future as we develop our governance systems, is the excessive powers that are really given to the IGG, because he has a lot of powers.  In future, if power is to be abused, this is one potential office where that can happen, because he investigates, he can prosecute and so on.  So he has a lot of powers.  He has powers to search and so on.  So, in future, as our democracy gets stronger and stronger, we have to see how to stop the potential abuse of excessive power by the office of the IGG or the Government using that office to curtail personal freedoms.  

The final point I want to talk about is corruption, because that is the major activity with the IGG. Transparency International in its latest report has ranked Uganda as N0.3 or 2 on the list of corrupt countries.  Because Transparency is careful to say, ‘well our purpose is not to compare countries, how corrupt they are, it is up to you to see where you stand’.  Now, when you look at the countries that scored worse than us, it is Nigeria, it is Kenya and Bangladesh.  

When you look at the score for Bangladesh, the standard deviation plus or minus is 2.9.  It is very, very high.  Bangladesh scores about one point something plus or minus 3, meaning that, if they carried out a more vigorous test, Bangladesh might actually score better than us.  So, the countries that we have to really look at are Kenya and Nigeria, and you see that is the very league.  I would not like to be compared with those, because, really they are corrupt; to say that we are less corrupt than them is immaterial, because when you look at the scores, we got 1.9 plus or minus 0.7, Kenya got 2.0 plus or minus 0.6.   We are in the same league as Nigeria, the same league as Kenya, and in fact even slightly above us.

To say that we score badly because we talk about corruption is also not very valid. That argument, I have heard the Minister talking about it. Because when you look at the test they use, they ask simple questions, they ask business people, they ask importers, they ask researchers. They ask, “what is the probability of you paying a bribe, when you go to register a company?  What is the probability of you paying a bribe when you go through customs?  What is the probability of you paying a bribe when you go to see an official and people high or low?”  So, really to say that, because we talk about corruption, we score badly, that argument is there, but it is not completely valid.    

The truth is that we score badly because there is a lot of corruption, and unless we do something about this, development will be challenged.  It will be curtailed because corruption is a sign that there is very, very poor governance.  In fact, if there is massive corruption, it means that government needs to do something, and this is the sort of thing that is fought from the top.  We have to fight it from above, because corruption cannot be fought from below.  You start from the top and then you give a message that there is no free lunch, you are corrupt, you are arrested, you are prosecuted and so on, so it is a shame to be corrupt.  

But in our country, if you are corrupt and you get away with it, you are the hero, and I think that is sad for Uganda. I pray and hope that one day, it will be so embarrassing and shameful to find you corrupt. Therefore, we would like to score highly on the corruption index and on the other bribery index, which is also another score.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I get persuaded to support this Bill, I am seeking the following clarification.  In fact, I am very hesitant to support this Bill until Government has clarified to me the contents of Article 27(2) of the Constitution, with reference to what we are dealing with right now. And I would like to begin by reading this provision verbatim.  Article 27(2) of the Constitution reads, “No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property.” 

I am bringing this challenge to Government and those concerned for one main reason.  Year after year, as an individual, I get perturbed when I receive forms from the IGG’s office demanding that I disclose what I own, as if I am not supposed to own anything! And I would like to advise that it is time Uganda borrowed a leaf from the German law.  I am not a lawyer, but I am an admirer of diverse laws.  In Japan, if you are appointed Minister of Finance and after one year, you own a helicopter, you are subjected to a law, which is known as the unexplainable wealth law.  People become suspicious that within one year, where has this fellow got the helicopter? -(Interjections) - Aggrey Awori’s helicopter was just borrowed.  

So, in the case of John Ken Lukyamuzi, what do I have to declare?  We should borrow a leaf from the Japanese law so that you declare when you have to, and I do not know whether there will be an opportunity for me to bring that amendment. 

Now, in the case of the IGG, I do not know whether he is doing any investigations at all.  If he is doing any investigations, he is best advised to begin checking the Government Officials first before he checks us, the likes of Ken Lukyamuzi.  How should he check these people over corruption?  Check on what they own!  If what they own is excessive as compared to what they are supposed to own, then you take action.  But this question of obliging every Dick and Harry to complete that form - me John Ken Lukyamuzi, I have never completed that form and in accordance with this constitutional provision which I have read, I do not think I have committed any crime.  If I had committed any crime, I would have been taken to court. So, I am waiting for a warrant of arrest because I have openly defied the completion of that form.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker -(Mrs. Matembe rose_)

MRS. MIRIA MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, actually the hon. Member is talking about the Leadership Code, which I am about to bring here.  It is not yet here.  But I would like to inform him that he has been violating the law.  You cannot be a hon. Member of Parliament, participate in making laws, which you go out there and violate and you praise yourself for violating them!  Therefore, I would like to inform him that he has been violating this law, and I would like to advise him that in fact forms have already gone out.  We are going to watch out.  If he does not fill them this time, he will face the consequences of the law.  Thank you - (Laughter).

MR. MUSISI: Mr. Speaker, in this august body, I have noticed two hon. Members who definitely have violated the dress code.  I do not know if the rules have changed, that we have got to put on as if we are going to our shambas.  I note with concern the Member from Sironko and the one from Isingiro.  Are they in order?  One is just next to me here.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, when you say Isingiro, which Isingiro?

MR. MUSISI: He has definitely noted himself.  But I see him putting on a big blouse - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that dress is from which country?

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, this was brought by my lovely wife at high cost from the Republic of Nigeria –(Laughter)- and, Mr. Speaker, I am wearing this to demonstrate that it is made in Nigeria. It may look like rubbish, but made in Africa by Africans for Africans, and it is promoting local industries.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: And this one?

MR. WANANZOFU: Mr. Speaker, I believe this is normal dressing even in Uganda here.

THE SPEAKER: What?

MR.WANANZOFU: It is normal dressing.  It is decent and normal.  

THE SPEAKER: Is it a dress of some country?

MR.WANANZOFU: It is Ugandan.

THE SPEAKER: It is just a shirt and trouser.  I think you change it, please.  

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Member who raised the point of order, whether by putting on a yellow shirt, he thinks he is best dressed in this House.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think it is a question of colour.  But I think in respect of the other Member, he is having a short-sleeved shirt over trousers.  I think it is not a proper one.  Next time he has got to change.  He has received a warning.  

MR. ABDU KATUNTU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the whole House that I am a Member of the Rules Committee.  We have come up with specific rules on the dress code, and I think we shall be tabling it for the approval of this House, and some of these issues will not be issues anymore.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have a lot of business to transact today, so just wind up and then we proceed with other business.

MR.RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. More often than not, the hon. Member of Parliament, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, has referred to Article 27(2) of the Constitution on freedom of his privacy and the like. I wish to inform the hon. Member that he should read the Constitution in its totality. He should not isolate provisions of the Constitution and refer to them in a singular context.  

For instance, as much as his privacy is guaranteed under this particular Article, it is also restricted or qualified under Article 232, where there is provision about the Leadership Code and its operations and where he has to declare his income, his assets and liabilities and the like.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I thought the hon. Member from Nakawa had a point, only to discover that he did not have anything to talk about.(Laughter). 

With those few words, I wish to wind up by urging the Executive to seriously consider the amendment of Article 27(2), because in its own right, if Ken Lukyamuzi insists on not disclosing his private property, he does so at no risk at all.  Thank you very much.

MR. RUHINDI: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, to say that I have raised no point at all, when I have referred him to a provision of the Constitution? What does he say about that? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Lukyamuzi is telling you that the Article he mentioned specifically protects private property. It is a question of interpretation. According to him, no person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of the person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property. 

I entirely agree with you that there is Article 233, which may require somebody to disclose. I think he is saying these two provisions may be in conflict. He can invoke Article 27 to resist divulging the details of his property.  So, when you bring Article 233, you may really say there is a conflict, and what happens when there is a conflict? 

And as he mentioned yesterday, the constitutional court has ruled on this. You may not be in position to say which one is which, especially when these are provisions of the Constitution, which should be followed. So, should it be 27 or 233; which is superior? I think that is the question. It has not caused a problem, but he has interpreted it like that; that hon. Lukyamuzi can hide under Article 27 and say, ‘do not interfere with my property’.

MR.SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the Bill and the amendments, but I have a small comment to make. We would like to see this Bill stronger and very effective, but I have a problem with the IGG’s office.  

It seems the IGG’s office lacks people of integrity, after being on our necks to declare important information about our wealth to our debtors.  I can give an example of hon. Chebrot who, after declaring his wealth of 3 billion Shillings, was haunted by debtors. So, I would like the Minister of Ethics to clarify why the IGG’s office is so loose and leaks information to the press, when you are telling us to declare our wealth.  Thank you very much.

MR. JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have no problem with the House passing this Bill. My problem is whether it will be possible to implement this Bill when it is passed. Is there a willingness to implement it to cover everybody in this country? Does the IGG have the clout to be able to reach the powerful people in this country who may defy this Act?  

I am asking these questions because we are in this House, but how many people are in this House after having bribed their way into this House, after having cheated at the election to come to this House? These are questions you will be asked, because the electorate from which we came knows this fact. We should not appear as if we want to do something about a situation, which we are not prepared to handle. These are things on the ground. If you came to this House having bribed every single voter, how can you say you are going to question bribery? I am asking  -(Interruption)

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I am John Kazoora and I represent Kashari Constituency, now for the second running. I work very hard, I debate extremely well on the Floor of this House, and my people have confidence in me and they vote for me.  The hon. Member holding the Floor is making serious allegations against you, Mr. Speaker, because you are also a Member of Parliament, by insinuating that there is a big number in this House who bribed their way into this House, in other words, that we cheated. 

I am very worried, Sir, because I know I am very clean, and it can be testified by my people. If he does not substantiate, people like us, who have got high moral integrity, will be taken in that category. I am wondering, therefore, if the hon. Member is in order to generalize all of us.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawanga, can you substantiate your statement.

MR.KAWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I will start with the wailings Mr. Kazoora has been making in this House about elections in his own constituency. The kind of things that were done against him to make sure that he does not come to this House - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kawanga, you were asked to substantiate a statement to the effect that a number of Members sitting here came in by bribing their way to the House.

MR.KAWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I asked a question.  I did not make a statement, the question was, ‘how many Members in this House bribed their way into this House?’  I did not mention anything -(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: No, no.  I think either substantiate or withdraw the statement and then proceed.

MR.KAWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that statement -(Laughter).    I will only state that, let every hon. Member who is sitting in this House, before casting a stone accusing anybody of bribery, look at yourself and see, and ask whether what we are legislating is here.  Are we in a position to implement- (Mr. John Eresu rose_)

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that the Electoral Law in this country is very clear.  There are even provisions for petitions in case of electoral irregularities.  Given that Members of this House are here present deliberating on behalf of their people, I would like to inform him that the statement he is trying to give is incorrect, because Electoral Laws would have caught up with such Members.  I thank you.

DR.NKUUHE:  I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that, the fact that we commit adultery does not stop the Bible from condemning adultery and trying to stop people from committing adultery.  I thank you.

MR.KAWANGA:  That is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, and that is the very reason why I am asking whether we have the moral clout to implement this law, because if we do not, then we shall be passing it but we shall not be putting it in practice.

THE SPEAKER: But who is supposed to implement the law; is it ourselves or the IGG?

MR.KAWANGA:  We are all part of this country; the enforcement is with all of us, Mr. Speaker.  We are the ones who shall be called when people are making the complaints - I mean, just as I was speaking now, as we are implementing this law, a hon. Member of Parliament feels that it should not concern him.  Now, if that is the position, and if the Constitution is as it is, then I fear we will pass a law which we will never implement.

Two, are we prepared to give sufficient funds to the IGG to be able to implement this law?  It is good to pass it, but we have not created an enabling environment for him to be able to implement this law.  There is another clause in this Bill which makes a reference to investigating a matter, which is still before the courts of law.  When I first read it, I feared, because I have heard incidences where we have been in the middle of the court trial and the IGG has given instructions which have interrupted a court process and the parties to the process did not comprehend this kind of situation.  I hope the amendment that is being made in this Act will not create conflict between the Judiciary and the IGG’s office. 

With these few remarks, I pray to God that this bill is implemented.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PATRICK KABAYO (Kassanda county South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to make reference to the definition of corruption, which in my view is limited to matters of gain only.  The attention of this country has been disrupted by influence of gain.  But actually there are many issues which have nothing to do with gain per se, but which in my view are central to the issue of corruption.    I think that is the greatest form of corruption in this country, failing to give credit where credit is due, maligning people, seeking credit by discrediting others. I feel that the definition of corruption as it is in here, should be expanded to include improper behaviour which includes favoritism and so on, which may not necessarily translate to personal gain, but which may nevertheless, be forms of corruption.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS.SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do not know whether I am standing to support the Bill, but I would like to make some observations about it.  The 5 per cent that has been proposed is too much, because, this morning, I was attending a meeting and the people were talking about smuggling, which is done by the officials who are supposed to detect it.  So, you might find that the 5 percent might be given to a person who is in fact corrupt or who is in fact part of the IGG.  So it is not only big, but also not necessary, because the institution itself is not very clean.  I do not think that even Uganda alone as far as corruption is concerned, has got an institution that can fully detect corruption.  So I do not think we need to reward somebody who you know –(Interruption)- could you please protect me, Mr. Speaker?  I do not think that we need to reward somebody who reports corruption, because the corrupt cases that we have experienced in the past have been in the open light, they are not hidden cases that one has to search for them.  

I have many examples where I have been working -(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, instead of strengthening the IGG, I would like to appeal to the Government or Ministry of Ethics to coordinate more closely with the Auditor General.  I think that the Auditor General is properly equipped; he must be having enough tools or proper tools to detect people who might be getting into corruption or to stop it. So, instead of creating a new institution - the new institution is there, but instead of over strengthening it, let us urge the Ministry responsible for corruption to work closely with the Auditor General, because the Auditor General is there, but we do not hear anything from the Auditor General as far as corruption is concerned.

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, is the proposal or the recommendation made by the Committee that the IGG should search.  I say the IGG should not search.  I am repeating that we should drop this recommendation, if the Report is taken, because the people who are involved are partly officials of Government who are supposed to even implement the law itself.  So who is going to search what or who?  The searching should be dropped; the idea of giving a reward should be dropped because we are going to give the same people more money, because they are the ones who have got the information.  So do not reward them. I am sure, if the Auditor General is given enough tools, the proper tools, he can be able to detect who is corrupt and who is not corrupt without rewarding anybody. That is what I wanted to contribute, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyaddondo County South, Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The IGG’s office would be the most crucial organ in the present Uganda, but what is happening is really very disappointing.  The IGG’s office is likely not to perform its role because it has no political will and support.  It looks like the organ is there for propaganda purposes; to impress the International Community that really Uganda is doing a job of fighting corruption, and that kind of thing.

You will agree with me that when you look at the way the appointment of the IGG is done, there is a lot which is left out. The current IGG was at one time a Deputy National Political Commissar.  This is the person who is brought in to watch the same Government  -(Mr Wambi rose_)

MR.WAMBI: Mr. Speaker, the IGG’s office is established by the Constitution and the laws that follow that kind of establishment. Therefore, is the Member holding the floor in order to call the office of the IGG a propaganda arm of Government, when in totality he knows this is an organ established by the Parliament of Uganda, and by the Constitution to fight corruption and the related ills. Is he in order, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: You know, currently there is a Constitutional Review Commission and the fact that we have a Constitutional Review Commission gives opportunity to many people to review all aspects of the Constitution to see whether they are proper, they should be there or they should not be maintained.  So, I think he is speaking in the same spirit that as far as he is concerned, he does not believe in - whether he is correct or not, but that is his view.

MR.KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Speaker, for that protection. About the appointment, you will agree with me that the current IGG was a Director –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think personalities coming in this debate may be a problem. Because the current IGG was appointed under the Constitution and when his nomination was sent here, Parliament itself looked through all merits and demerits of the appointment and approved it.  Now, if you make a contribution attacking an individual when you are talking about a general law, really it may be unfair; maybe, decline from mentioning an individual.

MR.KIKUNGWE: Mr. Speaker, I will talk about someone who was a director in Danzi and that director was managing the company, and that company caused a loss of over shs.40 billion to Uganda Revenue Authority, and no explanation, no action has been taken. And somebody is to watch and fight corruption.  The IGG’s role, Mr. Speaker, has changed to the extent that today, the IGG’s office gets money, marks it and nets people with that money.  That is the kind of work that is going on in the IGG’s office.  They get a bundle of money, mark it and then they get a particular person X and hook him with that money. That is the kind of work they are doing and this is happening! I think, the role of the IGG’s office must be more broader than focussing on this.  Maybe, this is why hon. Kawanga was talking about the financing.  Maybe, they do not have enough money to handle all that they should be handling.

The hon. Minister talked about the informer.  I came to this House and told the hon. Minister that Uganda was third most corrupt country in the world. The hon. Minister attacked me in the House, but a month later, Uganda was elevated from the 3rd position to the 2nd position.  So, the kind of information they get is not really treated with the due attention it deserves.  Despite having several organs - CID, IGG, today we have a Minister for Ethics - corruption is really increasing at a very terrible rate. I do not know what we are going to do for this country!  I, for that matter, do not support the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you not think really I put the question?

MRS.HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. About two weeks ago, we were debating the Bill on Education Service in this House and we set a precedent that, before we debate a new Bill, we must know the budgetary implications according to the new Budget Act.  We are now talking of establishing a new office, deputy IGG, Operational funds; what are the budgetary implications? We seem not to be consistent in this House.  I would have expected the Minister and the Committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, you came late.  This issue was dealt with.  The Minister when she was moving a motion for the Second Reading said that there was no financial implication of the Bill, and everything that is being proposed will fit in the Budget.  So, that was the position unless you query it; that is the statement, as far as it is concerned, there is no financial implication. I think, hon. Members, why don’t I now put the question? Because you see, there is repetition of what –(Mr Awori rose_)- what procedure?  Let us hear the procedure.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, you propose to put the question, but we have put a number of questions to the hon. Minister, we are seeking her clarification. I would appreciate if she could reply to our concerns before we pronounce ourselves to the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Is it not fair for the Minister to answer questions?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr. Miria Matembe):  Thank you very, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Members for their support, their response and their comments.  

Hon. Awori was worried about the capacity of the IGG because he thinks he gives orders which cannot be respected and therefore he is toothless.  One of the reasons why we are bringing this law is to give more power, and more teeth to the Inspector General of Government by bringing the office in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution. The framers of the Constitution saw it fit to strengthen this office in this way.  

However, he referred to an incident where the IGG gave an order, the hon. Minister of Justice – (Mr. Awori rose_)

MR. AWORI: It is not an incident. It is a serious constitutional matter. The matter of printing ballot papers, for deciding local leadership in this country. A company was awarded that contract in a manner which is not consistent with the tender system. It is not an incident.  It is a serious matter!

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Aggrey Awori, I think yesterday you got an explanation that there was a balancing between creating a constitutional problem and proceeding with a tender.  When they balanced, the balance was in favour of upholding the Constitution so that the Constitution is not violated; the Constitution is not amended.  That was the reason why the Ministry said let us proceed producing the ballot papers within the time prescribed by the Constitution and we shall investigate. I think that explanation was given.  

MRS.MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, I was to explain to this House because I was one of the people that were discussing this matter. It was discussed at length to find out what we should do.  I want to say that, when IGG is investigating cases, there are some incidences where he has got to stop certain actions from going on until his investigations are complete.  

In other cases, he may investigate when things go on normally.  But should there be a need to stop the action of the process, he does so.  When he does so, actually he is always respected. You remember many cases of procurement which used to be a problem here; he could stop the process and then investigate and things begin afresh. In this very incident, where the process of tendering was actually fraud in relation to the coming elections – the ballot papers- because the Electoral Commission could not get money in time, it did not go on to tender for supplies of ballot papers. Because according to financial regulations, they were not supposed to do that unless they were sure that there was money.  

As soon as this Parliament agreed on the money, the Electoral Commission wanted to start its process and according to constitutional provisions, it found that the time was too short that it could not follow the usual international procedures of tendering. It was nevertheless advised to follow some kind of limited tendering by the Central Tender Board. Then it so happened that they did not follow this properly. When they did not, complaints were raised to the IGG, and IGG started investigations as usual and put a halt that they should not continue to award the tender until the investigations are complete. 

The Minister of Justice was pressed with time and either had to bring here a constitutional amendment so that you amend the Constitution to delay the exercise of voting or she had to continue with the orders to get the contract.  

Now, when this happened, she said, the IGG’s order notwithstanding because we are pressed with constitutional problems, I suggest we proceed.  She used her reasonable knowledge, competence and understanding of the situation and violated the IGG’s order.  When this happened, the IGG did not keep quiet. He appealed. You know we went to a higher office, the Prime Minister; we sat, the Attorney General was there and a committee was constituted. We discussed at length because when the Minister continued with the order, that means the contract now started.  Now, we could not reverse this. It would lead us into other problems of finance and paying damages, and that kind of thing.

So prudence dictated that let – because this is our own internal problem, weaknesses - us continue with the contract, but let the IGG continue with his investigations to find out as to why they should not have at least followed the regulation on limited tendering. Therefore, the IGG is continuing to investigate this case. Should we find that there were other ulterior motives, we shall handle the situation.  

Therefore, again with this explanation, I wish to say that actually IGG does his work; and he does it independently and he makes recommendations.  We need to know the powers of the IGG.  What does he do?  He makes recommendations to respective institutions, and then those institutions implement those recommendations. If they do not, he appeals.  I do not know, but in my knowledge, after all he reports to Parliament. I am there as the Minister who co-ordinates these programmes.  When some respective bodies do not behave accordingly, we follow them up to ensure that recommendations of the IGG are implemented.  

To my knowledge, many of his recommendations have been implemented. That one, which has been failing, concerns hon. Members of Parliament. When they do not fill the Leadership Code form; you have had him standing here and saying they have been violating the IGG’s orders and the law.  So, it is now up to you to behave as the hon. Members who pass these laws.  

Hon. Nkuuhe thinks that we do not have the role of the Ombudsman in Uganda. I want to draw his attention to Article 225 of the Constitution, which lists the functions of the IGG.  He will certainly find that in that Article, the functions of the IGG as the Ombudsman are brought out very clearly.  The Inspector General of Government plays the role of the Ombudsman and goes beyond into other areas, as was required by the circumstances of this country.  

Hon. Nkuuhe is saying that the IGG seems to have a lot of powers.  In fact, currently he does not have much power and that is why we are bringing this law, to bring him into the ambit of the Constitution.  But I want to say that even with this law, the powers he is getting are not actually in line with his work, he has independence, in that nobody directs him on what to do and how to do it.  First of all, he recommends and when he recommends, other respective organs to which he recommends reinforce the recommendations. For instance, if he recommends that a certain officer should be dismissed, he is not the one who dismisses.  He recommends to the Ministry and the respective Permanent Secretary to bring into motion the necessary machinery to discipline those people.  At times, if it is a higher officer, it goes to the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, who attends to these matters, so the IGG recommends and gets out.  Therefore, there is no way he can really have superior powers or abuse powers or become untouchable.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, he reports to Parliament.  When these reports come here, you are the ones who know how to deal with them, and he has no powers over you.  If he recommends and decides that you do this, and for you, you do the other like the one who has not submitted the Leadership Code forms, he is in problems.  When this concerns Ministers, the President comes in.  I remember last year, when the IGG reported to the President about some of the hon. Ministers who had not filled the Leadership Code Forms, the President responded and all of them filled immediately.  But the hon. Members here, because they have nobody to control them except themselves and the voters, they did not fill them.

The other one, Mr. Speaker, about powers, the IGG prosecutes and when he decides to prosecute somebody, he takes this person before a court of law, and the court may decide that the person is guilty or is not guilty.  Therefore, even in this one, the IGG’s powers are subject to other institutions.  Therefore, for sure –(Mr. Emmanuel Dombo rose_)

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Matembe, for giving way.  The issue I wanted to seek clarification on is the office and the powers of the Office of the IGG in respect to one example I want to give.  In Tororo District, the district contracted a contractor to rehabilitate Tororo Hospital, and the IGG was not satisfied with the procedures, and he wrote terminating the Contractor, stopping the contract.  After one year, when the IGG had not even investigated, the person who had been contracted, he went to court and asked for damages, and the court ruled that the IGG was not party to the contract and he had no powers to stop it, so the district must pay; and because of that contract, the district lost a lot of money and a lot of property of the district has been attached. In such circumstances, what is the role of the IGG in such matters and how should the districts react, if the IGG intervenes in such a manner?  I thank you very much.

MR.AYUME: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The powers of the IGG are provided in the Constitution and in the Inspector General of Government Statute, which we are seeking to repeal and powers of the courts are also provided in the Constitution.  In the exercise of his powers, the IGG is certainly not above the law.  I want to make this very clear – and where the law provides that any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the IGG or of any other authority can apply to a court, for example, a constitutional court - there is no way anybody else can stop a person from doing that.

Secondly, judicial proceedings are intended to decide on issues, on disputes that have been raised before the court, and in this particular case, there was no way the IGG could have done that after giving that order to stop a complainant from testing a decision of the IGG in a court of law, and once he did that, I think the courts were given the power to decide on the issue.  There was no problem with that.

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Attorney General, the question was, according to hon. Dombo, does the IGG, if somebody is carrying out work on a road, say, ‘stop, do not carry out any more work’ or this has to be done by the employee?  I think his problem was in this particular case, which he has referred you to, that IGG simply told the contractor, ‘Stop carrying out the contract’.  Is this how it should be or he should just communicate to the employer, namely, the Municipal Council of Tororo and say, ‘You are employing so and so, I advise to terminate him,’ I think that was his question.

MR.AYUME: Well, what I was saying, Mr. Speaker, is that, indeed the IGG has those powers.  One of his powers is, while investigating a matter, to issue orders for a particular action to be stopped.  

THE SPEAKER: You mean, when he is not privy to the contract for him to carry out the executive role of saying, ‘Stop’ or he says, ‘The person who engaged the contractor, we advise you to terminate the contract’.  I think that is the point.

MR. AYUME: Yes.  But, Mr. Speaker, I wish to refer to the constitutional provisions regarding the IGG’s powers, that is Article 225 which lists the functions of the IGG – Clause 1 up to Clause 2.  But for purposes of this inquiry, let us look at Clause 1, paragraph (e) which provides that: “The functions of the Inspectorate of Government shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall include the following- then we go to, (e) – to investigate any act, omission, advice, decision or recommendation by a public officer or any other authority to which this article applies, taken, made, given, or done in exercise of administrative functions”. 

I take it that the contract which is being talked about must have been concluded between a Government agency and some other individual. 

Apart from that, Article 230 gives the IGG special powers which are to investigate, cause investigation, arrest, cause arrest, prosecute or cause prosecution in respect of cases involving corruption, abuse of authority or of public office. It is possible that the IGG intervened because he was of the opinion that there was some abuse of office in respect of the manner in which the contract being talked about was concluded. 

Clause (2) of Article 230 says: “The Inspector-General of Government may, during the course of his or her duties or as a consequence of his or her findings, make such orders and give such directions as are necessary and appropriate in the circumstances.”  

I believe in this particular case, the IGG must have taken a decision that for the contract to continue, it would not be in the best interest of the Government or whoever entered into that contract with the other party. So, to that extent, he had the powers to proceed the way he did.  The question is, once he has done that, what happens? That is why I said the other party who is aggrieved can take up the matter in the courts of law and seek redress.

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem, learned Attorney General, is the question of communication. Can the IGG, from his office, write to an executive officer in an office of a district saying, “you are dismissed as from today, do not come to the office”. I think he would write to the employer recommending that the employer dismisses the person, but not directly dealing with the person. 

I do not know whether he was reporting the situation correctly. But the situation is that the termination itself was done by the IGG instead of the Town Clerk or whoever.  If the Town Clerk had terminated the contract, then the question of court would not have arisen.

MR. AYUME: Mr. Speaker, sorry I did not get this particular point. But surely, the hon. Minister has stated here, time and again, that the IGG makes recommendations if he discovers that a particular action of an administrative organ of Government is suspect, and he would come in to investigate. If, for example, it has to do with the enforcement of a particular action or contract, he would probably make a temporary halt, and not terminate the contract, because he is still investigating and he has to come out with his findings. It would be very dangerous to stop such a contract because in the process, it could cause more problems than solve them.  

I do not know whether the information by the hon. Member is really as he has put it, that the IGG took his pen and directed the contract to be terminated. I do not know whether that is his position. If it was so, then this would be contrary to the advice, which the Minister has given here, as to how the IGG operates.

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, I want to state absolutely that the situation was as I have mentioned it. And the biggest problem this causes is how will the district authorities subsequently respond to the IGG’s action, given that his previous action did cause the district to lose substantial sums of money?  

Secondly, would it not be proper, in this process of amending the law, to state that if in future the IGG’s actions result into loss, then the IGG’s office should be responsible for such losses, other than imparting such unnecessary losses to the districts when they are not prepared for it.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, I think hon. Dombo told us that the contract was irregularly awarded and the IGG started investigating. And the IGG wrote to the relevant authority that awarded the contract, but not to the contractor himself. I am sure he followed those right procedures.  

What I would like to tell hon. Dombo and the hon. Members, whom I heard applauding, is that the IGG is there to check Government. He is called the Inspector General of Government. He is there to ensure that in your operations as Government, you follow the law and right procedures, and in particular, that you do not involve in corrupt practices.  

We all know, actually, what is happening in our districts; people are giving tenders to themselves when they are councillors. If they go against the law and they give these contracts wrongly, and the IGG is properly executing his role to check the proper management of Government, is he the one who causes the loss or you are the very people who went irregularly and illegally and caused the loss to yourselves? We must see these things clearly, Mr. Speaker.  I would advise the hon. Members to advise their districts to go according to the law and act properly, failure of which, the relevant institutions will do their work –(Interruption)

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, my feelings are hurt because the hon. Minister is descending heavily with the law on the districts and their tender systems, saying the councillors are awarding themselves tenders illegally or irregularly.  This afternoon, I put it to you, as I put it to you yesterday, that at the highest level of the nation, on a matter of a constitutional nature, a tender has been illegally awarded. And you are claiming that you are emanating under the so called constitutional imperatives, is that excusable? Why do you penalise these small fellows, but at the highest level you go away with billions and billions? I lost an election because of such a thing – (Laughter). 

When I went for elections, at the registry we had 10 million voters. After the elections, when we checked the new registry, we had 8 million voters. Where are the 2 million, did they die within three months?  

Madam Minister, I would like to inform you to inform the Cabinet that actually you have been a recipe for petitions in case anybody fails in these LC elections. You have given us a recipe. Anybody can put in a petition because of this fraudulent tender system, due to your so-called constitutional imperatives.

MRS.MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker, me as the Minister for Ethics and Integrity and the IGG, we deal with all corrupt people.  Whether he is from the top, or in the middle or the lowest.  Therefore, I see no harm in drawing your attention to the dangers of the money lost at the districts.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, how many times have you sat in this House and debated passing loans, loans, loans for these districts and these regions?  Now, you are telling me that because there is a flaw - which I am following up by the way - in the tender process in the Electoral Commission, which we are investigating, I should not mention the problems in the districts. This would be unfair if I were not to tackle every area.

Hon. Members, I would like to appeal to you, every time we try to bite, like recently after investigations over two years, we arrested the big officers in the Electoral Commission, I heard people’s outcry; poor people, how can they leave these ones!  How can they arrest them when the Ministers are going free!  How can they arrest them?  We want everybody, whether it is the Minister, whether it is the sweeper, whether it is the small one, we want to catch them; and when we do, please, thank us instead of discouraging us by saying that poor people, poor people when they have stolen millions of money. 

Mr. Speaker, I was on that point of telling this hon. House that the IGG does not go direct to the employees or to the contractors, but he goes through a normal channel.  He advises and the other people take action.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, on a very pertinent issue raised by hon. Dombo, which is tending to derail the debate.  It may be true that the IGG wrote direct to the contractor thereby causing losses to the local government.  It may also not be true.  May I request that, for us to proceed in a proper manner with respect to this subject that was raised by hon. Dombo, that this letter be tabled to the House as proof.  Because the Minister is saying that actually the IGG could not have done that thing, because the IGG is well aware of the process by which he communicates with respect to such situations.  

Hon. Dombo on the other hand, is stating that actually the IGG wrote direct to the contractor.  The House needs proof.  So, I would request, Mr. Speaker, that on an appropriate date and at appropriate time, this letter which now becomes a point of controversy between the Minister on the one hand, and hon. Dombo and people of Tororo on the other, be tabled to the House to justify who is wrong.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not necessary because the Minister has told you the correct procedure.  Therefore, if there was an incorrect procedure followed, what can happen here is to send the letter to the Minister so that he takes up the matter with the IGG. There is nothing Parliament can really do.  This is purely an administrative matter.  If it went wrong, the Minister can take it up with the IGG.  But please, let us wind up this matter.

MRS. MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  To avoid all that kind of thing, we should advise the people there to behave properly and legally.

Now, the local governments; hon. Nkuuhe, was saying that there is a lot of corruption here and Government must do something quickly.  Yes, and that is why Government has brought this law quickly. And could you please, pass it quickly so that we can continue to do something quickly.

Hon. Lukyamuzi was just repenting of his sins of violating the law; and I cautioned him that he should stop doing that, otherwise he was behaving like that under the Leadership Code, which did not have punitary measures. But the Leadership Code which I have tabled in this House, is proposing certain punitary measures against anybody who would violate - and I would appeal to you, when you are studying it, you ensure that you help me and then we deal with people who behave wrongly - hon. Lukyamuzi in particular - (Laughter)

Hon. Sebalu, says the office of IGG lacks integrity.  He talked about things which I did not hear.  But one thing I want to tell you hon. Members is that the IGG recruits people and personnel from Ugandans. And if we in Uganda here, we are infected with corruption, the way we all accept, then he does not recruit people from heaven.  He tries as much as possible to get people of integrity.   Many of them are, but some of them misbehave and we catch them as much as we catch others; by the way, using one of the methods of trapping you –(Interruption) - why should we not trap you, if you want to get something in hiding and you ask for money?  We make it, we get the other money, which we number and mark.  We catch you getting it.  What is wrong with that one?  We do it and he has managed to get many people. By the way, I hope you read the reports, which he presents here. He really does a good job and he saves Government money.

Now, hon. Kawanga, is it possible to implement the Bill?  I think it is possible to implement the Bill.  The real law has been implemented except that we have been having shortcomings, and that is why we are coming to strengthen it. 

As to whether IGG can have clout to catch big people, really Members, the IGG has been doing that.  If big people including Ministers, I know he prosecuted a former Attorney General who is serving a sentence, sometime he was prosecuting some hon. Members. He has prosecuted some Permanent Secretaries; so which big people does he fear?  Given the real funds and the proper strengthening, he does not fear anybody.  He has clout.  Give him more please, so that he can do the needful.

Now, the conflict between the IGG and the courts.  There has been some kind of conflict which may be institutional because courts have their own powers and authority, the IGG has his own powers and authority.  Now, that is why we are bringing in here an amendment to avoid some of these conflicts, to say that when the IGG has already started investigating the case, the fact that the case goes to the court should not prevent him from proceeding with it. Because many people have been taking advantage by rushing to court because the IGG investigations may take long and they try to beat the IGG’s investigations.  Therefore, the provision is coming to help that.

Hon. Kabayo was talking about extension of definition.  We do agree.  Hon. Mugerwa, she has gone, but she dislikes the 5 per cent. But surely, I appeal to you Members, it is very important – actually we had sought for 10 per cent, but the Committee narrowed it to 5 percent.  Please, please, these people will give us information when we motivate them.

Hon. for Kyaddondo south, that one was not speaking – what word should I use?  I think he was misleading this House to say that the IGG has no political will. I do not know which will he meant, whether he thinks the will from above, which I am now thinking of in the strengthening of this Bill.  I do not know what will he was talking about.  But surely the IGG and Government have the political will.  What I find lacking by the way, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, is the personal will, including, hon. Members of Parliament, Ministers and everybody to fight corruption from the personal perspective.  That seems to be the most lacking thing.  But the political will, it is really in abundance and we are trying, and the institution of IGG and my office are not bluffing. 

By the way, hon. Members, this Uganda, although it appears as third corrupt, I want to correct that.  If you read the Press, you were the second corrupt country, and if you read it properly, they apologized that, actually they were not right to say that Uganda was the second corrupt country.  I sent you a report, Mr. Speaker and hon. House, I tabled the explanations here, and those hon. Members really of goodwill must have understood what we were talking about.  But, although we appeared third, really on African scene, we are an authority in fighting corruption.  Even the principles, which we developed here, are being adopted by the OAU to help in fighting corruption.  

On the International scene, I can assure you, we are an authority, if you want to know, and we are fighting it very seriously, Mr. Speaker.  So, we are not bluffing, we are doing serious business.  You will help me, Mr. Speaker, on the appointment of IGG as being endorsed by this House.  Therefore, the hon. Member should know that we appoint the IGG on competence, experience, integrity and ability, and you cannot challenge me on that.

Now, he talked of trapping.  We shall trap you even when you continue to do other wrong things like, selling expired drugs.  We shall deal with these matters, I am telling you. (Laughter) In conclusion, -(Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_).

MR.LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order with reference to what hon. Matembe has said, the whole Minister of Ethics and Integrity, who is supposed to observe the fundamental laws and all the ethics attached to them.  Is it in order for her, without substantiation, to allege that one of the Members of Parliament here present –(Interjections)- no, leave me.  Is it in order for her to make allegations, which are not substantiated, namely, that one of the Members who reacted to her submission, could be involved in the trade of expired drugs, because it could be Ken Lukyamuzi, and if you make such a statement, which does not –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I advise you to leave that issue.

MR.MABIKKE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have listened to the hon. Minister of Ethics and Integrity defending the IGG’s office, as having all the will and the political will to fight corruption.  But I am wondering, whether she is in order, because here with me is a letter, from the Vice President’s office to the Mayor of Kampala City, and a copy to the IGG, and in this letter, the Vice President was reminding the Mayor and the IGG of the implementation of the report on Owino market!  In 1997, the IGG carried out investigations on Owino and very many anomalies were unfolded.  The IGG wrote a very beautiful report; it implicated very many officials in Government and in KCC.  To this day, the recommendations of this report have never been implemented.  Is the Minister in order, therefore, to come here and convince us that the IGG has got the political will to fight corruption, when there is glaring evidence that it is failing?  

THE SPEAKER: I think really that letter should have been used against those people who failed to implement the IGG’s recommendation rather than criticizing the IGG.  As you have said, he unfolded many things and wrote a good report.  Well, he did his work, but then it is other institutions that actually failed.  So, I think this is not contradicting the Minister’s position as far as the IGG is concerned.  But if it was about pleasing other people who failed, then I think she would have been out of order.

MRS. MATEMBE: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I am glad that the hon. Member recognized that the IGG could reveal all these wrong things to people.  So, he supports me, that we work very effectively.  

One, hon. Members said that corruption is increasing.  I read about what hon. Okulo Epak was saying, and he is the Chairman for Public Accounts Committee.  He noted that actually corruption on the part of Public Officials seems to be decreasing.  I think we really need to have data and information before we shout loud on how corruption is increasing.  What is actually increasing is the ability and the level to reveal it, and that is why we appear outside, on the International scene that we are corrupt, because others keep quiet.  Nevertheless, this is not to say that we should not fight it, and it is in view of this, that I wish to call upon you, Mr. Speaker and the hon. House, that let us get together in fighting this corruption.  It cannot be the IGG; it cannot be the Minister for Ethics and Integrity; it cannot be DPP.  We are just there to coordinate, and I would appeal to you, by the way, hon. Members; why don’t you bring me that information concerning these big people who are corrupt, because when you say it here and you do not bring it to us, we do not follow up? But, if you have some clue or something, bring it to our office.  You might benefit from the five per cent, by the way, and then we fight together to stop corruption.  

I am therefore, thanking you for the support you have shown, and I would like to call upon you to speed up this law, so that it passes quickly and the IGG can work harder.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I want to put a question to the motion that the Bill entitled: “The Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001” be read the Second Time.  

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT BILL, 2001

Clause 1

(Clause 1, agreed to)

Clause 2

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 2 be amended by enlarging the definition of corruption to read as follows: “Corruption means the abuse of public office for private gain and includes but is not limited to embezzlement, bribery, nepotism, influence peddling, theft of public funds or assets, fraud, forgery, causing financial or property loss and false accounting in public affairs.” 

The justification for this amendment is that it gives a broader interpretation by specifying as many situations as possible, and also eliminates situations that are not relevant to the Inspectorate function.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

In addition, I would also like to move, in clause 2, that the word “public office” be deleted from this section. This is because the definition as it is here contradicts the definition in Article 257 of the Constitution. In the Constitution, a public office does not include Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service, Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and local defence units. Instead, as we shall move later, we would like to transfer all the offices listed under public office in clause 2 to clause 9, which defines the jurisdiction of the Inspector General of Government.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman, I think this was just a simple error on clause 2. On page 5, when you read (p), it records section 8. It should be section 9. It should read, “any other body or establishment prescribed under section 9 of this Act.”  Also, on the next one, which defines secretary, instead of 14 please put 15.

LT.GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the Committee has moved all those other offices to clause 9. If he is moving what is already presented under clause 2(n), I want clarification, after which I want to move a consequent amendment. Clause 2(n) says, 
“a commission, association or similar body whether corporate or not, established by law for the purpose of administering public funds in any form, or for the purposes of promoting…” A list including public health and even culture is given. I want clarification as to why he left out religion, because they handle a lot of public funds and they are established by law. I want clarification on why they left it out.

MS.ALASO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to know where the Movement Secretariat falls.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have also been hearing, many times, that the IGG has been involved with private bodies, is it really envisaged that he should? These are associations which are private and people are complaining, and then the IGG goes in. Is it proper?

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, the IGG deals with public offices. This particular provision is catering for a situation where an association may be private, but has access to public funds. For instance, there are these intermediary NGOs that govern micro financing. They are really private, but we put in Government funds because they can access the public. For an association like that, the IGG would have the powers to look into those funds.

THE CHAIRMAN: What about taxi organizations like UTODA? These are public, where the IGG should be involved.

MRS.MATEMBE: You see, the IGG, like you have heard, is the Inspector General of Government and he handles public offices. If, for instance, a public officer is involved in the UTODA business or whatever, and he is reported, the IGG would follow him up and investigate. This is a private matter without any public funds, the IGG’s powers do not go there, and he does not handle that.

About what hon. Tumwine is bringing forward, I do not know whether we had thought religion falls under education or culture –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it public?

MRS.MATEMBE: He is trying to say, what if there is a religious organization, which accesses funds from Government. We are public, yes, but what if we give it funds. We are willing; like we give money to our churches and the money is from public people, but on a personal level. Therefore, to that extent, we do not cover it. But if it is accessing funds of Government, we would go to it, even if it is not listed here. 

This clause mentions a commission, association or similar body, whether corporate or not, established by law for the purpose, or any office that offers service to the public or administers funds or part of those funds to the public. I do not think that churches really fall under this kind of thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us first deal with amendments proposed by the chairman of the Committee. You heard the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us move to the amendments proposed by the Minister, namely changing 8 to 9 and changing 14 to 15. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us move to the proposed amendment.  Was it an amendment by hon. Lt.Gen Elly Tumwine about including Religion under this Act?  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any further amendments?

MRS.MASIKO KABAKUMBA (Bujunje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to amend 2, to include “ Movement Secretariat” as a public office because it draws money from the Consolidated Fund.

THE CHAIRMAN: What does the Movement Act say?

MRS. MASIKO KABAKUMBA:  It is a public office.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, if it is, then it is.

MRS.MASIKO KABAKUMBA:  But it is not mentioned here, yet others are clearly defined, for example UPDF and others.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do we have to – (Mr. Okumu Ringa rose_) -really?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas the Movement Secretariat is established by an Act of Parliament and we know that it is a public office, there is no need to mention it specifically in this particular law because it will be covered under any other office or any other body.  Under (p), it will be covered.  “ Any other Body or establishment prescribed under section 8 of this Act”. So, I would like to propose that we do not accept the amendment to include the Movement Secretariat.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Members, in the first place you approved the amendment by the Committee.  The amendment by the Committee was to delete public office in section 2; and whatever you are saying here is trying to expound on what is a public office.  It was removed, and you were told when we move to section 9, this will be considered.  So, when we deal with this one, you are dealing with a subject that is no longer there, because you have already approved the amendment deleting public office.

MRS. MASIKO KABAKUMBA:  Will I be given an opportunity then to move this amendment under section 9?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR.MUZOORA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would seek this clarification from the learned counsel and maybe the Attorney General.  Article 226 of the Constitution is talking about the jurisdiction of the Inspectorate. It reads, “The jurisdiction of the Inspectorate of Government shall cover officers or leaders whether employed in the public service or not, and also such institutions, organisations or enterprises as Parliament may prescribe by law.”  So, I wanted that explanation so that I can know where the IGG can limit himself.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are exactly doing that and including others that are not covered by what you are saying.  But by the mandate, which is given to Parliament, then we are expanding the list.  I now put the question to clause 2 as amended.

(Question put  and agreed to)

(Clause 3, agreed to)

(Clause 4, agreed to)

Clause 5

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended by making the current 5 sub-clause (1) and creating sub-clause (2) to read as follows; “ The special tribunal referred to under subsection (1) shall consist of a Justice of the Supreme Court, who shall be the Chairperson and two other persons, all of whom shall be appointed by Parliament. 

(3) On receiving complaints about the Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General, the President shall refer the matter to Parliament to constitute the special tribunal to investigate the matter.
  
(4) The President shall remove the Inspector General or Deputy Inspector General if the special tribunal recommends that the Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General ought to be removed from office on any of the grounds under sub-section (1). 

(5) If the question of removing the Inspector General or the Deputy is referred to a special tribunal, the President shall suspend the Inspector General from performing the functions of his or her office pending the investigations.

(6) A suspension under subsection (5) shall cease to have effect if the special tribunal advises the President that the officer should not be removed from office.” 

Mr. Chairman, the justification for this amendment is to give the composition of the special tribunal and the procedure for the removal of the Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General of Government.  The power to constitute the special tribunal is given to Parliament under Article 224.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to know, I thought that the special tribunal, which is appointed by Parliament would report back to Parliament at that stage before it goes to the President?  Here it appears that once you appoint a special tribunal, the tribunal does the work and they solve the problem with the President.  I would like clarification there.


MR.MWESIGE:  Mr. Chairman, the answer is in Article 224 of the Constitution.  Which says, “ The Inspector General or a Deputy Inspector General may be removed from office by the President on the recommendation of a special tribunal constituted by Parliament”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put  and agreed to)

(Clause 5, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 6,  agreed to)

Clause 7

MR. MWESIGE:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that sub clause (2) sub-section (f), be amended by deleting the words “ in consultation with the Public Service Commission.”  The justification for this amendment, Mr. Chairman, is that, the Commission already has representatives on the Board and should not therefore participate in the appointment of the other two members of the Appointments Board.  The President should be given the liberty to look at the general public.

I would also like to move an amendment by creating a new sub-clause (3) at the end of Clause 7 to read as follows: (3) “The staff shall be appointed on the basis of integrity and competence.”  The justification for this is that the Inspectorate should employ people of high integrity and competence. And it is important for us in the law to emphasise these virtues of integrity and competence.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put  and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Member for Mubende.

MS.SYLVIA SINABULYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I beg to move an amendment to clause 7 (1) by adding (g) after (f) to provide that the composition of the board should have at least three women. The justification is that this is in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement of fair representation of women on commissions and boards.

MRS.MATEMBE: I was trying to see where this provision she is seeking to bring is. I have understood what she is trying to bring, but we do not want to expand. If you want to cater for women, you could look at these other two members and talk about how it should be gender balanced, but leave the numbers. If she could say, two other members, one of whom must be a woman. In so doing, we shall ensure that at least there is a woman. If among these other people there is no woman, at least there would be one. Is it okay with you?

MRS.SINABULYA: Mr. Chairman, I am not talking about numbers. I do not want to increase on the numbers of the board members. My concern is that at least three should be women.

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, apart from the last two members mentioned in (f), the rest of the members in clause 7 are fixed by law. The IGG is already there by virtue of his office, the deputy is already there, the secretary to the Inspectorate is already there, the chairperson to the Public Service Commission is already there by virtue of his office, and the Permanent Secretary of Public Service is there. So, there is no way you can fix gender from (a) up to (e). Gender can only be considered in (f). In the circumstances, it is only (f) which can be amended to accommodate the gender concerns of the Member.

MRS.SINABULYA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that under (f) we provide for one woman.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 7, as amended, agreed to)

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 8(1) be amended by substituting the word “subject”, at the beginning of the clause, with the word “pursuant”. The justification for this is that the provision in the Statute is the same as that given in the Constitution. Since it is a reproduction of the Constitution, the provision cannot be subject to the Constitution.  

Also, I beg to move that sub-clause (1), paragraph (d) is amended to read as follows: “to enforce the Leadership Code of Conduct”. The justification for this is that the IGG will be enforcing the Code. Supervision will come in in the process of enforcement.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.BITANGARO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that subclause (4) of clause 8 be deleted. Article 228 of the Constitution provides as follows:

“The Inspectorate of Government may establish branches at district and other administrative levels as it considers fit for the better performance of its functions.” 

The very essence of the Inspectorate of Government is to establish impartiality and independence. There are instances where you may delegate power to the LC.V chairman who may be at loggerheads with the CAO, and you may find that those powers are abused, and definitely you will not have impartiality. 

The justification is that we should not compromise the independence and impartiality of the Inspectorate. And according to clause 11 of the Bill, the Inspectorate may establish branches at districts and other administrative levels. In other words, let us leave the Inspectorate to establish branches at districts and other local levels rather than delegate the functions of the Inspectorate of Government, because it will neutralize impartiality.

THE CHAIRMAN: But there is no guarantee that if he instead sends his officers to open branches, they will always be impartial. This is really a question of individual concern.  The problem is not delegating. It is really unfortunate that you appoint somebody and he disappoints you. Well, there is an amendment that we delete clause 8(4).

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman, in the first place, the hon. Colleague did not give me this amendment, and he did not consult me, which he should have done.

Secondly, this provision comes in line with the constitutional provision in Article 232 (2) (c). That Article says, (2) Laws made for the purpose of this Chapter may, in particular, provide- 
(c) for ensuring accessibility to the services of the Inspectorate by the general public and decentralising the exercise of those functions and where necessary, for enabling the delegation by the Inspectorate of any of those functions to other authorities or persons at district or lower local government levels” 

We are operationalising this Constitution, Mr. Chairman. So, I oppose that amendment.

MR. BITANGARO:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I am alive to those provisions, but the framers of the Constitution were so careful as not to say, ‘may,’ in other words, they made it mandatory. We have section 11 of the Bill – we have section 228 of the Constitution.  Really both of them clearly demonstrate that you can have the impartiality and the neutrality maintained in the office of the Inspector of Government.  We should not see it abused. 

MR. AYUME: Mr. Chairman, it is unfortunate that my colleague did not appear to have consulted the sponsor of the Bill, but I think the Article cited by the Minister is very clear.  It presupposes delegation of powers by the Inspector General of Government, and in fact, Clause (2) provides that Parliament shall make laws for the purpose – laws made for the purpose of this Chapter may in particular provide for a number of things and one of them is really to ensure accessibility to services of Inspectorate by the general public and decentralising the exercise of those powers where necessary for enabling the delegation by the Inspectorate of those functions.  So what this particular law is doing is just that.  

DR.MAKUBUYA  KHIDDU: Mr. Chairman, I rise to seek some clarification and guidance from the Chair.  The hon. Minister sponsoring this Bill has indicated that she was not consulted by hon. Bitangaro, when he was proposing this amendment, and Mr. Chairman, we are a young democracy and we are trying to build institutions. I would be very grateful to receive some guidance from you, on the interpretation of Article 117 of the Constitution in view of this development.  It says that: “Ministers shall, individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their Ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet”. I imagine that this Bill comes here, as a decision made by the Cabinet for which there is this collective responsibility.

If we proceed to discuss the amendment proposed by hon. Bitangaro, is this Committee of the whole House contributing positively to the development of these institutions?  I would not have risen, but I see these developing, and we are setting a precedent, if we continue to debate along these lines, that in fact the Government can bring a Bill, and a Minister of Government can stand up without reference to the sponsor of the Bill and freely move amendments, and we as Committee of the whole House and as Parliament receive them liberally and debate them.  Mr. Chairman, I just seek your guidance from the Chair.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  In the first place, this Chair is concerned with guiding the House where Members of Parliament sit.  This Chair has no responsibility to guide Cabinet Ministers – (Applause)- as how to behave, it is not my concern, and I do not want to say anything about it.  In this House, there must be a leader of Government Business.  But as far as I am concerned, a Member stands up, makes a contribution or makes an amendment provided he follows the law. I do not know what was decided in Cabinet, I do not sit in Cabinet.  Therefore, I am not in position to comment on that.  

I put the question that Clause 8 as amended stand part of the Bill.  May be, hon. Bitangaro, you want to say something?

MR.BITANGARO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have heard the concerns of my hon. colleague in Cabinet, but I am a Member of Parliament and a Cabinet Member.  But given the concerns of the Front Bench, I reluctantly withdraw.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I want to put the question that Clause 8 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 8 as amended agreed)

Clause 9

MR.MWESIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that Clause 9 be amended to read as follows:  “ The jurisdiction of the Inspectorate shall cover officers and leaders serving in the following offices:

(a) a government department, undertaking or service; 

(b) A Statutory corporation or authority;

(c) the Cabinet;

(d) Parliament;

(e) a Court of Law;

(f) the Uganda Police Force;

(g) the Uganda Prisons Service;

(h) a school, college or other public institution of learning;

(i) the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces;

(j) Local Defence Forces;

(k) a Local government Council, local government unit or a committee or such a council or unit;

(l) a council, board, society or committee established by law for the control and regulation of any profession;

(m) a public commission, association or similar body whether corporate or not, established by or under any law;

(n) National Security Organisations including ISO and ESO;

(o) any other person, office or body that administers public funds on behalf of the public.” 

Mr. Chairman the justification for this is to define the jurisdiction of the Inspectorate.  

The Committee recommended that a political party be excluded, because the law to regulate the operations and financing of political parties is not yet in place, in accordance with Article 72(iii) of the Constitution.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr. Chairman, I would like a clarification before we pronounce ourselves on this.  The reason for (j), this is for Local Defence Forces popularly known as LDUs.  To me LDUs are illegal entities of the forces.  LDUs are not recognized by any law, and they are not established as such –(Lt.Gen. Tumwine rose_)  

LT. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Wambi, to say that the LDUs are operating illegally without any law when the Armed Forces Act call forces that are auxiliary, and cover all those forces that support the Army in some operations?  For example, now in Karamoja, where they are operating with the Army, the Armed Forces Act legally binds them. Other possible forces could not be covered under that.  As long as LDUs are attached to the UPDF, the Armed Forces Act covers them. It will be wrong to put a blanket and say all are illegal.  Is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, hon. Member, as you may remember, this issue of LDUs is not a new issue here.  I think less than two or three months ago, this House had opportunity to deal with this matter. The question was put that under what law are LDUs operating?  If LDUs cause damage to a person, where do you go?  It was clearly stated by a military officer of your similar rank that there is a problem, there is a lacuna, and there is a need to bring a law to regularize the LDUs.  Therefore, when the hon. Member made the observation, he must have been remembering what was stated in this august House about the issue. And actually his observation must have been intended to draw the attention of those concerned that this issue should be speedily handled and regularized.

MR. WAMBI: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for that wise ruling. I wanted a clarification and therefore, I would move that this Section (j) be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think he is echoing the same observation, which the Chairman of the Committee echoed on political parties. He says because the law is not in place and therefore he was excluding this one, and maybe when the law is made – I think that is his line of argument.  Maybe you may bring it, as may be in political party.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman, there is a difference here.  The political parties were removed from here, because currently, they do not use public funds, and there is yet no law to tell us anything about how they will be financed.  So, the provision that we put that any other organization which uses public funds, is waiting to catch the political parties. Once the law is made and they are made to access public funds, they will automatically be covered by this law.  

But although there is no specific law governing the local defence forces, they are already accessing public funds.  Therefore, they differ from the political party, and we want them to be covered because they are attached to the Defence Forces and are accessing public finance.  So, I beg the hon. Member to see that logic and withdraw the amendment.

MR.WAMBI: Mr. Chairman, I cannot withdraw this because I am aware, we have local defence forces in our areas.  These local defence forces are accessing their funds through UPDF.  UPDF officers are the ones in charge of those units.  So, the local defence forces themselves do not manage any funds; they just go there to be paid either through the Police or through the UPDF.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, you are the one who raised it.  It is a fact that there is no law to back up, as the records of our proceedings say.  Now, do you want to leave them there without anybody controlling them?  Will you be in safe hands?  This is the question. Now you want to free them from any control.

MR. WAMBI: I think when you look at the other side of it, if you are guiding that the Inspector General of Government will go there, control probably their excesses and so forth, I do not think that will be the line.  But I am looking at the monetary part where they control nothing; they are just appendages of UPDF.

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify.  The mover of the amendment, hon. Wambi is only looking at one aspect, whereas this Article means that all the functions of Inspectorate will be covered by the following public officers.  He is only looking at the monetary part.  What about when they misbehave, who checks?  If at all they are robbing or doing what, who checks such misbehavior?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not put a vote on this amendment?  Because we are wasting time!  There is a proposal by hon. Wambi that we delete.  I put the question.

(Question  put and negatived)

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to amend this Section by including “The Movement Secretariat”. The justification being, other similar organizations and departments have been clearly stated here and the Movement Secretariat draws and manages public funds from the Consolidated Fund.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: But is it not covered really?

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to oppose the amendment because the Movement Secretariat is already covered.  It is covered under (a), Government Department or undertaking or service.  If she is not satisfied, there is even (o), which covers anybody who receives Government funding. Therefore, it is effectively covered, Mr. Chairman.

MS.KABAKUMBA: Mr. Chairman, my understanding of the Movement Secretariat is that it is a Movement organ and not necessarily a Government department. Since other organisations and departments have been mentioned, there is no reason why it should not be mentioned. 

And you had even gone ahead to mention political parties, but you have deleted it because there is no law governing it, but there is a law governing the Movement Secretariat. I strongly feel and believe that it is like any other organisation, like the UPDF, the Police Force, Parliament, a court of law, but in a different line.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kabakumba, have you been able to get hold of the Movement Act and read it? If you did, I think you will see that it is covered in (a) and also in the last one, which says, “Any other person, office or body that administers public funds on behalf of the public.”  
The Movement Secretariat entirely depends on Government funds and we vote for them. Anyway, let me put the question. 

MS.KABAKUMBA: Then, Mr. Chairman, we do not need to mention other departments.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me put the question. Hon. Kabakumba wants to expressly include the Movement Secretariat.

(Question put and negativated)

MS.ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to get clarification from the Minister as to whether the jurisdiction of the Inspectorate shall also cover private schools. 

In Clause 9(h), it is stated, “a school, college…” Do we include private schools and private colleges? That is the clarification I would like to get. If they are not included, I would like to move an amendment to delete (h) and instead say, “public schools and public colleges”. I beg to move.

MR.NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to inform my former colleague that there are private schools, like some primary schools, which get UPE. So, the IGG can go there to investigate

THE CHAIRMAN: Her problem is that it is blanket. You even include private schools that do not get any funding from Government. I think that is her concern.

MR.NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Mr. Chairman, right from the principal, the IGG just follows institutions which get public funds.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have agreed; that is an obvious point.  The paragraph says, “school, college or other public institution of learning”. “School” and “college” are common for private and public institutions, but she thinks that private schools that do not receive public funds should not be brought under this net. That is her view.

MRS.MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we could put “Government-aided schools and colleges”, because we want to reach any institution that accesses public funds. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. NKUUHE: ‘Government-aided’ is a specific terminology for specific schools. It does not mean – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: She is saying the schools that are being covered here are those schools getting aid from Government.  She is coming in to save the situation raised by the hon. Member for Arua District so that the schools referred to here are grant-aided schools and colleges.

DR.NKUUHE: Mr. Chairman, I think she wants to capture any school that accesses Government funds in whatever way.  There are schools that are not Government-aided but which access UPE funds, or which get money for teachers or something like that.  

MR.WAMBI: Mr. Chairman, if we limit ourselves to Government-aided schools, we are only limiting ourselves to the monetary part and accountability, but there are other issues that are performed by the IGG. There may be cases of defilement or cases of failure to pay teacher’s salaries. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That should not be his function. What does the IGG have to do with the failure to pay salary to my employers. I have even seen these issues going to the Human Rights Commission. Somebody working in a house goes to the Human Rights Commission and reports that he has not been paid! That is over-stretching the matter! The courts are there to give effective remedies. Why should somebody working in your shamba go to the IGG to report that he has not been paid! That is overtaxing the IGG and yet he has other pressing duties.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 10, agreed to)

Clause 11

MR. SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I beg to move an amendment to clause 11, to read as follows: “The Inspectorate shall, under this Act, establish branches at district and other administrative levels so as to check on the abuse of the functions that may have been delegated to the district or lower levels, including any local government, for the better performance of its functions”  

The reason for this is that clause 8(4) left this matter hanging. Government is now decentralising to the lower local levels, so they have to account for the billions of shillings. I do not see any harm if we can have offices established to avoid any lacuna or any collusion that may arise among the delegated functions.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MRS.MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman, the amendment he is seeking to bring, which in effect makes it mandatory, is a little bit dangerous in view of our financial incapacity and inability to do many things. And you know that we continue to divide districts; one of these days, districts will maybe go to 100. To say that Government must establish these branches is to make a law which we shall not be able to implement.  

The IGG really desires to establish these branches, and this is why we have been trying as much as we can, given the money available, to add branches. We are now establishing regional offices. If funds allow, we shall go slowly to establish district offices. Therefore, I beg the hon. Member to see this reasoning and drop the amendment because we may not enforce it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member for Lwemiyaga, it seems your amendment is becoming stronger than the provision in the Constitution, because the provision in the Constitution article 228 reads: “The Inspectorate of Government may establish branches at the district and other administrative levels as it considers fit for the better performance of its functions”.  So now when you say ‘shall’, then the Act is going to be stronger than the Constitution.  You will be amending the Constitution.  I put the question that clause 11 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Member, a statute cannot amend the Constitution.  A provision of a statute cannot be stronger than the provision of the Constitution.  It will be ultra vires.  I put the question that clause 12 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 13

MR.MWESIGYE ADOLF:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 13(2) be amended by inserting a new paragraph before the current (a), to read as follows; “search any person and retain any document or item in connection with the matter being investigated found with or on him or her”.  In other words, 13(2) would read as follows: “without prejudice to the powers of the Inspectorate specified in section 11 of this Act, the Inspector General, the Deputy Inspector General or any other officer or person authorised by the Inspector General or Deputy Inspector General for the purpose shall in the performance of their functions under this Act (a), search any person and retain any document or item in connection with the matter being investigated found with or on him or her”.  The justification for this, Mr. Chairman, is that some vital evidence such as documents and items can be found on the body of a person, yet there is no provision for searching a person.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to make just a correction on that provision, Clause 13(2), where it says: “without prejudice to the powers of the Inspectorate specified in section 11, it should be section 13”.  Correct it to Section 13 instead of 11.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the proposed amendment by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 13, as amended, agreed to)
 
Clause 14

MR.MWESIGYE ADOLF: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 14 be amended by deleting sub-clause 5, 6 and 7.  The justification, Mr. Chairman, is that these clauses are contrary to article 230(2) of the Constitution, because the IGG does not need recourse to the courts of law in order to give orders.  He has the powers to give orders under article 230 sub-clause 2. I also beg to move that sub-clause 12 be amended by deleting the word “appeal” appearing in the third line and that appeal be accommodated in a new sub-clause 13, which should now read as follows: “In all cases prosecuted by the Inspector General of Government, he or she shall exercise the same powers of appeal as exercised by the Director of Public Prosecutions”.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 15

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 15 stand part of the Bill

(Clause 15,  agreed to)

Clause 16

MR.MWESIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 16 sub-clause 2, be amended by deleting the words “in consultation with the Public Service Commission”.  The justification for this is that the Public Service Commission is already represented on the board.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 16, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 17, agreed to)

(Clause 18, agreed to)

Clause 19

MR.MWESIGYE ADOLF:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 191(c) be amended to read as follows:  any civil matter which is before court at the commencement of the Inspectorate’s investigations.  In other words, the new clause for purposes of clarity would read as follow:    “The Inspectorate shall not have power to question or review any of the following matters; -  
(a) the decision of any court of law or of any judicial officer in the exercise of his or her judicial functions;  (b) the decision of any tribunal established by law in the exercise of its functions; 
 (c) any civil matter, which is before court at the commencement of the Inspectorate’s investigations”. 

Mr. Chairman, the justification for this amendment is that criminal cases are investigated even when the case is before court.  It is only in civil matters, where a case may be prejudiced by investigations when the case is before court.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question?

MR. ERESU: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee.  What would make a civil matter get prejudiced and not a criminal matter?  I would like to be clarified; you are saying that in your amendment, any civil matter that is before court.  What makes the difference in giving prejudice by investigations between the two cases of a civil matter and a criminal matter which is before court in respect to investigations as your amendment is trying to differentiate?

MR. MWESIGYE ADOLF:  In our justification we have said that in practice, investigations continue even when a criminal case has opened in court.  In other words, you cannot stop investigations, because a case has started, the trial has begun.  But in a civil matter, if a matter has gone to court before the IGG has started investigations, it is prejudicial to the court, if the IGG on parallel terms starts investigating a matter which is already in court.  But, if a civil matter has not been referred to court, the IGG can start investigations,  and even if that matter went to court, provided that the IGG started investigations before, he can proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 19, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 20, agreed to)

(Clause 21, agreed to)

(Clause 22, agreed to)

(Clause 23, agreed to)

Clause 24

MRS. MATEMBE: Clause 24 is just also a matter of correcting a word.  It should read, “A complaint or allegation under this Act may be made by an individual or anybody or persons.” It should be “any” then “body.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, according to the report by the Chairman of the Committee, he has not indicated with respect to clause 22, it is supposed to be deleted and we have just passed it.  

MRS.MWESIGE: I am sorry, I should have informed you.  But the Committee, after discussing with the Minister, abandoned that amendment and that is why I did not rise to proceed with it. 

In sub-clause (4), Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the word “absolute” in line five be deleted.  The justification is that it is redundant.  It serves no purpose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 24, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 25 ,agreed to)

(Clause 26 ,agreed to)

(Clause 27, agreed to)

(Clause 28, agreed to)

(Clause 29 agreed to)

(Clause 30, agreed to)

(Clause 31, agreed to)

Clause 32

MR.MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the marginal note in clause 32 be re-written as follows; instead of “resources of the Inspectorate,” it should be called “signification of acts of the Inspectorate.” The justification is that this is a printing error because the clause has nothing to do with the resources of the Inspectorate.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 32 as amended stands part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 33

MR.MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the marginal note in clause 33 be re-written.  Instead of “Signification of acts of the Inspectorate” to read “Seal of the Inspectorate.” The justification is that this is a printing error. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 33, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 34

MR.MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause (1) should read as follows; “A person who provides information to the Inspectorate shall be protected and his or her identity shall not be disclosed and may be rewarded for his or her information and paid an amount of five per cent of the money recovered consequent upon his or her information to the Inspectorate, and where the information is provided by two or more persons, the reward will be shared among the said persons.” Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

The justification for this, Mr. Chairman, the Committee thought that the reward of ten per cent is on the high side and that we need to be more specific on the reward of informers; and that where money is recovered and informers leading to its recovery are many, those people should share the five per cent.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, I am worried.  The very cure of corruption is also being implied into this amendment by this clause.  I have two questions to be clarified on by the Chairman of the Committee:
This clause states that if information is given leading to the recovery of money, a reward is given.  What about in the event of information being given and the person is convicted?  In other words, in the place of recovering the money, he has been pushed to the ‘University of understanding’ in Luzira.  How will he get the five per cent?
 
What signal are we sending?  I think, instead of putting the five per cent of the money we could stop at the word “reward” so that it can be anything.  It can be a medal, it can be a ‘thank you,’ it can be a vehicle, it can be money, it can be a recognition or even a job.  Why do we restrict it to money?  Because if we put in the money aspect, supposing the money is about one billion shillings, what is five per cent of one billion shillings, which is public money going to be spent around because we are rewarding people?  

How are we going to be sure that by having this clause included, we are not going to have people playing intrigue and also blackmailing others in order to get this reward?  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there has been a policy started by the Sixth Parliament.  We have laws in place where we introduced this new policy of encouraging people to give information that would lead to arrests.  I think this is in respect of customs or income tax, something like that.  We passed it, and that is the law now.  That law is still standing and I think this is in line with the laws that were passed.  I do not remember the Act itself.  It is the Customs Act;  it is there.

MRS.MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank you for that guidance and help.  Mr. Chairman, you see us here crying out for losing Government money, and I think we would all like to have it back, but there are many people in offices who might know what is going on.  But you know they are so scared.  They may lose their jobs; and they may lose their lives.  There are many things that they may lose.  Now, for them to come out and say, ‘let me help this Government’, what is it that we should do to motivate them to do that so that they can say, ‘well, although I may lose my job, I will have helped my Government and after helping it, it is also helping me here.’

It is very important that we cannot fight corruption without facilitating the informers. Other countries, which have sufficient funds and sufficient machinery, even have independent offices for protection, motivation and promotion of official informers. But because here we do not have such funds, we are just saying, let us put something. In fact, we had asked for ten percent, and the Cabinet had approved ten percent, but we discussed with my colleagues here and we came down to five percent, which is still very small, but we settled for that. I would like people who would even say, ‘let it even be better’, rather than saying we remove it.  

On the other issue, when you are saying that five percent of billions of dollars is too much, you would have lost those billions anyway! The fact that you have been able to get them, at least parting with a small percentage should be enough.  

The other worry was about the man being in prison. In case there is misappropriation of funds or embezzlement of funds, the courts make orders, and one of these orders may be to return that money and also go to prison. I want to tell you that the former Attorney General did not only go to prison, but he was also ordered to pay back. Even the Permanent Secretary, who was eventually imprisoned and pardoned, was ordered to pay back. And quite a number of people whom we prosecute successfully are ordered to pay that money. 

We are saying that when he is ordered to pay, let that percentage of the money go to this person. It will motivate other people to report. When you report maliciously and we investigate and find out that there was nothing, then you cannot get the money, because it will not even be recovered, because we shall not prosecute. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we really vote? I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 34, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 35, agreed to)

(Clause 36, agreed to)

(Clause 37, agreed to)

(Clause 38, agreed to)

(Clause 39, agreed to)

Clause 40

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause (2) of clause 40 be amended as follows: The words “with the office of Inspector-General” be substituted with the words, “in the Inspectorate of Government.”  

The purpose of this amendment is to make the Act consistent with the wording of the Constitution, and more specifically Article 223 of the Constitution.  

I also beg to move that sub-clause (4) be deleted because it contradicts sub-clause (2), which saves the offices of the Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General. And also, it would mean that the IGG and Deputy would have to swear twice in one term of office, which is unnecessary, in view of sub-clause (2).  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 40, as amended, agreed to)

(The First Schedule, agreed to)

(The Second Schedule, agreed to)

(The Third Schedule, agreed to)

(The Title, agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. Miria Matembe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. Miria Matembe): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001” and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. Miria Matembe): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. Miria Matembe): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2001” be read for the third time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed. Hon. Members, thank you for persisting and sitting for long hours so that we have been able to pass this Bill. I never expected it to be passed today, so thank you very much for your patience. Now that there is five percent, then I think you will help the Inspectorate of Government to catch those taking our money. 

Do you think we can push in more work? We have a motion on a resolution for a loan for roads. Our roads are not good, but if you are tired then –(Interruption)

MR. NASASIRA: Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to ask you and the House to sustain this patience that you have had this afternoon so that we can meet the deadlines of our development partners on this loan. It is a very small resolution by the Ministry of Finance. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 50.9 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR FINANCING PHASE II OF THE ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

THE MINISTER OF STATE (GENERAL DUTIES) MR. MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be passed to authorize Government to borrow special drawing rights, 50.9 million from the International Development Association (IDA) for financing phase II of the Road Development Programme.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded?  It is seconded.

MR.RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the resolution be in these terms:  

Whereas a credit agreement for a special drawing rights 50.9 is to be concluded between the International Development Association, and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of Financing the Phase II of the Road Development program; and 

Whereas under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other Constitutional provisions; and 

Whereas under Article 159 (2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament; and 

Whereas in line with the above stated Constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorization. 

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorized to secure the said credit from the International Development Association of the World Bank upon the terms and conditions therein stated.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Any position from the Committee?

MR.NANDALA MAFABI (Chairman Committee on National Economy): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, this is the report of the Economy Committee on Phase II of the Road Development Programme. In summary- (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Is it the conclusion?

MR. NANDALA MAFABI: The report needs a summary. I must tell you that the report is going to be read in summary, so be patient and see what it contains.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, a request was presented by the Minister of Finance to the Committee of Economy, as provided under Article 159 of the Constitution and Rule 182 of the Rules of Procedure.  And now the Committee wishes to report according to Rule 90(60) of the same Rules of procedure.

Background:
All of you are aware that Government has embarked on a 10-year program, which started in 1996 to 2006, which was approved by Parliament for the Road sector. The phase II will be implemented over a period of 5 years, starting from 2002 to 2006, and the overall aim is to reduce poverty and to make the country access the economic parts.  

The Committee was informed that Phase I of the programme is nearly completed and the work is going on as scheduled.  This includes the following roads: Busuuju to Hoima - 145 kilometers, Pakwach to Arua - 130 kilometers, and the studies on the sector.  

Method of Work:
The Committee met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But can’t you really summarize, because, in the method of work, you just tell us what happened.

MR.NANDALA MAFABI: In summary, the Committee is requesting you to approve a loan of 50.9 million -(Laughter).

MR.MUKAMA (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion to have this loan secured in the improvement of our road sector.  Definitely, the road development programme is very vital for us in the Nation, and we should give it its due consideration, so that we can forge ahead with our economic development.  One thing I want to bring to your attention, according to the report from the Committee, is on the last page and the first bullet, whereby the Committee recommends that we should have local companies considered to do some work, so that we can bear the capacity, and also it recommends that the local firms should have joint ventures so that they can also be exposed to the construction works. This is where I want to bring a strong recommendation to the Ministry, and probably at an appropriate time we have to come out very seriously and require that some of these contracts or works that are contracted on public funds, and for which the nationals have to pay back, especially where we get loans, that also our people do benefit.  

There are some countries whereby it is mandatory that construction work - the requirements of gaining a contract to build a road, they will say, ‘you should have your turnover of so many million dollars’, which our local people do not have.  So we need at a later stage to require that, in contracts, we specify a certain percentage of the monies to be allocated to our local firms so that within that, the local firms can work together with those International firms, because you already know who is going to take this one, so that these ones can work with our local firms to build some capacity. 
 
So in this one, I want to appeal to the Minister of Works and the Minister of Finance, both in their respective categories, that when they are developing the contracts, a certain percentage, at least minimum 10 percent of these borrowed monies, should be allocated to our local contractors, so that they can benefit in the development of the capacity building.  But for now, let us approve this with that understanding, and I will come back with a proper proposal, so that I request the Parliament to make it mandatory for any works - not only in roads, but also construction buildings, so that our locals should be targeted to get capacity in construction work.  Thank you.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi county, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to support the motion, but I wish to get a few clarifications.  

One of the justifications for this loan is to boost the tourism sector, and I agree with the Committee. At a later date, I also wish the Ministry would come up with a request in line with boosting tourism. I think I have mentioned it earlier, that if tourists go to Queen Elizabeth Park and they enjoy themselves, it is imperative that they cross to Murchison Falls. That means the road between Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls, the Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba road, should naturally be tarmacked. With that, you will boost tourism in this country. I hope that the Minister, at a later time, comes with a request for a loan to tarmac that road.

I wish the Minister could give us clarification. When is the road to be handed over to a contractor, who is responsible, to make sure that that road remains passable?  I am bringing this concern because I sometimes travel along Busunju-Hoima road, which is supposed to be tarmacked soon, however, the road is almost impassable. After you have gone along that road, you will take some drugs, if you are going towards Hoima. Who is supposed to make sure that the road remains passable? And this could be affecting other roads like the Arua roads and other roads, which may be under construction. I wish to get clarification. I thank you.

MS.ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for this report, and I would like to support this motion.  

We are all aware about the major problems we have in our country. One of the major problems is poverty, and we are aware that this is mostly caused by poor communications, and those are the roads. I would like to support this motion. We are sure that if the money is got, the roads will be worked on, and the problem of poverty would probably have been dealt with.

I would like to strongly concur with the Committee’s recommendation, where they talked about the corruption of the people who are concerned with the supervision of these roads. If they do not supervise properly and poor quality work is done, then they should be dealt with. I take an example of Kampala-Gayaza road, which is under construction now,  –(Interruption)

MRS.HYUHA: Thank you very much my colleague from Wakiso.  I just want to inform you that we have just passed the law of the Inspector-General, so this one will be looked after.

MRS. SENINDE: Thank you very much for that information. I would like to support this motion because I am sure that most of these problems will be dealt with, especially the problem of poverty.  Thank you very much.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I want to move a motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the motion by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again, I really thank you for the sacrifice you have made today in disposing of the business we had. We had the Amnesty Bill, you listened to a personal statement, then we had the Inspector-General of Government Bill, and then this loan request. I thank you, sincerely. 

This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m., when we shall consider the remaining business.

(The House rose at 6.42 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 13th December, 2001 at 2.00 p.m)

