
 
Thursday, 28 December 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: The Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Social Services on the Children’s Bill, 1995.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman and hon. Members of this august House, I beg to present a report of the NRC Joint Committee on Legal and Security on Social Services on the children’s bill.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members of this august House would recall that the second Reading of the Children’s bill, 1995 was done by Her Excellency the Vice President of Uganda and Minister of Gender and Community Development on the 18th October, 1995. A number of hon. Members contributed on the debate that ensued. The majority of the Members who contributed were in full support of the bill, but expressed concern about the legal drafting of the bill.  Many of the Clauses in the bill were non- justifiable, and others had been overtaken by the provision of the new Constitution of Uganda, 1995.  

On the 19th day of October, 1995, the Minister of State for Gender and Community Development hon. Baguma Isoke was asked to wind up the debate, and in his remarks he agreed with the hon. Members’ views that the bill be referred to select committee of the House for cleaning up.  The Motion was moved and unanimously supported that a children’s bill be referred to a select committee of the joint committee of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security and the Sectoral Committee on Social Services.  The joint committee under the chairmanship of the Sectoral Services first met to commence work on Wednesday, 15 November 1995. The Minister of State for Gender and community Development hon. Baguma Isoke, a team from the first Parliamentary council and Member of the legal and security and social services committee were present, and thereafter attended various deliberations of this joint committee.  

Mr Chairman, you will recall that some amendments to the bill had been circulated notably from Prof. Kanyeihamba, hon. Mwandha, hon. John Kawanga and the hon. Minister for Gender himself among others. In its deliberations the committee considered these proposed amendments. The committee also considered the various views expressed by hon. Members in the course of their general debate and of course the general debate on the bill.  Mr Chairman, you will recall that during the debate Members were in agreement with the principle of the bill but were generally not happy with the way it had been drafted. The committee, therefore, proceeds to study the policy consideration behind the bill.  All the documents were presented by the officials and a cross study of the bill was done.  The report of the child law review committee guided the Members in their deliberations.  The joint committee also invited Mr Charles Tuhaise of the Uganda Foster Care and Adoption Society who addressed them on the subject of adoption of children, Uganda experienced for the last 50 years.  The Committee was also addressed by Mrs Lebecca Kiviri Mayengo a child psychologist from Makerere University. After a major surgery on the bill a fresh bill has been printed and has been circulated to Members. Some Clauses of the old bill have been deleted and new ones added to the bill. Also some Clauses have been reconstructed to give it a legal outlook. 

Mr Chairman, let me now attempt to point out some areas, which the Committee has considered and proposed amendments.  Clause 1 and 2 of the old bill have been retained.  Clause 2, the interpretation of the bill has been expanded to include terms like guardian which had not been defined in the old bill. All definitions which were in the main body of the bill have been put in Clause 2. Clause 4 now appears under a new first schedule, while Clause 5 has been completely deleted because it is covered under the new Uganda constitution. The committee re-arranged and re-drafted Clause 6 to 8 to cover the welfare principle set out in the first schedule.  The new Clause 6 to 8  spell out children’s rights and parental responsibility for the welfare of the child.  Clause 9 to 11 form part 3 of the bill, and deals with support for children by local authorities.  The new Clause 9 provides that local council shall designate one of its members to be the person responsible for the welfare of the children.  

Mr Chairman, here we say the local council will designate one person, this is now a departure from the present law of the RCs whereby the vice chairman is supposed to be responsible for children’s affairs. The committee discovered that may be the vice chairman may not be necessarily interested. So, the committee has now been given a freedom to designate on of the officials to be responsible for children on its committee. Clause 5 spells out the state responsibility towards the disabled children, and Clause 12 to 17 deals with family and children’s courts to be established in all districts.  In this law, the family and children’s court is the only authorised court to sentence the children who might have committed criminal offenses.  The Magistrate’s court and a High court shall continue with the trial of a child if jointly charged with an adult on the criminal offence.  But the sentencing shall be made by the family and children’s court. 

Mr Chairman, Members discussed the issue of adoption and agreed that a person who is not a citizen of Uganda may in exceptional circumstances adopt a Ugandan child if he or she meets the conditions laid down in Clause 45 (1) of the new printed bill.  It was also agreed that the Judicature Act Section 9 be repealed to stop those people who have been taking Ugandan children under guardianship order.  Another area where the committee reached agreement was to do with maintenance of children during divorce, separation and nullity of marriage. Clause 83 provides that, in all cases of divorce, separation or nullity both parents shall continue to maintain and educate a child up to 18 years. 

During the debate Members made reference to the age of criminal responsibility. The minimum age in the old bill was proposed to be 14 years. After considering all the views expressed by Members and technical staff, the age of 14 was consequently dropped to 12 year, and 12 years was agreed upon as the minimum age of criminal responsibility. The new Clause 88 (3) provides that as soon as possible after arrest the child’s parents or guardians and secretary for children affairs in the local council of the area in which the child resides shall be informed of the arrest by the police.  This is meant not to get a child but to keep in contact with his or her relatives.  The new Clause 89 seeks to provide that no child shall be remanded in custody in adult prison.  Clause 95 provides for the establishment of a National Rehabilitation Centre for children and such other centres as the Minister may deem necessary.  It further provided that the Minister shall appoint fit and proper persons to periodically, visit the education centres. Mr Chairman, I must re-emphasise that where a child is jointly charged with a person of 18 years of age in the High court on a serious criminal offence, the child shall be remited to the family and children’s court for an appropriate order to be made if the offence is proved against the child.  
In Clause 103 decriminalisation of certain offenses in relation to children has been made hence in paragraph (b) sub-section 1 of Clause 162 and Clause 163 of Penal code shall cease to apply to children.  These are offenses like idle and disorderly when they find a child roaming in town would be arrested and tried on criminal offence or vagabond. As far as children are concerned, no child will be arrested and be charged of being idle and disorderly or being a vagabond.  Clause 106 provides for penalty.  It spells out that a person who contravenes any of the provisions of this statute commits an offence and may on conviction by liable to a fine not exceeding UShs 100,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 6 months or both.  

Mr Chairman, if I may emphasise, if anybody contravenes any of the clauses for example, if anybody mistreats a child, the penalty is one, if you are not a responsible parent the penalty is one.  So, the committee did not set various penalties for various offenses.  The penalty in this law is one if anybody violets the rights of the child. The bill further provides that the child’s rights to privacy shall be respected throughout the court proceedings in order to avoid harm being caused to him by undue publicity and no person shall in respect of a child charged before a family and children’s court, publish any information that may lead to the identification of a child except with the permission of the court. Any person who contravenes this section- sub-section 1 of this section and publishes a name or address of the child, the name or address of the child, the name or address of any school which the child has been attending, any photograph or other matters likely to lead to identification of the child commits an offence and is on conviction liable to a fine not exceeding UShs 500,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 6 months or both.  

Finally, Mr Chairman I would like to thank you and hon. Members of this House for the support you have given to this very important bill.  I would also like to particularly thank the Members of the Joint Select Committee for their time and advice to come out with this improved bill.  I also thank the Minister of state for Gender and community Development, hon. Baguma Isoke, his technical staff, and the staff of the first Parliamentary council for the  assistance and cooperation extended to the joint select committee.  Last but not least, Mr Charles Tuhaise of the Uganda Foster Care and Adoption Society and Mrs Rebecca Kiviri Mayengo for their professional expertise  extend to the Joint Select Committee.

Mr Chairman, it is now my pleasure to lay the report of the Joint Select Committee on the table for this House to consider and adopt.  Thank you much.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY VICE-CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the debate is now open to the Floor in case some of you would like to contribute towards the presentation of the report.  Otherwise, I will put the question.

DR MAGEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Having listened attentively to the report from the committee which so thorough and has done a commendable job, I thought it a duty to thank the committee and also to see it to convince Members of this august House that we adopt the report from the committee.  I beg to move. (Applause)

MRELYAU: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mine is very simple.  I wanted to find a difference of these fines in page 4; say UShs 100,000 or imprisonment of 6 months.  This is a young child normally such children may not be having their parents.  How can this child raise this amount of this money?  I wanted to find that clarification.  In case of that one who does not have close relatives, in case he makes or she commits an offence. What do you do?  Because if that child fails to pay a fine of UShs 100,000 what do you do with this Ugandan? I want clarification on that.  Lastly, why do we charge somebody who publishes the name of the child and school UShs 500,000 What kind of fear is there, I want to be told so that I am aware. Thank you very much.

MR ONGOM: I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee that redrafted the bill.  But Mr Chairman, I have a problem with agreeing to adopt a bill immediately because we, as we walked in the House this afternoon we were given the newly drafted bill; and is a fairly detailed and voluminous bill and if we have to adopt it without reading through it at all, Mr Chairman; I do not know whether it is fair to Members.  We have just been given this today-the redrafted bill, and if new things have been introduced and re-arrangements made, certain punishments and penalties have been introduced, I think it is only fair to give Members even just one day to read through so that we approve what we know, Mr Chairman.  I know there are Members who are saying a- a- a- but it is important. It is important that we approve what we know at least, so that we know what we are approving Mr Chairman.  I would request that we give at least some time for Members to read.  May be just one day so that we know what we approving, Mr Chairman. Thank you.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to thank the chairman of this committee and the Minister who prepared the bill. The bill is clear and simple to understand -(Laughter)- thank you for the laugh. But I also want to say that unlike the hon. Member who just been on the Floor, this report is so short, shorter than most of the reports we have been receiving, and very clear, and I think as the chairman read through all of us understood it and I really would say that, we will a lot of good service to the country if we adopt this report today.  But I would like to point out on page 3 where it says in the middle, where it says that the new Clause 88 little 3 provides that as soon as possible after arrest the child’s parents or guardians and the secretary for children affairs and local council of the area in which the child resides shall be informed of the arrest by the police.  

Mr Chairman, there is a provision in the constitution that anybody arrested, the next of keen or those who are interested should be informed within 48 hours. This is a provision of the constitution.  So in actual fact if you want to amend this particular passage you need only to refer to the constitution within 48 hours these people must be informed. Otherwise, Mr Chairman, for me, and I am sure and very many other people here, I would propose and agree with the mover that we adopt this report.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, if we pass this report and bill today, history would be repeating itself. The only time that this has happened, and I do not know if hon. Members here present apart from myself are aware of it,-I mean have participated, was in 1966 when Members of the House passed a constitution which they were told they will find in their  pigeon holes. i.e. without first reading it.  

Speaking as a Lawyer, and as a former principle legal advisor to the government of this country, there is no way I can pass a document this size, without first reading it. Digesting it. Because, with reason we referred back this thing to the committee was, we were dissatisfied with the drafting as it then were.  Now, we want to read it and certify ourselves and assure ourselves that what has been produced does indeed conform with what we conceive a children’s bill or Act should look like. We have already taken time and money and there is no harm that can be done but only good and will be seen to be serious to our duties if the House was given at least a week. I will not say one day -(Interruption)

AN HON MEMBER: Point of order. Mr Chairman is it in order for the hon. Member to raise issues about the bill when he is a member of the legal and security affairs committee in which committee he should have participated fully when this report was being scrutinised.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is entitled to make comments after the submission of the chairman. (Applause)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, that is my important submission.  But I would like also to give information to the House.  I think one hon. Member who spoke before me, made a slight confusion about the constitutional provision. If I am right before I remember right, there are two situations about informing.  When a person is arrested for an ordinary crime by the police he must be taken before the courts within 48 days of his arrest; and then the court must order his bail or his remand.  If a person is detained in under what is popularly known as preventive detention legislation i.e. if a person is detained not without an allegation that he has committed a criminal offence, then I think that is questioned where his family should be informed.  Because then, he is not taken before the ordinary courts.  What used to happen was that, the person would be detained and nobody would know.  That is where the requirement to inform the family and to publish in the gazette.  But coming back to the provision of this bill, I do not see, that then we can really pass it honourably and honestly without first reading it to ascertain leave only to ascertain , to compare it with the original and see that, it has been improved in the manner directed by this House.

DR MAGEZI: Point of procedure. Mr Chairman, there is a laid down procedure in our interim rules regarding views which are referred to committees and a report presented to this august House.  Is there any reason, once we adopt the report then we just skip the rest of going on in the details of the bill.  This is what the interim rules say. (Interjections) 

I stand for correction, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of clarification. Thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, while I wish to agree with hon. Magezi, normally when a report comes here, the bill comes well ahead of time so that we are able to reconcile the two.  But now the bill came today as soon as we entered in, and, therefore, it becomes very difficult.  For instance, Mr Chairman, why I seek clarification in this report, if you look at the report (i) page 3, for instance the report says that the two parents will continue to maintain the child up to 18 years.  If you look at 83 in this bill the word 18 years does not exist.  So it looks a small thing but it is a contribution. 

Mr Chairman, if you look at this report (L), the new Clause 88 (3), what is said here in the report is not what is in the bill. 88 (3) does not exist in the bill.  If you look at Clause 95 it does not tally with what is in the bill.  I think if we can be clarified as to why these are not tarrying, the report and the bill, then of course we need to reconcile the two bills and see where these things are not tarrying.  Otherwise we may pass a report which does not agree with the bill;and we are not passing the same law.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I do assume that this House has got in its legislative functions some rituals i.e. the bill is read for the first time, it goes for the second reading, it goes through the committee and finally is given for subsequent assent.  Mr Chairman, I do not recorrect, and I am subject to correction.  Whether we exhausted the process of the committee stage?

HON. MEMBERS: We did not.  We did not. 

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Secondly, Mr Chairman, I think there is a provision in our rules whenever amendments which have been proposed by contributions of Members are so substantial that they give effect to an entirely new bill, the process ought to be repeated.  I am subject to recorrection. Now however, and trusting in the work of our committees, I would go as far as adopting the report after a few further comments.  But I think we must go through the process of the committee stage so that we can endorse.  Because actually the committee stage is what produces subsequently the law. We cannot just give a general blanket approval as if we agree even in grammar and commas and full stops.  Because those take place in the committee state.  

So, I think it would be fair on both sides for this House to make a few comments and allow the Minister to rewind up, then the process that usually follows from then i.e. we go to committee stage, we go word by word, paragraph, Clause by Clause and so on and finish at disposal of this. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that we are suffering because of the procedure of this House. It is true I do not remember that we ever went through the committee stage of this bill.  But the problem is that, when a bill is recommitted to a select committee what follows is that, a report once it is adopted we go straight to the Third Reading.  Now the problem rises -(Interjections)- this is what is here.  It reads like this, in 63 immediately a committee of the whole House or council was recalled to the council, the council may proceed on Third Reading of any bill reported.  When a select committee has agreed that a bill shall be reported to the Council, the Chairman shall lay the report of the committee on the table at a time provided in rule No.10.  But now what he is telling us will depend on the chairman using rule 65 that provided that the chairman in his absolute discretion if the amendment or amendments proposed are such a number or nature that he considers such a course to be necessary or desirable may require the whole bill to be considered as provided in the previous paragraph which have been read.  So, there is - it is now up to the chairman to see the mood of the House and decide whether we go to the normal procedure.  But I think the main criteria of the matter is that, this bill and the report were only received today, and I think in the report there is where they talk about Clause 88 (3) and yet it is not in the bill.  So I think to help the House, the Chairman should consider seeing to it that we commit the bill in the procedure as in 65, which I think we, can - it is quite long, I may read it out or, - otherwise it was a point of information.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Technically speaking,-(Interjections)-Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify that we would be making mockery of ourselves as Members of Parliament or legislature, in the sense that, the bill itself is dated 22nd December, 1995.  It is not yet a week, strictly speaking it is a new bill since we committed it to the committee and it has come before this House; and therefore, we would be doing exactly what hon. Abu Mayanja was saying, of the 1966 constitution if we just go and just pass this bill.  Mr Chairman, if you come to even the report itself, it says, page 5, it is written there, December 1995.  It could have been the 1st of December, it could have been the 28th of December, so the whole thing does not make sense and since the bill was given to us just this afternoon, my conscious is not clear that we should debate this bill until we go into the report and give it enough time.  Technically and strictly speaking it should have been two weeks.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAHERU: Mr Chairman, both the report from the sectoral committee and the new draft bill, were found by Members in their pigeonholes today.  We never knew about their existence yesterday by the time we went home, and really there was no opportunity of reading the bill.  We have not carefully examined what was deleted in the old bill, nor have we scrutinised what has been added in the new bill.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would suggest although regrettably, we have met here at great expense of the state, I see no alternative, Mr Chairman, if we do not want to ridicule ourselves, I do not see any alternative to adjourning so that Members could really scrutinise the law before them so that by the time we reconvene, Members are in a position to debate this law intelligently, and proposing amendments or approving the law in full understanding.  Thank you. (Applause)

MR SIBO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, if I remember well this bill passed Second Reading; and once the question has been put for Second Reading and the Second Reading takes place, we do not debate the bill anymore.  That is a stage for a committee stage.

At that moment, after Second Reading the Committee - the bill was referred to the select committee, and a bill can be to the select committee at any stage, and it was at that stage that this bill was referred to the select committee.  Is it therefore in order that we should be debating this bill a second time? When the second reading passed.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the position is like this,to be fair to the hon. Members of this House, a little time should be given for them to go over a new bill. (Applause) And in this respect, we shall adjourn the House until Tuesday next week starting at 2.30 p.m. (Applause)

(The Council rose at 3.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 January 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)
