Tuesday, 20 December 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING ((Mr Kisamba Mugerwa) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, The Capital Markets Authority Bill, 1995 be read for the First Time.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Muyingo Kezimbira): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Allow me first of all before I read the Ministerial Statement to express my gratitude to the Chairman and the Members of this august House for the many congratulatory messages and handshakes that I have received ever since I was appointed minister. (Applause) These messages, have not known any political shade, any religious inclination or tribal boundary.  This is a fundamental change in our politics. 

Also, allow me to congratulate my fellow colleagues who have been appointed ministers or re-appointed in other ministerial positions.  I also wish to thank all those, although retired, have served mother Uganda diligently.  Sir, I also congratulate the hon. Kintu Musoke who has been promoted to the level of Prime Minister of this nation Uganda. 

Lastly, although not least, may I also congratulate Her Excellency, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe to having been raised to the position of Vice President.  This, Sir, is an indication that Uganda holds women high in office and, therefore, the President of Uganda has had a big role to play in the liberation of women in Africa. 

Turning to the ministerial statement, I wish to inform the Chair and the hon. Members here that we have an outbreak of migratory pests in the Northern part of Uganda and these are grasshoppers commonly known in the local dialects as nseenene or osene or sene in some of other dialects in the North; The district of Gulu, Kitgum, Arua, Moyo, for the last four weeks have been affected by these grasshoppers which seem to curve these areas and do not leave as we normal have been observing grasshoppers.  Damage has not been reported in Lira, Apac, or Nebi; in Gulu the counties of Aswa, Kilaka and Moyo, about 20 per cent of the sorghum and finger millet have been damaged, and the damage is normally at the grain filling stage when the grains are still soft.  In Kitgum the sub-counties of Namokola, Arom, Parabek, Atang Labong have also been affected.  In Kitgum the grasshoppers are also eating up simsim and sunflower seeds.  In Arua the areas affected are Terego, which includes areas of Adupi and Birege.  In Vura county, Agia and Arivu are affected, and Madi County is also affected.  In Moyo East, area, including Atabi, Okusigoni and Kureka are affected, and here the areas were badly hit.  Sorghum and finger millet are the staple food-crops in these areas; the second rains which are on now normally produce the crop that carries farmers from January up to June when the second rains come.  So, this is the main harvest, and it is feared that at family level some pockets of food shortages may occur.  

Although we are currently having a general bumper harvest of May, there is need to hold enough food stock at family level since the demand for May from neighbouring countries may continue to rise and much of our grain could be bought leaving little into the country.  My Ministry is encouraging farmers in the affected areas to scare off the grasshoppers and expose them to predators mainly man and birds.  We are hesitant to advocate for the use of pesticides, in fact we have decided not to simply because the birds are not killed instantly by the insecticide and they could be able to move from one are to another and then be consumed by human and animal population.  My Ministry is encouraging farmers in affected areas to grow more sweet potatoes, especially, in areas where we have most valleys so that this can offset the possible food shortage.  I appeal to you Members of this House to mobilise people in the affected areas, especially our Christmas holidays that eventually, they keep more food and also grow more potatoes.  

We also have a threat from locusts; Uganda is threatened by red locusts which may come from the South or desert locusts which may come from the North.  This year the whether condition in all the traditional locusts breeding areas, in Tanzania, Zambia, and Sudan have had favourable conditions and the breeding has been high.  

So, the change of direction of wind could lead Uganda to be invaded by locusts.  My Ministry is in constant contact with the International Red Locusts Control Organisation for Central and Southern Africa and Desert Locusts Control Organisation for Eastern Africa who continually monitor the breeding and movement of locusts. We continue to request all people of Uganda to report appearances of suspicious grasshoppers to our field staff for identification.  In case the field staff are not certain samples should be submitted to the Ministry headquarters where they accurately be identified.  

I should like to appeal to the hon. Members to mobilise people to keep food reserves and grow other foods which are possible during the rest rainy seasons.  Member of this House will also assist the Ministry by reporting any strange suspicious grasshoppers that may be seen within their locality.  

The Ministry also appeals to Members of this House that during the course of recess they should sample out and see shortages of food either due to insect damage or due to floods and slides so that these can be reported to the Ministry and urgent measures are taken.  The Ministry is in the process of working out and fulfill recommendations which were recommended at the meeting of ministers in Indonesia about food security, and would like Uganda to develop and maintain a food security programme.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I just want to thank the hon. Minister for his good statement.  I am just asking him to clarify the position of the armyworm.  The armyworm was a terrible menace last year, and it seems there are signs of this armyworm in Nakasongola, Buruli, Kigumba areas.  We fear that if there is an outbreak again, this may be a catastrophe for us in terms of food production.  Because the armyworm eats all grasses, leaves and everything, leaving nothing behind.  Thank you.

MR MUYINGO KEZIMBIRA: Mr Chairman, information in the Ministry indicate that the Ministry is well equipped now to handle the armyworm wherever it will appear; pesticides are well stocked and also we have the pumps ready to spray against the armyworm when we have an outbreak.

MR PINTO (Kakuuto County): Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to welcome you back from Casablanca. At the same time in appreciating the message - the timely message from the minister which is a sign of good management that we can get early warning messages and early warning systems; I would like to appreciate this from the Minister. (Applause) 

It is well known that as a result of the circumstances in Rwanda, a lot of cattle have left Uganda for that area.  I know that from my area a lot of cattle have gone. I fear that, maybe not too distant in the future. We may have to import meat or other methods must be devised for us to have security. Could the Minister advise us in this direction?

MR MIYINGO KEZIMBIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  We are aware of the drain of cattle to our sister state in Rwanda, and just this morning, I have been in Mbarara opening up a meeting which is involving a delegation from Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda to discuss the effect of movement of these cattle in relation to animal health.  We feared that since a lot of cattle were being moved to Rwanda, there could be a possibility of Rwanda filling up with cattle as far as grazing area is concerned and have an overflow back into Uganda and probably into Tanzania, and therefore, we have moved to try and put in place measures the are going to ensure that should animals have to come back into Uganda or go into Tanzania from Rwanda, they would conform to the regulations that the veterinary ethics require.  

So, these measures right now are being discussed. I bring this up because it is possible to have an adverse effect on our population if diseases move from country to country because of lack of measures at the borders.  This is a first move to try to see that although we have remained with a small number of cattle to produce meat for us, we have put in place measures which will prevent these from being infected by diseases that could originate from our neighbouring state.  

Further on to that I would like to also inform this House through you, Mr Chairman, that in my ministry and in particular myself - about to launch a drive whereby we want to appeal to the entire population to take up the rearing of small ruminants, the goat, sheep and rabbits so that through these which are short generation animals, we can be able to cater for the shortage of meet which has been brought by the shortage of cattle.  You will bee aware the cattle take a long time to reach maturing in order to give us meat.  So, if we could turn direction and concentrate on sheep, goats, rabbits and pigs, then we could be able to bridge the gap.  We could be able to bridge the gap that is feared could occur in the protein supply.

POLICY STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, permit me to make a Policy Statement on the Entandikwa Scheme which is a small entrepreneurship fund. Hon. Members may be aware, during this Financial Year 1994/95 Government has made a provision in the development Budget of Shs.6 billion for the purpose of facilitating small entrepreneurs to undertake productive commercial ventures.  These resources have been turned into a scheme to be known as Entandikwa Scheme; the scheme is aiming at improving the socio-economic well-being of poor population both in rural and urban areas by promoting and strengthening the productive capacity of micro-enterprises saving for future investments and institutional building at grassroots.  

The Entandikwa Scheme is to target that section of the population that cannot obtain credit under the traditional commercial lending.  The potential beneficiaries of the Scheme include the urban poor, rural artisans, rural women and men, the disabled and the youths.  A Secretariat has been formed in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning to coordinate and monitor the operation of this scheme and to provide a link between the ministry and all programmes focusing on poverty alleviation.  

The Scheme is to be operated in all counties throughout the country; each district is to form a district steering committee which is to be answerable to the District Development Committee on matters relating to the scheme.  The District Steering Committee which is to be answerable to the District Development Committee will oversee, monitor and ensure smooth operation of the scheme.  At county, county Chief is to be formed.  The County Steering Committee will be responsible for the screening and approval of the projects to be funded under the scheme.  

The Committee will also monitor the disbursement, utilisation and recovery of the funds under the scheme.  Intermediary Agencies will be identified by the county service committees and verified by the district steering committees.  The Intermediary Agencies will be Non-governmental Organisations or institution akin to grass-roots lending, and will be responsible for initial screening and appraisal of the projects; advise beneficiaries on the projects and eventually receiving the funds for disbursements to the beneficiaries.  Intermediary Agencies will receive loan applications and be forwarded through RC.I RC.II and RC.III of the project area.  The Intermediary agencies in turn will present all applications with technical justification to the county steering committee.

The terms of the Entandikwa Scheme: loans under the scheme will attract a 12 per cent simple interest rate charged on declining basis.  Only viable project activities will be funded under the scheme; high value projects with short maturity will be given priority in short run. Loans may be extended into four categories, namely; one, loans up to 0.2 million would require recommendation from area RC.I, I and III; two, loans above 0.2 to 0.5 million would require recommendation from RC. I, II, and III plus two local guarantors; three, loan above 0.5 and up to 1.5 million would require all the conditions in two above and an arrangement between the beneficiary and the Intermediary Agency.  Four, approval of any loans exceeding 1.5 million will require the consent and the appraisal by the Entandikwa secretariat.  A grace period of a loan to be given will depend on the nature and gestation period of the enterprise or activity to be undertaken.  Loan will be given to both individuals and groups, although, groups will be given priority.

Disbursement Plan: the County steering Committee will identify a geographical location preferably a sub-county to serve as a pilot entry points for entry delivery.  Projects to be funded under the scheme will be identified by the beneficiaries appraised by the intermediary agencies before consideration and subsequent approval by the county steering committee for funding.  Projects exceeding 1.5 million as earlier mentioned will be reappraised by the secretariat before funding.  Funds will be disbursed direct from the Entandikwa Secretariat to the intermediary agencies identified by the county steering committees and recommended by the district service steering committee. Each intermediary agency participating in the scheme will operate an operational account at any nearest bank to the area of operation to receive seed money.  An appropriate agreement will be made between the intermediary agencies and Entandikwa secretariat for the implementation of the scheme.  Beneficiaries of the scheme will apply for loans through their RC.I, II, and III to the County Steering Committee which will consider the applications and approve loans, The County Steering Committee will ensure that, at least, 30 per cent of the funds located to the county is extended to women and the youths.  The district steering committees will advise Entandikwa secretariat on projects, activities approved for funding. The secretariat will thereafter disburse money to the intermediary agencies to onward disbursement to the beneficiaries.

The implementation plan aims at the third week on January 1995 for the Scheme to be fully operational.  The success of failure of the scheme will depend on how much mobilisation is done by the political leadership in the respective areas.  It is virtually important that the public is educated in the respective areas and on the productive enterprises that can raise incomes at household level in their respective areas and hence increase economic growth in the country. I specifically urge local organisation like Uganda Women Finance and Credit Trust, Ugandan Farmers’ Association, Saving and Credit Society and any other indigenous Non-Government organisations to take this opportunity to participate in the scheme, as this will strengthen their operations and capacities to deliver credit in their members.  

I have distributed the copies of this statement to all Members of NRC and the functions of the secretariat are shown page 4; then district steering committees, also the function are shown and the composition of the county steering committee stands as follows; County Chief, Chairman, RC.IV Chairman; member, County Development Officer, Members; Representative Women’s Council, Member; Unified Extension Worker, Member; Representative of the District Steering Committee, member; a representative of the Intermediary Agency,  member; County Cooperative Office; representative youth council and chairmen for RC.IIIs in the County.  Their function is also shown and the functions of the intermediary agency is also shown; and Annex I is what is the proposed implementation machinery for the Entandikwa. 

I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Minister of State, in charge of Entandikwa for the statement he has made to us.  But, I would like to ask him one simple thing; the paper has talked about many things, but has left out one major item, which is the recovery of these funds from the beneficiary.  What measures have been put in place to recover these funds? Because, this is the most important thing for funds of this nature.  So, I would like the minister to tell us if a person gets how is he going to pay back and if he fails what is he going to do.  That is what I want. 

DR LUYOMBYA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I congratulate the Minister of State for his attempt to put something down on paper; it seems what he is putting down is really complicated for simple people in the villages, and glancing at it quickly, it seems a year will elapse before this Entandikwa Scheme is put into effect; because the thing looks complicated.  

Secondly, there are so many people involved in the approval - there are also things are like per cent he is mentioning, and this is a big interest on these loans, unless he wants to say that there will be something charged for just handling, but really to put 12 per cent is a big interest, and very few people will take it; after all, this is tax payers money.  I would wish that rather than just glance at this thing quickly, we would be given time to study it and contribute to it meaningfully.  Thank you.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  This scheme being popular and, of course, going to every part of the country, I envisage that it is going to invite a number of questions from each on to understand, and Mr Chairman, I have already proposed to the Clerk National, to avail me tomorrow morning at 10.00 a.m. to enable a thorough discussion and of each implications behind the policy statement.  Because as the policy statement, it would not have been possible to put down everything which is being queried.  However -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman. I just wanted to inform the Minister that he may taking this paper lightly, but the responses we are getting from our constituencies are very serious, and we have been waiting for this paper for a long time, because we do not know what to say when we go to our constituencies as we are bothered too much by RCs. So, now that we have this paper, I propose that you leave us to take this paper home and discuss it with RCs, and then by resolution we debate it here in the House and pass it as a House resolution so that you can also have the stamp of us leaders - political leaders, because we have a problem.  For example, asking the County Chief, who no longer exists anyway, to be the chairman, is completely unacceptable in the constituencies.  The people want the chairman of RC.IV to chair those things; the composition of the membership, this should be discussed also by the people.  

So, give us time. This business of stampeding us into a meeting tomorrow, we are not ready and I think it is not going to work. I will appeal to you, since after all, you do not seem to have the cash, also to take time and study the Bangladesh case where they have a bank which has been handling this type of thing, and if you have not looked at the Bangladesh example, then you should look at other cases here which are already taking place in Jinja.  In Jinja there is a scheme, which is connected with a Bangladesh case where you could use this Entandikwa business to buy from there.  So, there is more time that is required than just calling us for the meeting tomorrow.  Please, do not do that.  Thank you.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: The information is taken but it is the very reason that it is important before the Members of NRC, go back to their respective areas; and it is the very reason that it is important that we take more time before the Members of NRC go back to give them information on each matter, because whatever is raised, I have the information, and we cannot exhaust each in time given on a policy statement in this nature.  That is why I am inviting hon. Members of NRC and anybody interested for the discussion tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to into more details about before you go to discuss so that you can discuss with, at least, fully knowing what is implied behind.  Now -(Interruption)

MR PINTO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much and I would like to thank the Minister for giving way.  Indeed the information I have for the Minister is that this scheme could be the turning point for the urban poor.  I find that to bring this policy statement ad hoc as it is here is not fair to us.  I would like to inform the Minister categorically that good ideas have been turned negative ideas in this country.  PAPSCA would have been a very good programme, it was done ad hoc, it failed; Northern Rehabilitation Programme is not performing because it is ad hoc! Here you have the majority of people’s representatives who are prepared to assist; instead I would have thought that the first thing would have been the brainstorming.  

I would not like to see this scheme fail; I would, therefore, like that this policy statement does not proceed to implementation until the committee of the economy is actively engaged and can give its contribution on this so that we can have viable projects.  As it is, I can see - although the Minister is laughing it off, but I can see that it is shooting off mark.  Therefore, my request it is should not go implementation, until as my Colleague has said, we are give thorough influence so that this money is used wisely and we achieve the turning point.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information, but he is anticipating that this thing has been written without any consultation.  The Committee on the economy has been fully involved for consultation, and a number of organisations who have experience in credit line have been consulted, and we are using intermediary agencies those in the area with the objective of empowering the grassroots level and indigenous.  We have a team that has visited Bangladesh; we have a library almost of all the books regarding the bank the hon. Members are talking about.  We have all the knowledge that you want to impart to the hon. Members so that they can fully cope with this scheme as it is. Now -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I know the Minister handling Entandikwa now has just left the ministry that does a lot of problems, that is the real problem; and he knows very well things went bad because things were being done havoc.  Is he, therefore, in order not to allow Members to debate this issue, so that he does not again go aims as from the Ministry where he came from? We need to discuss these things; is he, therefore, in order not to accept us to discuss this issue.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are not in order yourself; proceed, please.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, in the first place, I think, it would have been good duty for the hon. Member to substantiate which are the problems other than the problems for which the Ministry was created, which I left; because that office would have not been created if there were no problem.  But I do not think that its creation created more problems  

However, I am giving room to enable Members of NRC to have a free discussion so that you can go equipped with knowledge regarding this policy statement.  This is exactly which I am putting because it cannot be exhausted here! Interest rate one is saying is high, another one saying low, I have all the facts behind why the interest rate is what it is! Therefore, Mr Chairman, I beg the Member to accept that. (Interjection) 

Secondly, the Scheme was announced during the Budget Speech -(Interruption)

MR NYAKATURA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, an hon. Member raised a point of order, and before the Chairman made a ruling  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I made a ruling, first of all, he was not in order to raise it. (Laughter) Proceed, hon. Minister.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I can conclude by saying that this scheme needs a lot of education of our own people.  It is very excitement raised here which deserves discussing at every forum of this scheme if it is going to succeed.  Neither the government nor an individual personally would like to associate himself with its failure.  We want to ensure that this scheme meets its objectives to empower the grassroots people at their household level and also generate economic growth in the country. While the hon. Members have not digested this in this statement, it is true it is impossible to get all the facts in this statement.  I therefore, beg that you attend tomorrow’s discussion, at Parliamentary buildings South Committee room at 10.00 a.m. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr H. Kajura): Mr Chairman, hon. Members the draft Bill which is before you, indeed has been with you for months, but in the course of that period the Sectoral Committee which is in charge of natural resources has had a look at it, and indeed what is before you is a new draft Bill, which means -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of order.  We have been looking at the Order Paper and we do not understand what the Minister is now talking about. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are on 5.

MR KARUHANGA:  What about item 4, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It has some problems; we are not going to debate it now.

MR KAJURA:  So, Mr Chairman, the draft Bill before the House is thorough reflection of the Ministry as well as of the Sectoral Committee.  I hope, therefore, that the discussions will be brisk to the point and you will be able to present us with a gift for Christmas by passing this Bill that has been awaited for a very long time.

The rate of environmental degradation in the country is worrying! The natural resources on which we depend for our livelihood are being degraded at a very first rate.  This degradation is a result of many factors one of which is the poverty of our population, which forces it to exploit fragile resources and not invest in conservation measures.  This exploitation has led to environmental degradation manifesting itself in the following major forms: One, land degradation, particularly, soil erosion which is massive in the highland areas and has led to loss of productivity in the land; ancibitation of water bodies; two deforestation, especially of the natural forest estate which has led to soil erosion, loss of animal and plant species and changes in climate; loss of both plant and animal species. Drainage of wetland which has led to loss of plant and animal species,  local changes in climate and productivity of wetland; population of air, water and soil from industry, mining and other activities which has led to ill health among the population, and loss of productivity of water bodies and other natural resources.  Poor sanitation in both rural and urban settlements leading to waterborne diseases and high mortality, especially, of children.  

One of the main issues which has contributed to the high rate of the environmental degradation is the way we manage the environment and natural resources.  The existing laws and institutions on environment are not sufficient to contain environmental degradation. Government, therefore, became very concerned with this degradation and decided urgently to take action to intervene and contain the deterioration situation which at the same supporting development.  As a result, the national environment action plan need process for Uganda was put in place.  It is a continuous process to plan for the management of the environment and natural resources for this country.  Uganda NIP process was launched in August 1981 with the main objective of identifying the major environmental problem issues facing the country including the underlying causes and work out their solution; recommending intervention measures to address immediate environmental problems; recommending the forms policies and laws related to environment management; recommending an effective institutional framework for environmental management; recommending an investment programme to redress the environmental degradation. 

What is the position on the existing environment related laws? Uganda has many sectoral laws governing various aspects of natural resources management and protection of the environment.  These sectoral laws are not adequate; up to now the country does not have a framework law on the management of the environment.  Problems with the existing laws; most laws are outdated and out of tune with the present day concerns on the environment.  Many are sectoral in nature and address sectoral concerns only.  They lack a natural resources utilisation and not holistic conservation of natural resources base.  They lack effective sanctions to deter them. What are the areas not comprehensively covered by the existing laws? Wetland; management of waste and other sewage; conservational plan and animal life outside protected areas; maintenance of air quality; management of industrial chemicals; management of and accessed genetic resources; the working environment outside the factories; environmental assessment of policies and projects.  These need to be brought under the operations of a framework law.  

This Bill which is before you, and colleagues has had wide consultations within the government and outside the government.  The consultations included all districts, government departments and institutions, donor agencies, private sectors and NGOs.  The NIP secretariat physically visited and consulted over 20 public and private sectors, institutions and incorporated their recommendation as appropriate in the draft Bill.  Inter-sectoral and multi-disciplinary concerns was also taken into account.  

A one day seminar was also held for NRC Members, which many of you attended.  Twelve workshops were held at district and national levels. At district level all interested parties including resources users and owners, district officials and NGOs were involved.  These wide consultations recommended reforms on policy and laws; institutional arrangement and other collective measures, such as increased awareness.  A national policy for the management of the environment has been adopted by government; the detailed policy measures aimed at fostering environmental and sustainable development are contained therein; detailed action and collective measures are further contained in the national action plan on the environment prepared by the NIP secretariat.  

The Bill before you, therefore, is aimed at fulfilling one of the major recommendations which is legislative reforms; it is intended to lay a foundation for the establishment of legal and technical capacity for the environmental management.  The legal capacity will apply to all processes and every person who is concerned with the environment conservation or degradation.  This Bill was prepared with due regard to the provisions and spirit of the Draft Constitution currently being debated in the Constituent Assembly.  It is hoped that when this Bill is passed, it will support argument and attempt to implement the constitutional provisions on the protection and conservation of the environment and natural resources.  It is a general framework laws intended to create general and environmental standards, obligations, promote public participation, institutional responsibilities and enforcement mechanisms  

This framework Bill seeks not only to codify existing legal provisions on the environment, but to lay down basis guiding principles and criteria in the conservation and management of resources.  The provisions contained in this Bill will act as powers and principles where it can be applied to ensure the conservation of environmental resources where the sectoral laws are found wanting.  It is hoped that when this Bill is passed, existing sectoral policies and laws on environment will be reviewed to bring them into conformity with good environmental practices and behaviour, both at national and local levels.  

The Bill consists of 16 parts of which the following are the most significant; Principles; this part of the Bill highlights the key policy principles for good environmental management.  These are centred on the following needs: to ensure that all people have fundamental right to health environment, adequate for their health and well-being; to encourage public participation, environment and natural resources of Uganda for the benefit of both present and future generations; to reclaim lost ecosystems where possible and reverse the degradation of natural resources; establish adequate environmental protection standards and to monitor changes in the environment; to integrate environmental concerns into the development planning and process. The people of Uganda have a right to health environment and a duty to maintain and enhance the quality of the environment; and this is provided for in the Bill.  Environmental management is multi-sectoral and requires and institution capable of coordinating, monitoring and supervising implantation of environmental policy, laws, standards and all other related aspects Such an institution needs power to ensure the development and enforcement of national environment policies, laws and standards.  The existing general situation is that environmental management and coordination activities are essentially ad hoc, have considerable duplication of effort, conflicts in responsibility and revery in management.  Many areas are left untouched because they do not all under any direct jurisdiction of any one traditional institution.  The situation pro-enaction contributed to the continued environmental degradation.  

This Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); to be the principle agency of the management of the environment; coordinate, monitor and supervise and advise government in all activities in the field of the environment.  NEMA will be located under the Ministry of Natural Resources.  This Authority is intended to have a powerful voice to ensure cross-sectoral coordination and management.  A high political support for effectiveness, impartiality in directing natural resources, exploitation activities.  In order to achieve this, a policy committee on the environment is proposed to be established to ensure multi-section coordination and high-level political support.  It ensures effective participation by selected line ministries and bind them implementing policies and actions approved by this committee. The policy committee will be composed of the cabinet ministers chaired by the Prime Minister, and provide policy guidelines, formulate and coordinate environmental policies.  

The Committee is also assigned the function of identifying and addressing obstacles to the implementation of the environmental policy and programmes.  The management board is proposed to deal with overseas and the day-to-day functioning of the Authority.  It will also deal with the administrational supervision of the authority.  In order to ensure a board representation, the composition of the committee will include any person from government institutions, Non-Governmental Organisations and the private sector.  

The new institutional arrangement will be managed by an executive director appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board with the approval of the policy committee.  NEM – the establishment of NEMA will not remove powers and competencies of the existing institutions in the various aspects of the environment, but will supplement such efforts.  In any case any attempt to remove such competencies and powers will be futile.  

The Bill assigns the major implementations role to the lead agencies; lead agencies being those institutions or ministries directly concerned with a particular aspect.  There is no intention for the authority to interfere in the day today functioning of these institutions.  The development and issuance of guidelines, criteria and procedures for these aspects which are environmental in nature will be through a system of consultation. Decentralisation: in conformity with decentralisation police and the Local Government RC Statute 1993, district and local environmental committees will be established; the district will appoint environmental officers, DEOs; Environmental Inspectors; the Bill seeks to ensure compliance for the standards and the law by appointing Environmental Inspectors from amongst existing Inspectors or staff of the various institutions.

ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING

Environmental matters should not be dealt with in an ad hoc manner; the Bill should spell out environment planning as a matter of priority.  Environmental Planning at national, district and at lower levels is intended to achieve effectiveness, continuity and democratic participation at all administrative levels, to ensure good environment management at all times.  These plans will be revised periodically to keep up with modern development and standards and the needs of the people.

ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

The Bill further seeks to introduce a new concept in the management of the environment in the form of an environmental impact assessment known as EIA. for all activities likely to have significant impact on the environment, submission of environmental impact statement, consideration of environmental impact statement and consideration of public views on proposed projects.  It is required that every developer whether government or private will have to undergo the environmental impact assessment process.

ENVIRONMENT STANDARDS

The country does not have adequate environment standards, and neither are there requirements to transcribe them. This part of the Bill, therefore, provides for consultation with the lead agencies establishment of standards. It also lays down criterion procedures for environment measurement e.g. for air, water, influent discharges, soil quality, smell noise extra, extra.

ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT

Measures for the management of those aspects of the environment and natural resources of the environment which are faced with eminent degradation are provided under this part of the Bill, these includes lakes and rivers, hilly and mountainous areas, biological diversity, wetland range lands, forests, land use and atmosphere.  The Bill calls for prohibition of importation of wastes classified as hazardous, further more if anyone imports any hazardous wastes contrary to the provisions of the Law he will also be responsible for its removal from the territory of Uganda and it is on his cost.

CONTROL POLLUTION

All human activities lead to pollution of the environment in varying degrees, however, polluting beyond established standards will be allowed, the committee to handle applications to issue or cancel pollution licenses is proposed.  This Bill introduces polluter in principle into legal requirement for the use of natural resources to restore the environment or pay compensation to the affected parties.

ENVIRONMENT RESTORATION ORDERS AND EASEMENTS

Various human activities will damage the environment or resources in one way or another, as a remedial measure provision is given for restoration orders under which a polluter or user of a natural resource maybe compared to restore the environment degraded. 

ENVIRONMENT EASEMENTS

Development activities are also likely to deny people, this Bill is big it has more than 80 pages and very complicated so I am trying to - I think it will be circulated in due course. Mr Chairman, if I may be allowed to continue -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your time.

MR KAJURA: Environment Restoration Orders and Easements.  Various human activities damage the environment or resources in one way or another, as a remedial measure provision is given for the restoration orders under which a polluter or user of a natural resource maybe compared to restored environment degraded.  Development activities are also likely to deny people access to resources and therefore, infringing on their rights, for this purpose provision is made for environmental easements to be imposed on any burdened land so as preserve - space access to water and land resources.

FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

 This part establishes the National Environment Funds, the accounts of the fund are to be audited by the Auditor General while the Budget is to be approved by the Policy Committee.  Funds are to be managed in accordance with good commercial practice, resources of this fund will include disbursement from Government donations, taxes, fees and funds collected pursuant to this statute, Offenses and penalties stringent imprisonment terms and fines are being made together with the given offence, offenses related to the importation of hazardous wastes carries a maximum of no less than 36 months for imprisonment or to a fine of no less than 360,000 shillings and not more than 36 million.  

This is intended to discourage dumping of hazardous materials into our environment.  Minimum imprisonment for an offence is three (3) months or thirty thousand shillings and not more that three million shillings (3).  It should be realised that solution to environmental problems do not only lie in legislation, the use of criminal law is not enough - a culture of responsiveness to environmental conservation.  

Other incentives such as taxes, charges, performance bond, licences need to be used to promote conservation vigorous campaigns increase awareness will have to be used the primary motive behind all these approaches is to modify peoples behaviour by using economic and other means rather than regulatory measures alone in nutshell involved are the main provisions found in the draft I urge hon. Members to make their useful contributions to this Bill treat it to the urgency it deserves and pass it into law as it is proposed so that we can all go home and have an environmental present to give to the people.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Bill is open for discussion now. 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality Lira): Mr Chairman, I rise to support the National Environment Bill which has just been tabled by the hon. Minister, I would like also to thank the hon. Minister for taking the observation and statement of the Sectoral Committee which has made the Bill memorandum very short compared to the earlier Bill that was circulated to Members.  

Mr Chairman, I have very little observation to make, mainly arising from Clause 3 in part 2; that is the principles of the Environment Management.  The second objective which is in Sub-section (a) is very impressive that it is to assure all people living in the country fundamental right to an environment adequate for their health and well being. I hope when we talk of all people we also include people in Kisenyi area in all these slums where sanitation is very poor where they are living or staying it is not conducive to any human being.  I hope wee are also taking into consideration the air pollution as I will touch on it later in Clause 25 which we have on our roads today. 

The hon. Minister has traveled very expensively in the Western World he would not come to the country with smoking vehicles on the roads and people are still penetrating to go through.  As we will be seeing in Clause 4, which is starting on the same thing where I am now, the hon. Minister in this Bill is saying that every person has a right to health environment, I suppose the authority to be established will put in place and observe it very objective.  

The only area where I do not understand, in this same Clause, Clause 3 subsection (c); when the hon. Minister here in the Bill says; this Bill seeks to use and conserve environment and natural resources of Uganda equitably.  What if an area has no minerals like gold how will it be used equitably where there is nothing of the sort?  

In Clause 5 which is the authority to be established, it is clearly stated here that the authority will be the principle agent for management of environment and functions in Clause 7 is very clear.  But what worries me is Clause 8 where there is the introduction of Police Committee.  The Police Committee comes from nowhere to take over the work of the board, as we realise in Clause II that the Board is having the authority to appoint Members on the Technical Committees, but if you look at the Technical Committees Mr Chairman, you will not find the Policy Committee.  

So, what I do not understand is, because if the authority is the overall and then the Minister as you will see in Clause 12, there shall be an executive director and a deputy executive director appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the board which actually is the supreme body in an given corporation and it goes on to add, even in Clause 13 sub-section (c), ‘the executive director shall, from time to time, keep the Board and the Policy Committee informed of the progress and activities of the Authority.’ 

I think we are creating to many power centres. If the Minister or if the Executive Director informs the board, the board have that responsibility now to equally inform the Policy Committee.  

Mr Chairman, as I earlier on said -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to help my Colleague.  The Policy Committee consists of Cabinet Ministers of those Ministries intimately connected with environment these are found in the first schedule, the Minister responsible for Natural Resources, for Agriculture, for Finance and Economic Planning because of the money, the Minister responsible for Education and Sports because of environment education, the Minister responsible for Health because of pollution, the Minister responsible for Land, Housing and Urban Development that is obvious, Minister responsible for Local Government because the RCs and you can see the proposals go down to various levels of Local Government.  The Minister responsible for Gender and Community Development; I am sure that one speaks for itself; the women carry out 75 per cent of the economic activities in Uganda and it is necessary to bring them into this, and then the Minister of Wildlife, Tourism and Antiquities again they are involved.  Now, this is chaired by the Prime Minister, matters relating to environment are - they concern many Ministries particularly these Ministries which I indicated here.  

The idea is that there should be this Policy Committee to sort out controversy and to co-ordinate the approach of Government to environment concern in the country.  Because, the experience is elsewhere that unless you have got this high Policy Board generally to co-ordinate and oversee environmental concerns nothing more hence the creation of the Policy Committee really to guide and supervise and solve problems in case there is conflict in the Ministries or in those sectors concerned with environment, but the bulk of the work will be done by the authority and the board of directors.  Thank you.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague holding the Floor of the House that Clause of the Bill under debate is terrible misconceived.  Here under Schedule I, all Members in that schedule are cabinet Ministers, when will Uganda save extraordinary and more useless expense rather than to save money so that we can put them into social services or in education and even for that matter to develop the various resources we are trying to create about in this National Environment Law. Because, the point is, the Members on the list are already in the Cabinet should be there to make policy how can they go to several committees. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take your Seat.  Continue hon. Member.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, though that, that is a very hard-hitting expression but hon. Obwangor has sent in this message.  Let us begin to trust people whom we put in any authority, if we begin to bring hon. Ministers making a cabinet within a cabinet in the Authority. Then the Cabinet waiting where the Authority is failing then it comes in it is very unfortunate, Mr Chairman.  We think that when time permits this particular suggestion be deleted. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that one of the reasons why the Custodian Board performed miserably simply because the Board comprised of Ministers.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: That is true, Mr Chairman. I happen to serve on that Select Committee and we also came across this particular mentioned where ministers would not turn up for meetings at times when Deputy Ministries or the or the Deputy Minister in charge of Custodian Board was to Chair the meeting, the substantive Ministers would not want to come to that meeting.  So, in this case that is why we are suggesting, and very strongly that, that particular area be revisited in good spirit.  

Mr Chairman, finally, in Clause 26, it was also mentioned about the Water Policy -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member that the situation in various ministries have changed with appointment of Ministers of State now who are actually alternate Members of the Cabinet.  So, I do not think that if the ministers are going to be on the committees at least the Minister of State or the substantive Minister himself could be able to attend the Meeting, the situation is not as it was before where deputy ministers could not take a decision but now your recommendations which were taken into consideration, I think the situation has changed and I would like to appeal to Members to ensure that since this subject is much disciplinary the Minister should be allowed to sit on the committee. Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Thank you hon. Minister, I am glad that all the hon. deputy ministers have been elevated but the issue at stake is this particular authority should have no cabinet representation because eventually it will be answerable to the Cabinet and as I was saying, Mr Chairman - (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Members that in this House we have established a number of authorities in every ministry there is authority established and this authorities have turned up to be none performing assets rather than liability to the Government.  We have the Revenue Authority, they are now the central purchasing authority. This Revenue Authority are just chasing people, killing people and all sort of things.  So, we find it very difficult that the revenue that they even - they have even turned the revenue now to become their home revenue rather than the Government revenue.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I was saying, this particular authority if created will check on the standards of water quality.  It is said on Saturday around 11.00 a.m. I went down Nile Hotel, the most expensive hotel. What I would say - what did I find when I asked for water? I was told that there was no water. Instead they wanted to look after me, which they also failed; the mineral water.  Mr Chairman, we are living in -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is plenty of water in Nile Hotel, except that there is no water for drinking at times.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  So, I am glad that the hon. Member who is a Director there has confirmed my water problem there.  As it is, I was in Zimbabwe the other year you will find written, ‘tap water is safe for drinking and our water which is sweet water has refused to be safe for drinking and it is saddening to find that we import water from Burkina Faso as if we cannot improve on this.  So, I would like to see a serious authority which should do that just been mentioned.  With these few words, Mr Chairman, I beg to support. 

MR TIVU MARK (Youth Representative North): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Members. In the first place I recommend the Minister of Environment Protection for having compiled a very comprehensive book on Environment and I believe if all other Ministers had compiled books on their ministries which the Members of the House will have been enlightened on the function and problems of the various ministries and will be able to tell the public what the Government is doing, so I hope the other will learn the Minister of Environment Protection. (Applause)  

I have been reading the book of the Minister and I found that it has really run in line with the Bill and on my common sense I want to make few comments on the state of Environment in Uganda and first of all let me talk about environment planning in Uganda.  Indeed from the time when colonials left up to today we believe that there is no proper environmental planning, because you find that much of our land which is part of environment is under utilised and yet the other day here we were talking of poverty which means there have been deliberate effort by the successive government in planning and utilisation of our environment.  This is an act which can bring us backwards and, therefore, with Environment Bill in place we -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  The Member on the Floor is holding a very important point.  There reserved forests in areas like Teso since they were locked to be reserved forests either local or National they are there like that, no development they have remained local trees and you wonder why they are reserved and for who?  Thank you very much.

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, that was a very good point and Members are saying that, that was reserved I do not know whether it is common sense when you reserve when you are dying of hunger that is a matter of common sense you cannot reserve while we have people dying of hunger that is under utilisation of the existing resources we must have it clearly put in our mind.  

So, the - informing me that we have a number of areas in Uganda which are not utilised but in my county in Malaca you will find that ten out of 15 cases discussed by the RCs, the problem is land. But when you travel from Pakwach to Gulu you will find areas underutilized; that means much of our environment. 

So, as a Government -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am surprised by the statement by the Member on the Floor; the area he has just described is actually the National Park. (Laughter) 

MR TIVU:  Mr, Chairman, yesterday I travelled by air from Arua to Gulu and I did not travel through the park and my geography cannot be abused.  The area of the park is clearly demarcated and I know of which part to talk when you talk of dense population in the, therefore, it is not surprising for me to see that if in Malacha alone people are fighting over an area as large as this House and in certain parts of Uganda we have 10 acres being manned by one man who cannot manage it because it is to large and then in corporative terms and relative terms there is lack of environmental planning that we must accept. 

This will mean that as a government we must have deliberate monitorly and physically policies to make sure that we drive our people who are living in those areas which are populated to areas which are under populated; that is the role of Government. 

I want also to talk about destruction of environment deliberately by Government agencies.  It is common knowledge in most parts of Uganda, that people whom we have educated and employed to promote the development of the environment have turned to be enemies when you look at pitsawying you will find that forest rangers and forest officers are one way or another responsible for destruction of our environment, they will tell us that -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that that is precisely why they have been writing about me. (Laughter)

It is the forest officials who have been destroying and then they turn around and say, it is Wenendeya who was doing so.  This is serious because the hon. Minister of Natural Resources even I confiscated a vehicle which was carrying timber by the Ministry official. It was taken to the court of Law but the Minister refused. This is a fact.  

I, therefore, want to confirm that unless the locals are involved in making sure that our environment is not destroyed we may not go very far with the officials who are supposed to protect it.  I thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU:  Thank you very much for that information and I hope the law we are going to make will pin down those agents whom we have put to promote environment but decided to pollute environment to -(Inaudible) according to the law that is going to be enacted. 

I also want to talk about integration of Ministerial programmes, this is because the Minister has just told us that the institute of environment are multi-sectoral and we can neither succeed if there is no integration of ministerial programme. If the Minister of Agriculture decide to take her activities without consulting the Minister responsible for Tourism and Wildlife you will find that there ill be conflict of integrate in the Ministry.  

Therefore, if we are to succeed in environment programmes there must be integration of ministerial programmes, therefore, I call upon the Minister responsible to consult among themselves -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, this explains and justifies the existence of the Police Committee who should be co-ordination what would otherwise be divulging policies into one consistent policy of environment.

MR TIVU:  I hope this one also have to extend to the District and local authorities, because the - of any authority and any law that is enacted here should be passed low down because that is when the Government activities are felt.  It is a common conflict in districts that department do quarrel among themselves and that is a clear manifestation of electoral integration of ministerial programmes, therefore, if we are discussing something in Cabinet the Permanent Secretaries will take circular letter immediately to the district to see that there is clear co-ordination of Government programmes from the highest authority to the lowest authority, and we now talk of bottom up planning is that there has been no properly co-ordination because you find that the RC.I with it’s committee try to plan and then the RC.II, the RC.III and the process of our planning you will find there has been a lot of information flow the planning at lower level in many occasions are not integrated in the National Planning and in many occasions the planning from up do conflict and settle down on the lower planning, there is a saying in my vernacular that, ‘a big tree falls on the lower on and that when the big tree falls on the small one the small one normally breaks.’ 

Therefore, this conflict has to be ironed out properly by our economist whom we have employed in the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development and that is what I call by integration of Ministerial Programme.  

I also want to address myself briefly on under development of certain resources that look minor but they are very important. A certain part of the country has got a lot of springs, and they have got a lot of small rivers but they have not been blessed with - like it has been in other parts of the country and Government has been deaf and has looked blind to these resources. 

I, therefore, hope that with enactment of the law and with the reactivity of environmental protection and development, the Ministry of Natural Resources in conjunction Ministry of Animal Industry and fisheries will try to see how the spring water and the spring in Northern Uganda can be developed to make sure that they have fish that can sustain the protein need of our people this is another integration of ministerial programme because when you develop fish in those place there will be no malnutrition the Minister of Health will not be having health problems  

So, with these few points I press that environmental issues are not only issues of one person it involves all of us we have to educate to me education on environmental matter as a teacher to me it is very important issue.  If we only talk about environment law here without education our people on burning, without educating our people of making bricks without planning it properly we shall fail in this policy. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Bill. I fully support environment as one man’s survival in this world.  But, I would like the protection of environment whereby the people would be involved in planning.  Take the case of Budadiri where I am involved. You find that, here people are just told to leave their areas where they have been residing from time began.  But without an alternative as to where to be taken, as to how to cook their food, as to how to do literally anything, it becomes very, very difficult for man to leave in this world. 

Because, unless government puts in place possible ways of assisting our people, you find that, it would be a difficult thing.  Because environment exists for man and not by itself.  Therefore, you find that, the Minister should make sure that, the people in a given area are involved and therefore, that would be a big saving instead of getting these Forest Officers to be involved in patrolling environment.  And at night, you find that, they have their own pitsawyers.  And when they do the pisawying at night, they take the trees during the night as well.  And it is there that you find that some of - I mean they take the timber. (Laughter) 

Therefore, I would urge that, the wanainchi should be involved and be paid a fee for protecting and government can come in anytime by helicopter to patrol the area.  Therefore, I would urge the Minister to make sure that; this is a very important thing.  When it comes to cooking, people in Budadiri and indeed Mbale, they do not have anything with which to use in cooking food. Therefore, whereas on the other hand, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am finding it difficult to follow the Member’s argument.  Whether he is referring to a forest reserve or an ordinary land where the wanainchi are settled.  Because if it is in a forest reserve, to live with the thieves has its own repercussions. But if it is in open land, then I would be grateful if it is clarified so that I can follow his argument.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, the point is that, some of us who live near forests and in the mountains; the area was first cleared.  And after clearing that area, you find, there is now a forest reserve and that forest reserve was demarcated without even the consultation with the people.  The forests which would be planted or trees which would be planted outside of the forest area, I have no quarrel with that; in fact I would urge the Ministry of Natural Resources to make sure that, the hills, in Budadiri which are literally there could be planted with trees so that, we can have forests on those hills.  

But what I am saying is that, it is where the wanainchi do not have anything with which to cook food, with which to build simple dwelling places and it is there that, I am greatly concerned.  I therefore, would request government to look into this as a serious matter.  

The second point in this connection, is that those people who are in the case of Mount Elgon Forest Park, the boundary may be right a way from the area, but those surveyors would come and tell people that, the boundary passes as an example where the Minister is seated; whereas the boundary was this way.  But because they want some bribe; they would say that, the boundary passes where the minister is seated.  And therefore, it has made the lives of those people dwelling on the slopes of Mount Elgon, very difficult.  

When it comes to cooking food as I said, before, you find that there is no electricity, there is no firewood.  Therefore, since we have water falls in the area, I would request the Minister since he is also the Minister for electricity or power, to make sure that, water is earnest and we can get electricity so that, people can use it for cooking food. And, therefore, I would urge the Minister to do that.  In addition, I would request with all due respect that, the Minister thinks about putting in place a scheme like our brothers in Western Uganda. (Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the matter for electricity is a very important view.  In some of our areas, if our sons and daughters who want to make studies, they make firewood to be their electricity for reading. It is true.  My Minister knows very well.  So, I think if the environmental matter is taken seriously, what the government is to plan is, towards rural electrification.  And there must be a plan so that, this will follow.  They also want; they can afford.  Until that is done, we shall waste time talking here, when environment itself will be tortured, because this was saying, I have nothing for cooking and so on.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA: With regard to the Mbale Bugisu area, we have been looking at various small falls.  The idea of having small hydropower stations.  And so far, we have focused on one called Sipi.  Yesterday, a study has been made and we are now looking for funds to develop that particular waterfall.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank the Minister and also the hon. Member to have given me that information.  In the sense that, electricity must be affordable to the people.  Even other sources of energy.  Because, the electricity from UEB is unaffordable to some of us.  And this is because of corruption.  We happen to know a lot about the background and if we were allowed to blow full blossom with the hope that, somebody will take up the matter seriously in a Court of Law.  It is a few people who are benefiting because of commissions.  That having been said, , the electricity -(Interjection)- my contention has always been that, if I blow up who is going to take steps?  Because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you please, substantiate or you withdraw it.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, what I am saying is this, at one time, I was nearly killed and I showed you photographs. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Can you please substantiate, if not, then you withdraw your statement.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I would tell you this much. I am coming on, Mr Chairman, if you give me the opportunity. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you going to substantiate?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I am coming to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Either substantiate or you withdraw?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I remember very well when hon. Gerald Ssendaula was saying, substantiate in this very House.  And the consequences are very well known to him.  So, what I am saying is -(Interruption and Laughter)

MR SSENDAULA: Mr Chairman, comparing that, my name has really been mentioned and is dragged into this debate and say consequences are well known to me; I would like the hon. Member to help and let me know the state of consequences that I suffered as a result of asking him to substantiate?

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Ssendaula that, he wanted me to substantiate at that time and as a result when I have substantiated and produced a document, I was nearly killed.  (Laughter) Therefore, Mr Chairman, unless a member like you the chairman, if you want to know -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The Chairman protects you. Substantiate, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, the electricity at Jinja was increased by three million dollars.  I will not say the names.  That is what I can tell you.  The new contract.  Mr Chairman, that is where I will stop.  But let me go to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, you cannot stop there.  Proceed, please.

MR MAYENGO  Point of order.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  In view of the privileged nature of this House.  Is it in order for you to advise the hon. Member on the Floor, to substantiate or withdraw for him to continue labouring?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I have the powers.  Vote on No.2 now.

MR MAYENGO: No.2, is he in order to put a blanket of an organisation that is well over 3,000 workers; of corruption? Even if they are once one, without mentioning that particular individual.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what you have been saying.  Proceed, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman for the sake of what I would say, not want you get into problems, but I know my facts.  I therefore, withdraw, but I know that these facts stand. (Interruption)

MR SSENDAULA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it in order for the hon. Member who is holding the Floor and currently planning to withdraw remarks he has made, to make it a permanent habit, to make allegations in this House and when he is requested to substantiate such allegations, he then finally says; well in that respect, let me withdraw and we let him continue with that kind of habit in this House; without committing him to a committee on discipline in this House, so that he can explain.  Is he in order to continue?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is trying to explain, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, because I believe he must have been from the East where wise people come from. (Laughter and Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to inform hon. Wanendeya that, he has just informed this privileged House that, 3 million Uganda dollars belonging to Uganda’s Tax Payers’ US Dollars, have been wrongly added on a contract at Jinja Dam.  And therefore, that contract and the people who are working in that Dam are corrupt people - and the people -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: He has withdrawn that.

MR KARUHANGA: No, but I just wanted to inform him, Sir, that also that as I have been following his remarks outside this House, where he has even no protection, he has been on the vanguard of corruption and he always says these things freely and openly and nobody has really killed him. Except that, he said Ssendaula almost killed him the other time  - he almost died.  But really, in light of the freedom he has been enjoying outside and in meetings of various political organs, he is now involved in; can he really not favour this House which is privileged and stop this scourge, so that, we know that Wanendeya really is in the vanguard and in the fore front of fighting corruption other than just talking as if he is just a rumour monger or a child.  Can he not give me information on this?

MR WANENDEYA:  We have seen cases being brought up or being even written about. But who would have the courage to take some of those people to a court of law? If you can guarantee that, there is somebody who can standard up and I can tell you this much  -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, in our both constitution and laws of Uganda; particularly the Penal Codes, and even the Electricity Act; 135 any aggrieved citizen knowing very well that, the resources, that is public resources or parastatal bodies resources, he has a right to communicate to the police on the minister responsible. and particularly for the hon. Members of this House to try to have or to bring in this House a spirit which fears to speak the truth in this House. That is where we shall be making bad laws.  Because we are not honest to ourselves.  We should be direct honest and instead a statement to call that dog, a dog. (Laughter) 

As it says call a spade, a spade.  It will belittle the status of this hon. House as if we were talking in the Mukwano or Owino Market.  This is a hon. House, where everybody enjoys all the freedom he has in Uganda.  So, we should not be ashamed today; to say, if he knew that was wrong, it was done.  So, tell us -(Laughter)

MR NTIMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In view of the fact that, we are discussing a very, very important Bill which concerns all of us; will it not be in order for somebody to ring the bell and call hon. Members who are busy holding their own meetings in the lobby? As if those meetings are more important than environmental protection.  Will it not be in order to call them, Sir?

THE CHAIRMAN: It will not be in order.  It will not be in order; we have the quorum here.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform Members that, we people in our country pretend a lot?  I will tell you why.  Somebody earns Shs.100, 000/- (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Turn to the Bill, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I in this connection with environment say that, people in around Mt. Elgon area, there is nothing in place for us and therefore, in the way of where we can get poles with which to build houses; there are people who have been evicted, I would request that, the minister should think of how to re-settle these people like they did to our brothers from Kabale when they settled around Kibale. Therefore, they would have somewhere, where they can be accommodated.  And for those who would say behind although the minister has talked of Sipi River - water falls.  

In addition, there are waterfalls in Budadiri County itself.  There is river Sironko, there is river Simu.  So, if we can get electricity on that, some of us will be most grateful.  I want to assure also the minister that, there are a number of things which can be put up over there, in the way of protecting environment; but people must be involved, if we are to protect environment in a manner that, is worth the way it is done in other parts of the world.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MWONDHA (Butembe County): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  As my colleagues have said, environment is very important to our lives.  And if we are not careful, we shall also be deemed to perish.  I hope this authority will actually take into account sensitizing the public.  Because what is happening now or why we are having environmental degradation, is because of luck of education by our masses.  

So, I would really urge the authorities to carry out sensitization in the whole country to save the environment.  On the composition of this authority I would request the minister that, 50 percent should be women.  Because it is the women, who are directly involved in the environment.  Why am I saying that?  It is the women who fetch firewood.  It is the women who fetch water, it is the women who cook, it is the women who farm.  So if you really do not include them in this authority, you are just wasting your time. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would to inform the Members that, the point the Member is trying to raise is a very important one.  For the last three years, I am sure the Minister for Environmental Protection can agree with me that, all the programmes of tree planting have been carried out in this country by women.  No any other person than women. (Applause) 

MRS MWONDHA: I thank her for that information.  It is true, it is us who are planting the trees and it is the man who is cutting down the trees for other things.  So, I hope the Minister will take that very seriously. I hope also this authority will look into these energy saving stoves in this country. That is why we are cutting this - or the environment is being destroyed.  Because actually the women, the stoves they are using, they use a lot of trees or a lot of timber or a lot of wood for cooking. 

So, if this Authority can create a situation where we can have energy saving stoves. I think we shall have save the environment.  I also agree with hon. Wanendeya, that the UEB tariffs are actually very high.  And if we are really serious on saving the environment, the Minister must actually reduce the tariffs, so that everybody in this country can afford electricity.  And if I can really emphasize this point, most of the charcoal if you observe, which is coming from up-country, coming to the urban areas, it is the trees that are cut. So, if we really want to save this environment, UEB must reduce its tariffs.  

Also, the Authority should look into account these industries which we are creating in this country.  I think the laws are a bit relaxed.  I do not know really whether whatever is being on Lake Victoria anyone is looking at it very seriously.  I believe Lake Victoria is being polluted at a very fast rate.  So, industries which are coming here, must give us that assurance that, pollution is not all that high; we have to save the fish and also the air which we are breathing in this Kampala City or other towns which are having industries.  

Also, these industries, there are some goods which they manufacture, which are not good for the environment.  Take for example, the kaveras or these plastic things.  I understand they really destroy the soil facility.  I do not know why we cannot use the raw materials.  Let us say for really saving this soil.  But at the moment there are a lot of kaveras. Yet I understand in other parts of the world they have stopped this kavera business.  So, I think they should also look into that.  Another thing which is actually also destroying  -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. If the authorities could appeal to the people to burn each piece of kavera that is used, I think we would have a solution.  But what is happening -(Interjection) Yes.  What I am talking is that, the piece of kavera that one has used; if after using it he could burn it, to be a solution to our soil.  But what is happening after use, people just throw it about, and it prevents the soil from getting the fertility that it needs.  That is one of the main problems.  So, for the time being, I want to inform my colleagues that, burning these buveras could be a temporary solution to the problem.  Thank you.

MRS MWONDHA:  I thank the hon. Member for that information. Mr Chairman, there is also another thing which is actually destroying our environment.  And this is bush burning.  It is very common with pastoralists.  They just burn during the dry season; and you find the whole area under fire.  And also our farmers, need to be sensitized that, when they are preparing their gardens, they should not just burn anyhow. (Interruption)

MR TIVU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, even if it is common with the pastoralists to burn the area; because with the change of the season, they want fresh grass for their cows.  And, therefore, to make that fresh grass to come, they must burn.  But if for environmental protection reason for one to avoid burning, we have to irrigate these pastoral areas so that, there is no burning.

MRS MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information.  I am just happy of recent that, they have appointed a minister who is to do with anti-nomadism and I hope this will also save the situation of bush burning. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  I represent nomads. Now, if there is a Ministry should change its name quickly to be pro-people; it is such a very good name for us.

MRS MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, I did not get his point well.  But I think the government has studied the matter seriously and found out that these people need to settle down, so that we save the environment also. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  What I am saying is that, the government has set up a ministry called anti-nomadism. And I am saying that, I represent nomads.  Now, if there is any ministry which is anti-nomadism, it is really not addressing the subject well.  I think they should - because nomadism is scientifically correct.  These people were doing the right thing.  But if they want to improve on our roads, they cannot start with a negative sentiments of anti-nomadism.  It is not correct.  Even environmentally, I am sure the minister will agree with me.  That I think the name is wrong, and sooner the government changes it to a better name.  We have a Professor here.  A whole Professor here is a Minister in environment and he has been a researcher.  I am sure he will agree with me that, our rangelands are not to be fought, and that, the people who live there, have not made any mistake.  If anything, he should be grateful to us, we have been giving you milk and meat at grate cost to ourselves.  So, you can say that, you want to develop you can set up a ministry for water and pastoral development or pastoralism.  But not anti-nomadism.  And I will welcome hon. Prof. Minister  - former Luwero Minister, to talk about this entandikwa. Whether this is the right entandikwa. Because for us also, this is entandikwa. 

MRS MWONDHA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would just want to wind up by saying that, this authority I hope is not going to be a white elephant in Kampala.  They do not have to stay here, they must move into the countryside to save the environment.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 December 1994, at 2.30 p.m.)
