Wednesday, 28 December 2005

Parliament met at 11.24 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The Hose was called to order.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

11.36
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TIBARIMBASA: Clause 5, which is on page 4 of the amendment Bill, the committee recommends that it is deleted and the justification is that the proposal to empower the minister to issue the directives of the policy nature would interfere with the autonomy of the universities as spelt out in Section 3 of the parent Act.  

Two, Section 12 of the parent Act already gives the minister powers to give the National Council guidance on policy matters, which would be passed on to the institutions by the Council.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the proposed amendment.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, during the course of my response to the debate over this, I gave some key studies to indicate that there is need for the Minister in charge of the Education sector to have some powers so that he or she can streamline or direct or instruct or guide universities. What I think is appearing as a justification is that there would be interference with the autonomy of universities if this power is granted, but I will repeat the cases, which I gave yesterday. 

One is about this admission on criteria of discipline to be studied, the quotas for districts, quotas for special groups and so on. That was a very good case to illustrate that the minister acting on behalf of government should have room to give directives of a general policy nature because that was a policy made after government had realised the need for science and technical disciplines in our universities. It directed that admission should be based or biased towards the words “science and technology”, Mr Speaker.  

Then secondly, quotas: realising that many districts in remote and rural areas probably are not benefiting through the normal admissions, government introduced the quota admission system, which I am proud to say so far has worked very well for the first year. That was a policy of the general nature, which I think the minister should have authority over universities. So I think the minister should have some room to give policy directives of the general nature to the universities.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the minister. The proposal of the committee is that the minister should pass through the National Council, and then the National Council should pass over the matter, issues to the university. Whereas the proposal here is that in some aspects you should directly deal with the institutions concerned, that is the practice of the matter. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I think the concern of the committee and the chairperson is in connection with the independence of these organisations but what the chairman of the committee wants is that the Government should have some residual power to influence what happens in educational institutions because education is one of the most important or means a government of any country uses to advance the economic well being for the people. Therefore, if government has no power at all to influence the way education is handled in universities, it may be difficult.

Secondly, I think as evidence is, in future government will be called upon to support private universities financially and, therefore, I think government will still need to have some influence on how that financial support is handled. But I think the fears of the committee and the chairperson and everybody else should be allayed by the fact that the ministers will always use their power in a very sparing and discretional manner. Thank you, Sir.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank the chairman for the amendment. However, recently we saw some universities increasing the school fees arbitrarily - uncontrollably - and the Government had to come in to save the situation. Now if all those powers are taken away from the minister, what situation are we going to get in case such matters arise again? I, therefore, support the minister that government should retain some residual powers to intervene in these institutions.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We in Parliament raise various issues concerning the education sector on behalf of our people. The minister, who is in the House, listens to these views attentively and thereafter we expect the minister to implement these views. If this minister has no such powers, how will our views, which emanate from the people, be implemented in due course? It is important, as Minister Kagonyera said, “The minister needs to have some residual powers on which the people can have faith that their views are going to be implemented.” I thank you.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD.) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have seen the law as it is here and it uses the word “may,” which means that it is not mandatory, but it will be just in situations when it is absolutely necessary. And it is also discretionary, and it is also about policy only. Imagine if for instance there was - God forbid, a war situation and there is no time even for consultation, a minister should come in and say all institutions should do something. Imagine if there was an epidemic, a disease, whether an institution is government or private, the minister should have some residual powers to come in and say this should be done. I think this is a good law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal to delete the provision giving powers to the minister to give directives to the institutions. That is the proposal by the committee, which I think we should vote on. Those in favour will put up their hands first, and then we will see how we proceed.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before voting, as the chairperson of this committee and having listened to the views of the House, I would advise the mover, who is moving on behalf of the committee, that the House has a genuine point. We as a committee should agree to the views -(Applause)- I am convinced, especially when we have issues like escalating school fees and we have the minister who sits in the House, who should actually direct; and if we tied their hands, it would be a disaster. I know it was a very controversial issue when we debated, when we had universities appearing before the committee. So in the interest of a good law, I would persuade my chair so that there is no voting and we have a good law. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, this is tantamount to withdrawing the proposed amendment for deletion. Is that the case?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate my chairperson commented without briefing me –(Laughter)- but I want to make a clarification before I make a position on what the chairperson has said, that when we were considering this proposal to delete, we were looking at two issues: there are policy nature matters and there are emergency matters.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, it is most unusual for two prominent members of a committee to have different points of a view on a report by the committee, on the Floor of the House.  Over and above that, you had already put the question - actually you are just exercising your discretionary powers to allow him differ with his chairperson. But really I would beg that you put the question and we proceed accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, before I did, somebody rose and said she wanted to make a comment. It is true a committee or any person can present a proposal to amend but subsequent to contributions from others he is free to withdraw the amendment, and I think this is what we are witnessing now. It is the case that the proposal is being withdrawn. That is all.

MR TIBARIMBASA: For the harmony of the committee I agree with my chairperson, we withdraw the amendment.

Clause 5

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 5 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 13 is amended by inserting the following new clauses after 82(c) to read as follows - that will be 82(d): “Application to establish a private other degree awarding institution:
(i)	A person, firm or organisation proposing to establish and operate a private other degree awarding institution or a post-secondary institution proposing to constitute itself into a private degree awarding institution prescribed form, make an application to the National Council for Higher Education for a provisional license to establish and operate another degree awarding institution.
(ii)	An application made under sub-section (i) shall be accompanied by:
(a)	The proposed name, physical location and academic character of the university.
(b)	The aim and objectives for which the university is to be established.
(c)	The detailed financial base of the proposed university.
(d)	The form of governance through which, the academic and administrative affairs of the university are to be conducted.
(e)	An outline of the academic programmes intended to be conducted by the university.
(f)	The academic facilities including library services and property equipment proposed for the academic programme and the manner in which they are to be maintained.
(g)	Existing or proposed human resources including academic and senior administrative staff.
(h)	 Existing or proposed physical infrastructure.
(i)	Financial controller and administration.
(j)	The timetable indicating the steps to be taken three years after the establishment of the university towards the realisation of the objects of the university. 
(iii)	The National Council shall on receipt of the application under this section organise a meeting or a series of meetings with the applicant to verify the resources and information given with the application.
(iv)	A detailed report of the findings of the National Council under sub-section (3) shall be submitted to the minister.”  

Also at 82(e) –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But excuse me, don’t you think these are rules that would be suitably accommodated by rules made by the minister rather than going in the law?

MR TIBARIMBASA: The committee felt that this detail should be in the law so that the council is protected because you have seen the Council being taken to courts of law from time to time. So, we wanted to give an emphasis to the requirements on which the council bases decision to award provisional licenses. Thank you.  

I will try to be faster. 

“82(e): (i) Provisional license for private other degree awarding institutions on being satisfied that:

(a)	The resources declared are available or are likely to be established.
(b)	The applicant is following realistic plans to achieve the objects of the university.
(c)	The university is likely to attain and maintain the academic standards set by the National Council. 
(d)	The establishment of the university is in the interest of the public in relation to high education.
(ii)	The National Council may issue a provisional license to the applicant to establish and operate a private university according to the resources and information attached to the application.
(iii)	The National council shall publish the name and particulars of the private university issued with a provisional license in the gazette.
(iv)	The provisional license shall be valid for at least three years from the date of publication of the university in the gazette within which period the National Council shall be monitoring the university to establish its validity for accreditation.”

You also add 82(f): Application as a provision to another degree awarding institution. 

“The provisions of this Act relating to private universities shall apply to a private degree awarding institution subject to such modification, qualifications, reservations and other things as maybe determined by the National Council by legal notice.”

Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendments by the committee as outlined by the chairperson. This is in reference to clause 13. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection to many of his proposals but if you go to (f) where he said the academic facilities including library services and property equipment proposed for the academic programme, I think he would have stopped there rather than adding on, “and the manner in which they are to be maintained.” I do not know whether he is suggesting that we should also mention the garages and all the repair shops where they will be maintaining their equipment, and how they are to be paid. So, I propose that we should stop at the academic programme and we put a full stop if they wish.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of that committee. We went into those details because other universities would begin work without libraries and when the National Council for Higher Education closes these universities they run to courts of law. So, we wanted to protect the National Council for Higher Education and that is why we went into those details here. Thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, I think there are regulations, which cover the operation of the law.  To go into the details of specifying how things are maintained and so on implies that outside these prescribed methods of maintenance, which is now mentioned here, it will mean there will be breach of the law. Then who would be able to supervise that kind of thing? I think it should be left to the individual institution or university to see how that equipment is maintained. It would be more accommodating - it would be broad and give room for each of those institutions to see how best they can maintain that equipment we are talking about.

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Here they are referring so much to universities but I think this law also applies to other private, degree awarding institutions. I think the best statement here should be institutions because some of them are not universities - like UMI is not a university. So, we should be referring to them as tertiary institutions. Also, I do not have the Act on this National council for Higher Education. I do not know the qualifications of members because if that Act is not providing for the qualifications here, it implies that we need people of high calibre and character to be able to supervise these institutions. Thank you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, I have no objection. The committee has no objection to deleting the last part of (f) as proposed by hon. Byabagambi. So, it will read: “The academic facilities including library services and property implements proposed for the academic programmes.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is deleted?

MR TIBARIMBASA: That is deleted. And I do not see how hon. Kityo’s proposal differs from what the committee has presented because if you look at 82(e), we are talking of provisional licenses for other private degree awarding institutions. So, we are not using universities all through. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, in clause 16 the committee recommends that the clause be deleted and the justification is as follows: 

The amendment may not be necessary since under Section 97(3), the provisional license is valid for three years at most. It, therefore, means the council has been entertaining applications for renewal of provisional licenses. If the council did not do so, the universities would have been compelled to apply for a charter. So, delete 16.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TIBARIMBASA: Clause 18, Mr Chairman, the committee recommends the drafting of clause 119(a) to read as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, no person shall operate a university and other degree awarding institution or a tertiary institution without the prior accreditation of its academic and professional programmes by the National Council for Higher Education.”

The justification is clarity, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TIBARIMBASA: In clause 19, Mr Chairman, the committee recommends the deletion of this clause and the justification is as follows: this would be difficult to implement since all the institutions have their own unique nature and autonomy that would be interfered with. This would pose the question as to which institution would award the degree or certificate: would it be the National Examinations Board or the independent universities?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members you have heard they are proposing a deletion of this one for reasons given. Honourable minister, do you have anything to say?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Chairman, this provision was made after receiving concerns that some graduates get degrees from one university and others get them from other universities but when you consider the content of the papers they sat to get a first grade, probably one who gets a first grade from one university “a” would get a third one from “b” simply because the contents of the papers they are sitting might not be of equal weight. But on the other hand really I have no objection if this authority can be left to the senate and other competent organs at the university.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, in clause 20 the committee recommended that the following words be deleted: “To monitor the administration and policies of the Business School for purposes of quality control”, appearing at the end of 4(a) and 4 (d). The justification is that the representation of Makerere University on Makerere Business School Council is adequate enough. So, it is recommended that that last bit of 4(a) and 4 (d) on clause 20 be deleted as I have read. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am totally disturbed by this amendment because it has ignored the fundamental issues. When a university or a school is affiliated to the main university, the main university does not offer the same programmes offered in the same school. What has happened is that the business courses offered at Makerere University Business School have been taken over by Makerere University -(Interjection)- yes. And what I expected –(Interjection)- let me finish because I want a clarification –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, but what amendment are you talking about? You see, the amendment here is just to delete the last part giving why it is being represented on the council. It is not necessary. So long as it is there it will do many other things, including this one. That is why the committee thought it was unnecessary and therefore they are deleting the last part: “To monitor the administration and policies of the Business School for purposes of quality control.”

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, my concern is that it seems they jumped it deliberately.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think the provision hon. Rwamirama is that they are dealing with (b) which says that for as long as Makerere University Business School remains affiliated to Makerere University, Makerere University shall be represented on its governing council and academic board. I think you do not have to explain that they are there to monitor the administration. I think they are saying it was not necessary and that is the amendment.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, the problem I have is that the whole section needs to be seen in totality. This is because Makerere main campus, which is supposed to be the parent, is taking away certain courses from the Business School and at the same time has the mandate of selecting people for these courses. This becomes very tricky and that is the clarification I wanted.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you had misgivings on this shouldn’t you have brought an amendment to that effect? This is because this particular issue is about representation and the purpose for that is the amendment as I understand it.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, when you are affiliated to an institution it does not mean that you should not carry out the courses the institution affiliated to you is conducting. Before Kyambogo became a university it was affiliated to Makerere University but it was running a course in education and awarding degrees while Makerere University also had a School of Education. 

Therefore, when you are affiliated you are just connected to that institution to which you are affiliated at the level of awarding a certificate or diploma. Otherwise, you are independent and you administer your institution and recruit your staff. The institution you are affiliated to just comes in to see whether standards are being maintained because if you are getting a certificate of that institution you are affiliated to, your standards should match with those of that institution. However, it does not mean that because you are affiliated to me you can come and interfere with the administration of my institution. That is the clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment was to delete the last part. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.05
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.06
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.06
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

12.07
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005” be read the third time and do pass.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Congratulations. The Bill has been passed. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON REPRESENTATION OF SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS

THE SPEAKER: Well honourable members, this business has been with us for quite some time and I indicated that I will be putting the motion to vote. But before I do so, I would like to know whether I have the minimum number for us to be able to transact business on that motion. Those who are outside, please come in. Let us first deal with the ascertainment of the number. 

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, can the bell be rang?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the bell be rang. Do not walk out when we are trying to ascertain numbers. Hon. Mutuluuza, are you walking out in protest?

Honourable members, you may recall that some time back we received a report on some districts from the Committee on Local Government. The report concentrated on three districts namely Manafwa, Tororo and Pallisa. We had extensive debate on these issues but unfortunately by oversight this particular item was not concluded on the Order Paper that we have. I intend to adjust the Order Paper so that we can deal with that report after transacting business on the motion before us. 

12.16
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Yesterday the Attorney-General told us that he would be presenting a code of conduct for parties and I have managed to pick a copy from the lobby. I am wondering whether this is still a matter you are considering to have on the Order Paper because I do not see it anywhere not even as notice of business to follow. I think it is a good document and one that should be finalised since it will enable us to go to the field knowing how to conduct ourselves. We have already got the copies.

THE SPEAKER: You are right. I was not advised that copies had been issued but if members have been issued with them and have been able to read through then we can also include it.

MR ATUBO: Right.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to the Act the required number to pass, abolish or increase something, is 196, which is two-thirds of all members. Currently according to the figures given to me here we have 185 members. I do not know whether I should suspend proceedings for about ten minutes and we see?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, we almost have reached there. I propose that the bell be rang further.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let it be rang. The problem is that when members walk out this affects our counting. Please, for the time being try to keep your seat instead of moving out.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance on a matter. Instead of doing this head count, why don’t we roll call? This is because some of our colleagues who were harassing us yesterday that we are never present are the ones who are not here. The nation needs to know who is here and who is not.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a suggestion that to ascertain who is here and who is not we carry out a roll call. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, if it is a matter of roll call then I believe that at a certain stage when we come to determining or voting ourselves on any matter it will also have to be by roll call. It will not be by “aye” or “nay”. Also I believe that procedurally, this being an important matter, there is no need for omnibus voting. We should go item by item.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that we have quorum and, therefore, roll call at this point would not be necessary. Roll call will be necessary at voting time so I would beg that we proceed with the motion.

THE SPEAKER: I have not got the number yet. Why don’t we give ourselves 30 minutes since we are doing nothing here?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, everybody in the various constituencies knows about this function today. I think it is very important that we carry out roll call so that people are accountable.  
MR ERESU: In view of the fact that this is a constitutional matter to which we must be accountable, we deserve a clear verdict and this can only be ascertained by having a very clear determination by roll call. 

THE SPEAKER: We can have the roll call eventually when we start voting. Honourable members, for how long are we going to sit here? Why don’t we say 2.30?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, if it is a matter of spending time before we can determine whether the numbers present here can transact business, we also have very urgent items to clear. Take for instance we need to clear our Pensions Bill today. Where is it?  Why can’t we deal with it today? As a matter of fact –(Interruption) 

MRS ZZIWA: The information I want to give hon. Awori and the august House is that it is true we have other very urgent business like the Refugee Bill, which among others the committee has been able to put forward. Therefore, I suggest that since we are here and we have a full House we should handle other urgent business, including the Refugee Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that while we are waiting to realise the required number we dispose of matters raised in the Public Service and Local Government Committee report on the districts. As you recall honourable members, my assessment was that as far as Budaka was concerned I believe we had concluded the debate. However, I think there were some problems with Manafwa and Tororo although the report was covering the three districts. Is it possible to deal with one part of the report and keep the other pending more consultations?

12.35
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, you remember I had concluded the Government’s position on the recommendations of the committee. In the case of Budaka, we had agreed that it becomes a district with effect from next financial year. That was the recommendation of the committee, and Government accepted that.

Concerning the case of Tororo, it was agreed that the matter be looked into further and that Tororo District remains as it is today. 

Regarding Manafwa, I concluded by saying that the issue was the name of the headquarters. There was a recommendation that the headquarters be called Manafwa and that the name of the current town called Bubulo be changed to Manafwa. Meanwhile we also considered the proposal by the committee that Manjiya be looked into for a possibility of becoming a district. That summary reflects the Government position and that is the position I still hold.  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe for the sake of information to the minister on the issue of Budaka, you suggested next financial year simply because the funds are not there. However, Dr Mallinga has sent me a document - although I cannot ascertain its authenticity - indicating that money is being allocated for starting the district – this is the document - and that actually the money is there. The document is addressed to the Chief Administrative Officer, Pallisa District and it indicates that money is being released on a monthly basis for this district.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we have been going through a number of exchanges and some on the Floor of this House as to the truth of this claim. I also have a copy of that document. This House authorized the money that is being given to Budaka when it was elevated to a town council. The document I have shows that for the month of October Shs 2,082,919 was being sent to Budaka from Pallisa. This cannot be money to establish a district. The money that establishes a district is a minimum of Shs 100 million and it would not be translated into Shs 2 million per month. I have communicated this to hon. Mallinga and I have failed to succeed in ascertaining whether this is the truth. The only mistake that is on this document is the start-up cost for the district. 

As things are, money is being sent to the district of Pallisa to start up the town council. If Budaka was a district they would have a CAO established to handle the money. As it is, this money is now going to the Town Clerk of Budaka; and that is the truth. If hon. Mallinga believes that a district can be started on a monthly basis with Shs 2 million then that district is not worth its name or even that of a sub-county. Please, let this House be -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay honourable members, the report was that we create the district of Budaka next financial year. Can we pronounce ourselves on Budaka as a district?

12.40
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, what the honourable minister is saying is not true. The Ministry of Finance has opened up a line for finances to reach Budaka and that is called a start-up account. I asked the CAO specifically if this was for the town council of Budaka and he said that if that were so, money would have been sent to the town clerk. This money is for the district of Budaka and they have close to Shs 30 million in reserve awaiting a budget from Budaka. They are awaiting a budget but the financial line is open from the Ministry of Finance. Any time they submit a budget, money for the district to cover this budget will be sent. 

I am really puzzled as to why the honourable minister has been a stumbling block as far as the partition of Pallisa is concerned. Furthermore, there are rumours circulating in Pallisa that he has not been in favour of this new district and that he is trying to favour his personal friends in that district.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, this House exists and hon. Mallinga is a member. The document that he has given to you states that the total estimated budget for 2005/2006 for this particular vote is Shs 25 million. Could this House have passed Shs 25 million as a start-up fund for Budaka when there is no record anywhere? 

Secondly, we have ministers from the Ministry of Finance here. How could the Minister of Finance allocate money on his own as a start-up fund for Budaka when in fact there are other districts which are supposed to start next financial year? How could he choose only Budaka?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would want the honourable member surely -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us resolve this in this way. First of all as of now there is no district of Budaka and the resolution has not been made. We are going to make it today. Why don’t we make a resolution on Budaka and then see how to proceed? I am putting the question and we shall vote by show of hands. The question is to create the district of Budaka as recommended. Let us start by creating it and then decide when it will start walking. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is one abstention; those for are 188, and none against. The required number is half of the members, which is about 140. Therefore, the motion is passed. Budaka district has been created. 

(Question agreed to.)

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance from you. I am happy that the motion has been passed. However, we are aware of the controversies in Budaka, now a district. When I go out, people of Pallisa District who are anxious to start being productive will ask me when they should start. The report says, “with immediate effect”, that is why we are supporting the motion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Starting has financial implications. The Executive has proposed next financial year, starting with July. We cannot make a contrary arrangement because this involves finance. Do we have to vote on that?

DR MALLINGA: I think we should not go contrary to the recommendation of the committee. The committee did a lot of research and looked at the tension, which is in the district. We have established that the Ministry of Finance is willing to send money to Budaka as soon as they send the budget. There is an account.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Finance does not decide on how to disburse funds on its own. Funds are disbursed and votes created at the request of line ministries. Therefore, it cannot be true that the Ministry of Finance is willing or has accepted when the line ministry has not made a requisition.  

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Finance to tell this House whether the money is available, before we think of the various procedures to be followed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the money cannot be availed for an item that has not been created.

DR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, why have they been sending money to Budaka for a start up? It is not for the town council. This money is for Budaka district.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member that will become an audit query for the Public Accounts Committee. We have finished with that. Commencement date will be July 2006.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much for handling Budaka. I would request that the House adopts the committee report so that we move on. Other people from Tororo and Manafwa who demanded districts will follow these better, basing on the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The other aspect of the report was about Tororo and Manafwa. It appears that they recommended further study of the issue and we cannot do much about it now. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister of Local Government to clarify this. Now that Tororo is no more, the directive was that Lamwo becomes a district. Could the minister confirm so that we adopt it in the House?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for my colleague to say Tororo is no more when the committee report that we have adopted is very clear? The Speaker clearly said that for the time being the district will start in 2006. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, once the House pronounces itself on an issue, it is not a subject for further debate. However, maybe he was seeking clarification for other consultations.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member who asked about the issue of Lamwo knows better than the information he is seeking. I have written to him explaining the circumstances that the directive arose from. I do not see how he could ask this question now because the case of Tororo was not for this financial year even if it had been created. Therefore, there was no issue of substituting Tororo with Lamwo. Therefore, I do not see why he should raise this matter at all.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion by the minister about special interest groups’ representation, under Article 78. We have to vote on this to see what we keep and what we do not. We shall do it by show of hands but I suggest that we first ascertain whether we have the minimum number by roll call.

(A roll call was taken.)

MEMBERS PRESENT:
1.	AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS REX 
2.	AANIMU ANGUPALE 
3.	AEL ARK LODOU 
4.	AGARD DIDI 
5.	AHABWE GODFREY PEREZ 
6.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 
7.	AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
8.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
9.	ALINTUMA NSAMBU JOHN 
10.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
11.	AMAJO MARY MAGDALENE ORIEKOT 
12.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
13.	AMONGI BETTY ONGOM 
14.	AMONGIN APORU H. CHRISTINE 
15.	ANANG-ODUR LAKANA TOMSON 
16.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
17.	ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA 
18.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 
19.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON MPONGO 
20.	ATIM OGWAL CECILIA 
21.	ATUBO OMARA DANIEL 
22.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 
23.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
24.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
25.	BADDA FRED 
26.	BAGAYA GRACE TUBWITA
27.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA 
28.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
29.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE 
30.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 
31.	BAMWANGA STEVEN 
32.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
33.	BASAJJABALABA NASSER 
34.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
35.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILIP 
36.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
37.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
38.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
39.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE 
40.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
41.	BINTU ABWOOLI LUKUMU JALIA 
42.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
43.	BUKENYA BALIBASEKA GILBERT 
44.	BUTIME RWAKAKAIRA TOM 
45.	BWERERE KASOLE LWANGA EDWARD 
46.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
47.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
48.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
49.	BYENKYA BEATRICE NYAKAISIKI 
50.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE 
51.	D’UJANGA GIW SIMON 
52.	DOMBO EMMANUEL LUMALA 
53.	EKANYA GEOFFREY 
54.	ERESU ELYANU JOHN 
55.	ERIYO JESSICA 
56.	ESELE JOHN PETER 
57.	GABOI KIBAALE WAMBI DAVID 
58.	GOLE NICHOLAS DAVIS 
59.	GUMA GUMISIRIZA DAVID 
60.	GUTTI ANDREW
61.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
62.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA 
63.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
64.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM 
65.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
66.	KAGABA HARRIET 
67.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
68.	KAJEKE WILFRED 
69.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
70.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
71.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
72.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA COS 
73.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
74.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU 
75.	KAROORO MARY OKURUT
76.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
77.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE 
78.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
79.	KATUNTU ABDU 
80.	KATURAMU HOOD KIRIBEDDA 
81.	KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST 
82.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
83.	KAYANJA ELLY 
84.	KAYONGO TOM 
85.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
86.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM REUBEN 
87.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
88.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
89.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
90.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
91.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
92.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
93.	KIZIGE MOSES 
94.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
95.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 
96.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
97.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
98.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
99.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
100.	LOLEM MICAH 
101.	LORIKA ROSE NACHA
102.	LOOTE OGWEL SAMMY 
103.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN 
104.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 
105.	LYOMOKI SAM 
106.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
107.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE 
108.	MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD 
109.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
110.	MATEMBE MIRIA 
111.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
112.	MATOVU DAVID 
113.	MAYOMBO NOBLE 
114.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET 
115.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
116.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
117.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
118.	MUGAMBE KIFOMUSANA JOSEPH 
119.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
120.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU 
121.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON
122.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA 
123.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL
124.	MUKULA RICHARD 
125.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
126.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
127.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE OMUSOLO ROSE
128.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI
129.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA
130.	MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
131.	MWESIGE ADOLF 
132.	MWONDHA PATRICK JOHN 
133.	NABETA NASANI 
134.	NABWISO BULIMA WILBERFORCE 
135.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 
136.	NAMUYANGU JENIPHER
137.	NANDALA MAFABI NATHAN
138.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI
139.	NANTUME ERON JANET 
140.	NASASIRA JOHN 
141.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA
142.	NDAWULA ALI 
143.	NDAWULA KAWEESI EDWARD
144.	NDEEZI ALEX  
145.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP 
146.	NUWAGABA HERBERT 
147.	NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA RUTH
148.	NYANZI VINCENT 
149.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH
150.	ODONGO JEJE 
151.	OKOT OGONG FELIX
152.	OKULLO EPAK YEFUSA
153.	OKUMU RINGA PATRICK
154.	OKUPA ELIJAH 
155.	OLUM ZACHARY 
156.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED 
157.	OMWONY-OJOK 
158.	ONEK OBALOKER HILLARY 
159.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN
160.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO
161.	PAJOBO BRUNO 
162.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET
163.	RUHINDI FRED
164.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
165.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA 
166.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
167.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
168.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 
169.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
170.	SEBALU MIKE 
171.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE
172.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA
173.	SENINDE NANSUBUGA 
174.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
175.	SINABULYA SYLVIA 
176.	SITENDA-SEBALU WILLIAM 
177.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS
178.	TINYEFUZA DAVID 
179.	TIPERU NUSURA 
180.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
181.	TUMA RUTH 
182.	TUMWINE ELLY 
183.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 
184.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE 
185.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
186.	WANDERA MARTIN 
187.	WONEKA OLIVER 
188.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
189.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
190.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the roll call I am advised that we are 190.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, a number of colleagues have come and the number should be better than that, but unfortunately some of the colleagues keep going out. Maybe it is time they sought your permission before they leave.

THE SPEAKER: I think we suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m. so that those who went for lunch will be back. So, the proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.32 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.36 p.m. _)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we suspended the proceedings earlier in the day because of the numbers. The numbers required are set in the law and it was futile to call a vote on the motion. But still my assessment is that, still we do not have the numbers.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, may I request that as we wait for more Members, we handle the Code of Conduct on Political Parties. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us do that then we shall decide later. Representation will be by the Bill; it will come definitely, because everybody is committed to it. But let us for a time being handle this. So, the motion moved by the Minister of State, Justice and Constitutional Affairs; you very well know the reason why he moved it and this morning he told me he got the copies of the details. So, I think we can proceed with that motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (CODE OF CONDUCT) REGULATIONS, 2005 UNDER SECTIONS 19 AND 27 OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS ACT, 2005 (ACT NO. 18 OF 2005)

3.38
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for bringing this motion on the code of conduct for the political parties and the political organizations, as provided for in the Political Parties and Organisations Act. I believe that this code of conduct will go a long way to contribute to strengthening and to regulating the operations of political parties and organizations.  

As you know, we are just resuming the activities of parties and political organizations and, therefore, bringing this rule or this regulation and code of conduct at this time will improve on the manner in which these important institutions carry out their operations. I, therefore, rise to support it and to draw to the attention of the minister a few amendments, positive ones, that I think he should take into consideration to see how he can accept it so that we move forward.  

I am glad that we gave the minister these proposed amendments. One of them is in the interpretation.  This is to do with the interpretation of independent candidates, where the minister says it means a candidate nominated for an election and who is not supported by a political party or organization. I think to say, “is not supported” may imply a negative definition and I would rather go in for something like this. I gave him two alternatives: one, “is not sponsored by a political party” or “is not standing on a ticket of a political party or organization” I would be satisfied with any of those two.

I have also looked at page 5 of the code of conduct. I would be happy if the minister looks on page 5 under Electoral Committee, I think Rule 11(3), it reads: “The composition of the district, sub-county and parish electoral liaison committees shall be as determined by the commission in consultation with the political parties and organisations”. I think you have left out the nominated independent candidate because all the others are included, and I would think that for consistency, in Rule 11(3) you should also include - if you look at Rule 11(2) and 11(4) all these have included nominated independent candidates. So, in sub rule (3) after organizations, please amend by including, “and nominated independent candidates”. 

On page 8, the minister has brought up this issue of relationship between political parties, organisations and candidate and the media. I am satisfied with the aspect where the minister says, “Every political party or organisation…shall -” in other words, the relations between the political parties and the media imposing the responsibility on how political parties and organisations should behave. But there is no reciprocity, and I would think that just like the parties and political organizations and candidates have a responsibility on how they conduct themselves with regards to the media, the media also should have some responsibility and that is why I think in Rule 15(2), something to the effect that the media shall conduct its – I have not been able to draft it but the technical people will sit down and do it. 

I have put something like this, “The media shall exercise high level of professionalism and impartiality in the discharge of their duty.” In other words, it is not just the parties who are relating themselves to the media; the media also should relate itself to the parties. In other words, no body should use the media to publish false or defamatory allegations and I think this should find a way of bringing it out.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, whereas the party candidates can be controlled and measures can be taken to discipline them if they do not comply, what will you do with the media?

MR ATUBO: Well, this is a code of conduct and we put it down really to see that the press also have something. Already I have cases where some people are misusing the press to decampaign other candidates. They are going on radio and insulting their colleagues. Some of them have pocketed certain journalists to publish or say something very negative against certain candidates. Even at the local radio stations up country; I have been a victim of it already. So, yes, I think just like political parties and political organisation should recognize and respect this code of conduct, the media should not publish false or defamatory allegations. 

Prohibited conduct and sanctions: In regulation 16(1), “A political party, organisation, or candidate shall not;
(b) publish false or defamatory allegations in connection with an election in respect of – 
(i)	a political party, organisation or it’s candidates, representatives, agents or members.”

What about if you publish something negative about my family. Somebody can come and just say, you know, Mrs so and so, the son of a candidate, the husband of so. I think all this really should find a place for protection not just a candidate because somebody can really come with a false and malicious story to damage you by using some members of your family, and I think this should be covered. I think some of you have already been victims of that.  

On page 9, I think in that prohibited conduct and sanctions, I would be happy if the minister could accept an amendment in 16(3) and add in (e), a person shall not offer any inducement or reward to another person “to publish false or defamatory allegations against a political party or organisation, agency or a family.” 

Basically that is what I went through very quickly this morning when I saw the regulation. I am sure that my eye may not have caught everything but that is what I could do immediately. Thank you.

3.48
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, first of all, I rise to support what hon. Omara Atubo has complained about and that is the absence of something on the role of the mass media.  In 2001 elections, one presidential candidate was alleged to have HIV/AIDS. His opponent made that clear in the press and it was publicised. And when the Chief Justice, Benjamin Odoki, was passing the judgment after Rtd Col Besigye had gone to court he said, among other things, that Rtd Col Besigye Kizza had failed to prove that he was not HIV/AIDS patient. 

According to that judgment, the onus to prove whether somebody was HIV positive or negative was left to the complainant. So, I think it is necessary at this time for us to look into the possibility of prohibiting the mass media to publish negative information or smear campaign against his opponents. That is the first point.  

The second point, Mr Speaker, I was recently perturbed to hear Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale saying that the President of this country, His Excellency, is the patron of Kalangala Action Plan. It is in the press!  Now we know that the Kalangala group was formed to intimidate political opponents of the NRM and that programme has not been withdrawn to this date. I want to hear from the minister who is bringing this resolution to tell us whether it is true that the President of this country is actually the patron of the Kalangala Action Plan. It is very important, Mr Speaker, because if this country is going to be intimidated again by people of Kakooza Mutale – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would suggest that since we are making a regulation and you are not supporting that kind of leadership, you use this one to suggest the law, which we should use to prohibit it. It will be more helpful.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request that you allow me at an appropriate time to bring in some amendment. Thank you. Those are the two points I had in mind.

THE SPEAKER: Are we really going back like that? I think if you have the amendment, you have read the rules, help us to improve these rules or regulations by suggesting that let us put this as hon. Omara Atubo did. Think about it.

3.52
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Literally I am seeking guidance from you or the minister, the Attorney General or clarification on a number of items, which I feel aggrieved about but not contained in this amendment.  

While this is a code of conduct on how parties should relate to each other, in the previous law we passed regarding members of political parties or political parties who have been elected to office or to Parliament, somehow I feel that they are not sufficiently protected from any capricious group of people within the party that might wish to withdraw them from Parliament. 

Where can we seek redress because the very group that wants to withdraw you from Parliament is the same group, which says that if you have a grievance that you will have to go to them for redress? You might be taken as a rebel – I do not mean an armed rebel but somebody with views different from the established order within the party. How do we protect such a member of the party and Member of Parliament? 

As I said, a group of people at the party headquarters can decide mister so and so or honourable so and so is acting not in accordance with the manifesto of the party or the Constitution, therefore, we expel him and automatically he or she loses her seat or his seat in Parliament. What kind of protection mechanism can we put in place especially with such a law to protect them?

Two, we also have certain political parties with their own constitutions and their own code of conduct in terms of disciplinary measures. You might decide – look, I was denied the chance to be the candidate in the primaries and suddenly somebody within the party says, “Look, as far as we are concerned, you cannot run for election or else we expel you.” Now, what is supreme, the party constitution or the national Constitution, Article 59, which defines the rights of an individual?  You have the right to vote for a person and you have got the right to be voted for. 

If an organization decides you cannot be voted for, that is our party constitution and yet the national Constitution says you have the right to vote for a person or to be voted for but this organization says that that is it as far as we are concerned fairly or unfairly you are defeated in the primaries. I am trying to find a place of redress. Where do we go for such a person? Who can you run to? You have your own convictions, you are a loyal member of the party but a group of people have decided, we do not like you for whatever reason; it could be a personality clash or otherwise. 

Mr Speaker, which law - can we amend this particular one? Can we make provision for it?  Where do we go in case you have been maliciously excluded from competing or to compete for office?   I do not want to talk in abstract, let us be specific. I am not a member of NRM-O but I have been reading in the media that at least 70 or so members of NRM-O feel aggrieved that they were unfairly defeated in their primaries, and where do they go for redress? They are being –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like to give my hon. good friend, Aggrey Awori, the following information. First of all, Aggrey Awori admits he is not a member of the party and, therefore, Aggrey Awori is ignorant about the internal workings of the NRM-O and he is right perhaps to inquire. But I think the information that hon. Aggrey Awori should benefit from me as a member of the party is that, like the UPC to which he belongs, the NRM-O has also its internal working regulations which members who subscribe to it must comply with, and such that if you want to be a member of that party you must subscribe to certain regulations, which are in its constitution and also in its own other regulations that are there.  

In the event of what hon. Aggrey Awori terms as grievance by some of the members who have lost, there is a mechanism of redress, and this mechanism of redress is seen in the party reconciliation commission which has been put in place and also some elections being repeated. Those are the only mechanisms, which are in place and many others that will come with time. But hon. Awori also should know he lost elections when he was in UPC when he stood in Nakawa, where did he take his grievance? 

THE SPEAKER: But perhaps the minister could assist us, is it his intention to regulate the internal administration of parties, or this is in respect of how parties related to each other, maybe the minister may help us to explain that. Was your intention to have regulation to regulate the internal administration of parties?

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, that was not my intention in the list because as you know, inter-party issues are regulated by party constitutions and party regulations. Hon. Awori should be able to know that better than anybody in this House; and we are not here to write constitutions for parties. The code of conduct is an inter-party conduct to define how parties relate to each other, to define principles of the common good, principles of national interest and how we will go about the business of campaigns and elections. So, it has nothing to do with internal discipline and how primaries in parties are conducted.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify whether the Political Organisation Act, the Constitution and the party constitution are supposed to operate in conformity with the national Constitution. Because, I do remember, we put it categorically clear in the Political Organisation Act that the party constitution must conform to the Political Party and Organisation Act, and the Political Organization Act must conform to the national Constitution. So, kindly clarify to that. 

And for hon. Aggrey Awori, Mr Speaker, if a member of a party feels that the constitution of his party does not conform to the national Constitution or a political party he or she should go to court to seek redress.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my hon. colleague with the last piece of advice. My hon. colleague also you recall, the Attorney General, when I got up I said, I am seeking clarification. I do accept the fact that I have been belonging to that industry of political parties a little bit longer, and that is why I am trying to advise you who is getting in for the first time that there are certain intricacies which may not be apparent to some of you who are trying out this new political dispensation of multi-party politics; there all kinds of intricacies starting from the grass root level.  

In regard to my honourable colleague from Kaberamaido, I would like to inform you that what you are referring to, my fate in Nakawa elections in 1980, I was never disqualified. Indeed, the primaries were repeated three times and on each occasion I worn, so there was no point for me to go to any place for redress because I had become the official candidate of the party. Maybe at that material time you were not in the industry of politics and  - yes my colleague I am not going to address your issues before you get the Floor, but you said in 1980s, you were not in Nakawa. Once again you are one of those in the same category of 1980, I do not think you were in the industry of politics you were very far. Whether the age or profession, but I can assure you 20 years ago you were not in politics I was there.

MR ERESU: The honourable member has rightly put it that while having been an old guard in the industry of politics in 1980, the elections were repeated many times. I would like to give him this clarification that the very act that elections were repeated many times was the means of redress to a situation, which had not yet been clarified. So that actually he is conforming to the fact that a political party has its own mechanism of trying to clarify certain situation to put its house in order. So, for him to compare and try to inquire is actually shooting himself on the foot by explaining the fact of what happened to him as what is happening elsewhere now in other political parties.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I am very happy to know that you are very happy. What is our current status having been eliminated at the primaries without cause for redress? It is very important for us to accept what comes to us, and I am very happy that you are cultivating that culture in the NRM-O -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we deal with the regulations please.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Coming back to the principle or concern, Mr Speaker, notwithstanding with what the Attorney General has said that this particular law is a code of conduct between various political parties - In other words, external relations of the party not internal, I think that is very good clarification. But, when it comes to the relationship between various political parties, if various constitutions of various political parties cause difficult interaction between political parties, where do we put the mechanism for resolving such conflicts? That is why I was trying to find out how do we come to redress in the event of difficulties. Initially it was for the - now I want to know what about between political parties.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, this one may have passed in law, but I thought it was very unfair to make the Electoral Commission a regulatory body for political parties. Really, the law as it is, for the Electoral Commission it should be for the conduct of elections and nothing else and nothing more. Again for the Electoral Commission to be the organ to regulate political parties, I think is asking for too much and sooner or later there could be conflict of interest. I seek your clarification, Mr Attorney General.

4.06
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine are three clarifications I am seeking from the minister, if he could listen to me:  I notice that these regulations are made under the Political Parties and Organizations Act, and that they are made after consultation with Electoral Commission and political parties and organisations.  

But, Mr Speaker, I want to draw your attention to the proposed regulation No.3, which deals with the application of the regulations and it states: “These regulations apply to political parties and organizations and to independent candidates”. I want to know from the deputy Attorney General, why independent candidates have been brought into regulations, which are meant to deal with relations between political parties and organisations. Where do independent candidates fit in?

Secondly, I want to draw your attention to the proposed regulation No.5 which states: “The purpose of this code is to provide conditions that are conducive for peaceful, free and fair elections in a multiparty setting….” I want you to ignore the rest. Why are these proposed regulations being reduced to elections only? I thought that the purpose for which we were meant to provide this code of conduct was to see that inter-party activities were carried out in a certain manner so that political parties behave in a manner, which will promote democratic tendencies in this country.  Why are we reducing it to only the electoral time?

Thirdly, Sir, I want to draw your attention to proposed regulation 14(4)(c), which talks about sanctions, which include, but are not limited to the following: (c) “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and the law governing the election, the commission may cause the disqualification of the political party or organisation or candidate from participation in the particular election in which the breach or regularity is committed.” 

Mr Speaker, I am scared because this seems to be usurping the role of the electoral law. If a code of conduct meant for purposes of regulating activities of the political parties, can disqualify a political party or a candidate from standing for a particular election, then I think it is going ultra-vires its activities. I thought that this should be left to the electoral law and the Electoral Commission. Those are the few comments that I can make, Sir.

4.08
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania county, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Sir, I am making general remarks and I wish the minister to be sure of one or two issues. I want to note that smooth elections are the most assured way of having a peaceful outcome and harmony after the elections. I make this comment full aware of the current political atmosphere in this country, and I think it is agreed in this Parliament that in fact there is political tension arising from the case, which is in court on Dr Kizza Besigye. So, I will take this into account, coupled with the experience we had in 2001 elections, which was characterized by violence and intimidation. 

I want to ask the minister to let me know what guarantees he has that the police force is absent to man these elections that we shall not involve the Army in the management of the electoral process. Because if you remember, in the report which was tabled and debated in this Parliament, the use of the Army was one of the most serious issues, which were pointed out as the cause of election violence and intimidation.  

Mr Speaker, I note that Page 8 contains prohibited conduct and sanctions, which we should agree on as Parliament. I also note that a number of these issues are covered in the electoral laws, which this Parliament has passed. But I want to specifically point out that if I go out to campaign as a candidate or for whatever office in this country, I should be prohibited from using the Army or any security agent of this country, for the purpose of trying either to gather votes by use of those agents or otherwise to intimidate other candidates.  

I would wish that this be part of what is prohibited even though it might be in some other laws, because I note that in some of the cases we are also repeating what is in other laws. This is very important because there are advantages and I have experience after working with the team, which investigated election violence. This issues of use of the security agencies, the Army and so on, is the most important issue, which if not addressed now, we stand a danger of having a repeat, which may even be of worst magnitude than that which we had. I wish the minister could include this in this conduct so that all of us can have fair and intimidation free elections.  Thank you, Sir.

4.10
MR JOHN KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief, but I would like to make one general statement, which I would like the minister to answer. 

This Parliament will always be remembered as a Parliament of action and activity. We took trouble, about four years ago, to appoint a committee, which investigated election violence. We came out with a very big respectable volume. That volume was laid on Table, it was also reported. But the recommendations therein were never brought on board through any serious documentation. Clause 2 is capable of reversing the trend from the past negative experience. I would like the Attorney General to endeavour to explain why those endeavours were not carried out in accordance with what I have stated. 

Secondly, it is on record that the issue, which hon. Anang-Odur has articulated, regarding the misuse of security forces during election periods is not a new phenomenon. In my own area, Wankulukuku, I saw several mambas on the eve of the elections, which were permanently stationed there and they did not leave until after the results had been announced.  

This document of law in regard to conduct should caution participants in the electoral race, especially those who are close to power, to endeavour not to misuse any security organ during the campaigning time. They should be warned in documentation, not only in words. I have not seen anything of that semblance in this conduct.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the minister to page 4 in regard to the campaigning regulations. It says: “For the purposes of this code, the words ‘same place’ means within 10 kilometres of the other public event.” Mr Speaker, this is most unfortunate, for example, in urban areas, the distance between Nateete and Ndeeba is hardly three kilometres and in places like Otuke and beyond the situation is even worse. 

I would, therefore, like to propose immediately that the Attorney General accepts an amendment, which I will later forward. You must be talking in terms of two or three kilometres, in reasonable terms otherwise 10 kilometres, especially in regard to the new demarcations of districts, would not be knowing what you are talking about. Otherwise, I have liked the document –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But what do you do with the local elections where people, for instance, compete for the chair of a sub-county? What do you do with this distance?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for that contribution and advice, Mr Speaker. I am sure that the learned Attorney General will be picking that point very seriously. 

Mr Speaker, I have also been saddened by some of the regulations, which have been proposed, especially the following regulation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, I have a problem. Do you think that you are going to make a contribution again? Why do you not have an input in improving the regulations because the minister then will respond and say, “On this I agree and on the other I disagree,” instead of expecting that we are going to treat this at the committee stage. I do not think that we are going to have a committee stage.

DR EPAK: The honourable member on the Floor has made a very serious statement that you had contributed to the debate and it is in the Hansard.  Unless this impression is corrected, it can cause a very serious precedent.

THE SPEAKER: I am not bothered with that kind of thinking. I am a Speaker who is supposed to advise and guide, and if a Member does not know, my role as a Speaker is precisely that. If you become irrelevant, I will say you are irrelevant.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Dr Epak should know that I appreciated the advice given, and I do not know why he should advance a matter we have long left. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to humbly caution the Attorney General about the issue of warnings. For example, you have stated here that campaigners and the press and monitors must follow this. You have not been emphatic on the type of protectionism, which befits a candidate. The candidate should also be protected in person. I do not see anywhere in this document where a candidate is protected. A case in point is Dr Kizza Besigye, who was nominated when he was in jail. How much has this law protected him? Must he stay in jail in perpetuity as he endeavours to campaign, which campaigning time may never come?  

This is a serious matter, which the Attorney General should capably address. Taking your advice, Mr Speaker, I would like to propose one kilometre where the Attorney General had proposed ten kilometres in terms of distance of location of rallies, since I may not come back to speak. 

The third point I wanted to make is in regard to page 9, where it said that ferrying supporters from one campaigning area to another is prohibited. You have to be careful not to contradict the Constitution, where I think there is freedom of movement. If I hear of a rally taking place in hon. Kiwalabye’s area, much as he has already been thrown out, I have a right to go and participate and if possible enjoy the politics of his advocacy.  

Why should I be cautioned as if I am travelling between Kenya and Uganda to attend to an event of political relevance to my understanding and the people I represent? The Attorney General should protect that otherwise, this is a shortcoming which should not negate the existing fundamental human rights articulated in Chapter 4 of our Constitution.

Finally, since we are in a new dispensation, I am talking about the political party dispensation, I think we should not be too rigid otherwise we are going to kill off the drums of political activity in the course of campaigning. We have existing laws, including the Penal Code, which could bring on board any wrong doer. So, let us not be too rigid, we understand enough to contribute as we enjoy our fundamental human rights. Thank you very much.

4.14
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to admit that I have read the document and I have failed to identify the exact purpose for this document. I do not know whether it is a legal document or just a guideline. Maybe the minister will help me to identify the document. If it is a regulation or a code of conduct, I would have expected that to be clearly defined not as condense as it is with enforceable agencies or clearly identified as well.  

Now, we are told about the dos and the don’ts of the candidates, what the parties should do and what the parties should not do and the relationships between the parties. But we are not told what would happen in the event of breach of these conducts? I think it would be wrong to refer as to page 6 that in all these things, which are spelt out here, the complaint should go to the Electoral Commission. 

Then that means that we probably will have to expand the role of the Electoral Commission and maybe, provide also some legal commission within a commission to deal with the matter. I am seeing a problem here, maybe because this Parliament did not have time to digest and understand the issues behind the electoral violence of the year 2001. 

If Parliament had the opportunity of debating that document probably some of these issues could have been identified, and would have helped us to find the best solution in dealing with issues that would reduce violence during the elections or conflicts within contesting parties or conflicts between individuals. I feel that these are some of our handicaps. I do not know if we still have time to do that, but if we did definitely we would enrich this document.  

In my view, this is not a well sought-out document. Maybe we find a day or two for the minister to sit down with expertise to give us something, which is useful. To me, this document does not make sense. Or maybe, we could have directed parties to sit down, discuss areas which normally cause conflicts, and then come up with their own codes of conduct, which probably can be coordinated at some point.  

But to make it into a law without any enforcement agencies, I am at a loss, I do not know whether it came - I am sorry to say, but I think the minister should have worked a little bit harder. Maybe, as a lawyer, he did not have time to read the document properly before he brought it to Parliament. 

Mr speaker, the role of the RDC and the mobilisers who operate under the RDC are not spelt here. I am happy that at least something is mentioned about the media and the parties, but the role of the RDC and mobilisers has not been clearly spelt out and you know that they feature very prominently in electoral exercises. So, I think the minister may have to look at that matter and come up with a solution.  

On page 4 item 4, the issue of distance does not apply in municipalities. I think some of you are acquainted with life in the municipalities; the divisions can sometimes be a distance of about four or five kilometres. Maybe, since this regulation is going to apply to contesting candidates of different parties at different levels, we could probably define this distance according to the level of participation. So, if somebody is contesting as a parish councillor then maybe we can say that they should not hold same meetings in the same village within the parish. 

In other words, two parties should hold meetings on the same day, same time but in different villages within the parish. But if it is a municipality, then we should talk about divisions so that if one candidate were holding a meeting in one division, then the other would not be holding the same meeting in the same division. So, we should clearly specify what we are talking about and the candidates we are talking about. I think this may make sense to me.  

Finally, I want to say that if we are talking about inter-party relationship, we cannot ignore intra-party relationship because we are talking about electoral matters. Now, when we are talking about electoral matters, conflicts within the parties, which cannot be resolved by parties, there must be some kind of way of resolving that issue because somebody has already highlighted that some parties may not abide by the laws. Therefore, there must be some kind of redress and I felt that this document should have clarified that particularly when we are talking about independent candidates. Some of these independent candidates are actually members of the Movement Party, Democratic Party or UPC. So, in that respect, something must be done in terms of intra-political party relationship and also candidates’ relationship. Thank you, Mr Speaker.   

4.18
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, if I can recall well, when we were debating the Political Parties and Organizations Act, we created what we called the National Political Parties Forum. The purpose of this was to harness the relationship between parties, and I am wondering if we are talking about a code of conduct and the National Political Parties Forum is not anywhere in this document. I am at a loss.  

I am seeking clarification from the minister whether this forum is not of great importance when we are talking about relationships between political parties, especially now when we are creating new organizations like the Election Peace Committee? I am concerned about this because this point of the National Political Parties Forum was brought about to look into the relationship between parties and it ceases to feature when we create a code of conduct. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, to refer back to the honourable member for Lira Municipality, from your contribution, were you of the view that these regulations tabled by the minister should be scrutinised by a small group and then a report be made to us? Were you thinking about the committee?  Sorry, but I think it was not clear. 

MRS OGWAL: Can you repeat that, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: From your contribution, I gathered that you are thinking that there is a need to scrutinise these regulations by a sub-committee and thereby report. Is that what you think?

MRS OGWAL: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am sure you have had a chance of looking at the document –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Of course.

MRS OGWAL: The document is not a well thought out document. I am trying to use a better word but I am not a carrier diplomat. So, I ask the minister to forgive me for that. But it is not a well thought out document. It is not properly focused, we do not know what this document is supposed to achieve. We do not know who this document is targeting and we do not know the enforceable institutions, we do not know whether it is an electoral law or political organizations law. You know, it is all messed up. Therefore, we need a committee that gives us a more expert kind of detailed analysis and give us a better presentation.

MR OMARA ATUBO: In respect of that important guidance you made, what if the relevant provision of the Political Parties and Organizations Act says that we make this regulation in consultation with Electoral Commission and political parties and organization, with the approval of Parliament? In other words, these regulations or this code of conduct is not just something from Parliament; it is coming to us for approval. 

Now, the Minister of Justice/Attorney General may wish to confirm to us that this is really what the Electoral Commission and political parties agreed on. What we can only do is to improve on it. But for us not to be seen to be the machinery behind getting this thing, it may appear as if parliament is just refusing to approve. So, we have to be very careful and the Attorney General may at the appropriate time assure us that what we have is what came from the Electoral Commission and the parties. And while in the process of approving, we can make a few inputs here and there. But in the final analysis, it is the product of those parties and the Electoral Commission.

4.21
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I want to ask the minister to make the document a little smaller. When he is defining the issue of the deadly weapons, he defines it but not under (4), where he is talking of interpretations. So, the best would be to bring it under interpretations and make it a bit smaller. 

Then under Rule 7(b)(ii), in the second last line, he talks of “supporters.” How are you going to identify supporters of a particular candidate, especially in cases where they do not have letters to identify them as supporters of a particular candidate? We may have cases where supporters of a particular candidate go to join a rally of another candidate to make sure that they disrupt it, to cause problems for that candidate. How are you going to manage that, because this always happens?

And under 13, “Role of election monitors”. When he says in 13(2) that: “For the purpose of these regulations, an election monitor is a person authorised by the commission under any electoral law to monitor an election”. Any electoral law? This is a document by the Minister in charge of Constitutional Affairs, let him quote the law do not leave it hanging. 

And when you talk of election monitor, since this is multiparty politics, I belong to a party. Elections are going on in a particular place, say parish, but there is a candidate from my party, why should I first go to seek permission from the commission to monitor what is going on? I am a member of the party, so I automatically have interest. Why then should I first rush to Kampala or to Bugiri to get permission to be recognized as a monitor, yet I have interest. So, I think when we talk of monitors, those to get permission from the commission should be people from outside the country.

Then, when we look at 16(2), “A person shall not under any circumstances, carry a deadly weapon to a campaign or meeting area, whether or not the person is ordinarily licensed to carry the weapon.” People get weapons for personal security. Now, if you stop him or her from carrying weapons for their personal security, in their own meetings, are you going to provide security for every candidate? Do you think that this government have enough personnel to provide security for every candidate at a time when we are having local council elections, parliamentary elections and presidential elections at ago? Will it be possible? 

And still under (3)(b), to attend or not to attend a public meeting, that there should be no inducement or reward to any person. Assuming people are coming for a demonstration or for a rally, and it is taking a whole day, and they need a soda, how are we going to term that? If the candidate gives people water, how are we going to term that? 

Some of these should be left ambiguous, then it can take any definition and because you may find people disqualified on certain small matters. 

So, I would request the honourable minister that under regulation 16, this (9) should go under interpretations instead of having it as (9) yet it should just appear under interpretations. Thank you very much.

4.23
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem, I have just got this document and although the suggestion you are making is correct that we should be improving on it by proposing amendments, it is very difficult. 

I presume this is a regulation under the Political Parties and Organizations Act. But much of it is about electoral Act. Now, are we going to get another regulation covering other aspects or Political Organizations and Parties Act? Because you see, this is just concentrating on elections and we are not dealing with all the matters, which require regulating under Political Organizations and Parties Act. So this is limited. If I wanted to make those improvements and I have just received this document, I will never be in position to do it, Sir. This is the difficulty I am having with debating this document.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is because early in the day, I was informed that you had internalised it and that is why I had to adjust the Order Paper to include it. But it seems then people have just got the document. So, what do I do? Do we put off the debate for some time so that you can familiarize yourself with the document and discuss it maybe next week or the other week when we come back?  Currently, we may have to interrupt your programme to be able to deal with some very urgent business including the presidential Bill, which is coming soon.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I move that we stay a debate on this document until it is properly presented. I beg to move.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we were working under the normal circumstances, this document would have been subjected to the secretary of our committee and we would have benefited from the report of the committee. I believe the committee would have had the opportunity to consult stakeholders and so forth. That was not done. 

What we need to do maybe is to take into account the proposal made by hon. Okulo Epak. But is this the only area where we need regulations? If there are other areas in the Political Parties and Organizations Act, which require regulations, why does the minister not include those areas as well so that we can discuss the regulations, which are going to govern all areas of the Political Parties and Organizations Act? This is the only element, which maybe missing from this particular set of regulations.

DR EPAK: May I continue?

THE SPEAKER: No, we are trying to find the better way of handling it.

DR EPAK: I thought the question was addressed to me.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR EPAK: Mr Speaker, I was on the Floor and I have raised the question that I want to attempt to answer, but we cannot deal with it instantaneously. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal tried to suggest sometime back about the inadequacies and the possibility of subjecting this to the scrutiny of another body before it is brought to the House. You asked her a question, which she did not answer directly. 

I was suggesting that maybe this document should be subjected to scrutiny by the appropriate committee so that we are making a comprehensive regulation under the Political Organisations and Parties Act rather than a fire brigade affair. Elections are going to take place tomorrow and we need something at hand. That is my suggestion.

The second point I was making is that, the inclusion of the independent candidates in the law is no longer a small matter. So, the question of the independent candidates will not be incidental, it will not rise because a person was defeated in his party’s primaries then he decides in annoyance to say, “I am going to stand as independent”. I think we now must treat it as one area in which people will participate in elections even as presidential candidates and Members of Parliament, and not as a protest or an incidental matter for failing in the primaries of a party.

Therefore, the concept pursued by this document is precisely that it arises only at elections because in the process of working with the Electoral Commission, particularly the first relationship with the Electoral Commission, the independent candidates are not covered. How do they link apart from say indicate the line of communications? When do they meet at the national level with the Electoral Commission before they meet with the arrangement of the liaison committees? This again is a bit of inadequacy that the independent people, even in the process of coming with this code of conduct, were not party to.  

But now that the clarification for independent candidates is there, maybe this is another justification for referring this document to the appropriate committee so that those who now call themselves independent candidates can go there and do something. Parties, definitely we are looking at it from their interest point of view. Independent candidates were simply being covered incidentally, but not as a major partner or participant in the future election process of the country. That is another area of inadequacy, which could be addressed by deferring consideration of this document.

I find it very difficult now to move any amendment.  Maybe people got this document earlier, but I just got it here myself. That is my misfortune if others got it earlier. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think I would like to be advised, what do we do?

DR KIYONGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My view is that, in the earlier half of the debate, we seemed to be moving very well in the sense that the time limit notwithstanding, many colleagues did come with specifics in terms of improving this presentation, and I believe that our colleague, the minister, was noting them down. I do agree that there may have been an oversight in the government, because this code of conduct was to cover not just electoral matters, but was supposed to include other aspects of code of parties and even between elections so that we have a stronger regulation of the political parties. Now, the campaign is on as we all know and it is not easy, as you have noticed, to get us back here. It is getting difficult as we get closer to our own nomination and campaigns.  

So, what I would propose is that we make a start, because this law has made some good provision - you have peace committee, you have areas where we can interact inter-party wise and be able to help in ensuring that the election will go on smoothly. If we say it goes back in total to a working committee and then back here, there is a risk that we may never finish it and, therefore, the risk that the campaign may lose benefiting from this good initiative, it will not be in our interest. 

I would propose that we make whatever quick amendments we can make here to ensure that the positive elements in the law are implemented straight away and in future - because there will be parliaments and there will be committees - we can then return and make the law more thoroughly rather than getting out of here without some guidance as on how elections should be conducted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want to treat them as interim regulations?

DR KIYONGA: Yes, if we could have a way of treating it as such so that we have something in our hands to work with.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, do you have something to say about this?

MR MWESIGE: Well, I would like to agree with the NPC, Mr Speaker, that colleagues had started in fact making substantial and reasonable amendments. I had earlier interacted with hon. Atubo on his amendments and I agreed with all of them. Other colleagues were improving the code. This code is here for purposes of approval and it is only legitimate that before Members approve it, they make contributions to its improvement. 

Section 27 of the Act gives the minister the powers to make general regulations, which will govern political parties and political organisations. This code is brought under Section 19 specifically for the code. So, there is room, after this code has been passed, for the minister to come back to this House with general regulations which will govern the general conduct of political parties and this Parliament will have an opportunity, including the committee of Parliament, to have more input on the code of parties at that time. 

There are two sets of regulations: one is the code of conduct which we have now; the minister will also bring regulations which will help government to implement the provisions of the Act and those regulations will also be made with the approval of this House. So, there is another opportunity to make broader improvements in the way political parties relate.  

4.54
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at Regulation 5, the purpose of this code is already misconceived. Yes, we are going for elections, but we have electoral laws, which govern elections. The spirit of Section 19 of making a code for governing political parties was not looking at just elections. Now that we are in multiparty political system, we set ourselves ready, we carefully make a code of conduct, in fact not Parliament, but the stakeholders themselves. The political parties sit down together, they decide, they see how they want to relate with each other, they see how to operate and, therefore, they make a code of conduct in collaboration with the minister and we said with the Electoral Commission, which then would come here just for our approval. 

Mr Speaker, you know what a code of conduct means; it is a code of conduct that is made by those people belonging to either a certain profession or a body because there is a way they want to conduct themselves and usually they put enforcement mechanisMs It is not a criminal code; it is not supposed to have all these sanctions. 

In my view, I do not think that we should go on the basis of this code and continue to come out with something; we are not pressed by something because we have the electoral laws. Just because we are going for elections does not mean that we sit here and haphazardly put a code in place which is not a code of those who are supposed to be the owners. In fact, gauging from all these weaknesses in this documents, I am hesitant to believe that the political parties themselves were asked because for sure the thing is supposed to govern them to see how they relate to each other, see how their members operate, how they do good things in the environment which is good. 

So, for us to proceed on this document, which in my view is misconceived - when you see the purpose, it is just saying purposely for elections and yet we have electoral laws. Therefore, I would like to have this document withdrawn by the minister and he allows himself to work hand in hand with the political parties to come out with a code which they think would govern them and they feel it is theirs and they are bound by it. 

As you know, Mr Speaker, you belong to the legal profession, you make your own code because you feel this is how you want to behave and you are bound by it because you feel it is yours. You put it in place and you promote it and you have enforcement mechanisMs But now I see Electoral Commission - how does the Electoral Commission come in now to enforce behaviour and conduct of political parties to whom it is not even a party. Yes, for instance, it could have an inter-party committee, which must ensure that it enforces the code of conduct. 

In my humble observation as a person who has known code of conduct and who makes them and how they operate and how they are enforced, I think it is not proper for us to sit here and try to clean this document which cannot - for instance, I looked at page 2, 5(d) it says: “The promotion of professional conduct of political parties and organisations.” What is the professional conduct of political parties and organisations, Mr Speaker? I am not aware of that kind of thing. 

Then when you look at page 9, it talks of public meeting. For instance, this code does not define what a public meeting is. Now we are supposed to inform the commission about meetings. You know the way we campaign these days; we used to campaign properly when we used to appear together at the same time, but these days your supporters call you in a compound, “Come here at 3.00 O’clock” and maybe somebody has been called at 4.00 O’clock somewhere or even the same time but in different homes and in areas where they meet. Would they say that that is a public meeting? Can it not be construed to mean a public meeting in case there is a conflict? 

These things need to be well thought about not in a hurry. I am saying that we do not need to hurry because we have the electoral laws; they are governing how we should campaign and how we should behave. The electoral law is saying that and it has punitive measures for disobeying that law. Therefore, we are not in a hurry, Mr Speaker, let us avoid doing things in a hurry and they cause us probleMs I implore the honourable minister to withdraw this document and have sufficient time to work it out with political parties, and the commissioner and see how it can come out nicely with real enforcement mechanisms, with real practical things, which can be contained in here. Otherwise, it is as if it is a code to harass members who are campaigning and it may harass us very badly and prevent even the good campaigns that should take place. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.00
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the NPC - I do not know why he has shifted from this side to the other side, but he had a very good idea. Most of us have just got this document here. In reality, a code of conduct - because I also belong to a professional body - has a way it is enforced; it is far different from another independent body apart from the owners of the professional body. 

Mr Speaker, I would be very glad that for now, this document be withdrawn, be taken back to the owners to understand it better, bring their input and that is the one we can approve. But if we approve this, it will mean that we are forcing on the owners this code of conduct. Let me give an example; that there will be a civil penalty not exceeding 200 currency points. Now, when they collect this money who takes it? If I pay this money, if it is to the government, it goes to the government. But now who takes this money of the penalty? So, there must also be a way of how they enforce penalties on those who offend. 

Mr Speaker, the way these penalties are being put up - I think the people who are trying to bring it want to make other parties be put in a very bad quarter if they are really supposed to be applied. I will give another example on broadcasting or advertising in respect of a particular election in question. They have not even explained to us which particular question they mean and which election or what is not supposed to be advertised. Supposing I took my face when I am looking upside down; is that wrong or how do you want me to look?

I plead with the Minister of Justice that for now he keeps this thing somewhere. In fact, many of the things, which are here, are already catered for in the electoral laws. I was reading the electoral laws before I came here. Mr Speaker, I would plead with you maybe to prevail on the Minister of Justice that for the time being – even if we want, we can give it one week or two weeks, we shall reconvene and look at it. Thank you.

5.04
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much. This code should belong to the parties; as of now it does not belong to them. In fact, what it is trying to do is to become punitive to the parties. Look at this thing on page 7: “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and the law governing elections, the commission may cause disqualification of the political party or organisation or candidate from participation in the particular election in which a breach or irregularity is committed.” 

In a way it is trying to keep some people out of the process. The code should be helping everybody in the process not to keep some people out of the process. Already the Political Parties Act talks about a National Parties Forum, which actually should be the owner of this code but nowhere is this forum referred to in this code. Yet, I think it is that forum which should originate this code. I think some work still needs to be done on this code.  

If we go with it like this, it can be used probably in good faith but it could be abused and by the time it is being abused, it would be too late for us to get redress. It is better we put it on hold, maybe take it through our committees and the committee makes a report to the House. Then we can come back at a later time and decide. Otherwise, if we do it the way it is, Shs 4.0 million is not small money and you are asking people to pay it as a civil penalty. I know the Electoral Commission is used to collecting lots of money from people but why should they now take Shs 4.0 million? Is it becoming their habit? I think we need to look at this thing again.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the various contributions you have made on this subject, I realize that there is a lot to do with this particular motion and, therefore, I think it is appropriate that we adjourn to give you sufficient time to scrutinize the document and the minister to make further consultations so that when we reconvene, we can see what to do on the document.

As you appreciate also, there is a lot to do very soon about the motion which is pending under Article 78. We cannot deal with it today. I think it is appropriate for me to adjourn the House to next week. (Interruption)

DR EPAK: Sir, before you conclude, can I seek clarification?

THE SPEAKER: We are not concluding the debate on this particular subject.

DR EPAK: Before you adjourn because you said we stay it until we have scrutinized it and come back. I want to suggest that the honourable minister takes into consideration the general remarks we made here and see if he can come with an improved version.

THE SPEAKER: When we come back, he will definitely make his observations or comments on the matter. I thought that we should be free in the first week of January but because of the urgency of business pending, I am inclined to adjourn the House to next week because the other week will be for nomination and that may be a busy time. People will have scattered to Yumbe, to Lumino they will be far away from us. But before the nominations, I think it will be easier for you to come back and therefore I am inclined to – (Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, I want to ask because very many people today came all the way from their constituencies and we have tomorrow - what has happened to tomorrow? There are people who have arrived, who could come here tomorrow. But next week, I can assure you, many people will go away.

THE SPEAKER: We are adjourning the House to next week on 4th January. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 January 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)


    


 

