Thursday, 28 December 2006

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you to Parliament. I hope you had a peaceful and enjoyable Christmas Day. This sitting comes shortly after Parliament had adjourned sine die on Thursday, 21 December to begin a normal Christmas and New Year recess, which normally commences on the last parliamentary working day before Christmas Day. 

The Business Committee had in November agreed that there would be Christmas and New Year recess. The practice for the past Christmas and New Year recesses had been to adjourn sine die and to set the real date of return during recess. The normal returning date, as in most cases, has been during the first week of February.

Honourable members, on the same day, 21 December, the Parliamentary Commission had a very long meeting at which very urgent and important issues, which were at hearts of Members, were considered.  It was considered that a positive resolution of these issues would contribute to Member’s effective and efficient performance of their work. I wish to report that the results of that meeting were positive. Details will in a very near future be communicated to you. At the conclusion of the said meeting, it was found necessary to summon Parliament to meet on 28 December, which is today, before the commencement of the New Year. Thus, this meeting.  

However, on the same day the House was adjourned sine die, a number of Members wanted the Speaker to convene Parliament within 21 days for it to handle some business. They thus invoked the provisions of Article 95(5) of the Constitution by appending appropriate signatures on the statement requesting the Speaker to convene Parliament within 21 days.  I received a request under Article 95(5) the following day. However, I wish to observe that although Article 95(5) has been in the Constitution since 1995, no law by way of statute or Rules of Procedure of Parliament has been put in place to guide as to how Article 95(5) can be invoked. I find it necessary to have other details in the instrument other than the appropriate signatures. 

In the absence of the appropriate rules, under Rule 7(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I advise that the instrument should state the facts that Parliament is in recess, that there is a very important business that is required to be attended to by Parliament immediately. The details of business in form of motion, petition or statement etc should be stated in the instrument. It should be noted that Parliament handles business in form of motions, petitions and not by general statements.  It should be indicated that Parliament cannot be convened as required in any other way. The signature could then follow.  

The inclusion of the business to be handled at the requested meeting serves two purposes: First, to assist the Members from whom the signatures are being sought to know the nature and importance of business for which the request is being made. Secondly, to provide the items for the Order Paper, which has to be given to the Members before the proceedings commence. If the items are not indicated, the Speaker would not know what to include on the Order Paper of the day and there would be no business for the House. 

For your information, even without invoking Article 95(5), any Member or Members, if they have very urgent business which they consider Parliament should handle in spite of the recess, they can approach the Speaker, explain the case and if the Speaker finds merit in the case, he can always reconvene Parliament to handle that special business.

The guidance I have given on the provision of Article 95 is for future purposes. The recent request that was made under Article 95 has coincided with the meeting in that, it had already been fixed that day. I welcome you.
  
I am adjusting the Order Paper so that item No.6 replaces No. 2 because the First Deputy Prime Minister, Hon. Eriya Kategaya, is out of town and cannot make that statement. 

2.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It seems we did not adjourn at the time to say Merry Christmas to each other. Let me first take the opportunity to say Merry Christmas to all of you!

Mr Speaker, I must sincerely thank you for the explanation and guidance you have given to the House. I believe that the Members have taken the guidance in good spirit. However, just for the record - because when it is read that you made that statement, the person reading the Hansard may wonder what exactly happened. Just for the record, it is important that I say this. I would like to say that the events that led Members to seek a recall of Parliament lay in the events that took place last week, where there was a cancellation of a sitting; I think it was on Tuesday. [Members: “Thursday”].  No, there was one on Tuesday and then we sat on Wednesday. Then we were told that we would meet on Thursday morning.  

If you can recall, Mr Speaker, I personally came to the House expecting to participate and I found a notice, “Parliament cancelled” and I remember making reference to that to you, Mr Speaker. I said, “I read a notice saying, ‘Parliament cancelled’. I do not understand what this means.” And the fact that we were not able to sit on Tuesday, such confusion generates suspicions and probably Members thought that there were deliberate attempts to avoid sitting so that certain matters would not be resolved.

It becomes important, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, that as we proceed particularly as we start next year, we do everything possible to avoid situations that would generate suspicion. For example, that decision of the Business Committee of Parliament on the date of adjournment sine die was not provided to Members, and if a very advanced notice had been given that Parliament would adjourn on Thursday, then Members would know that whatever happened Parliament any way is scheduled to adjourn and it would eliminate the kind of suspicion that puts all of us in a tight spot and thinking that the Speaker whom we voted for overwhelmingly is not working for us. The Speaker on the other hand would think that the Members are trying to undermine him for some other reasons and then the House and the country would be in such confusion.

So, I thought that at this moment I should say this so that when your statement is read, it will be reflected against this background.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. I must say that actually I was not here on Wednesday. I had gone for the burial of the late minister, Zimula Mugwanya. I left the place early in the morning and did not come back here. The following day, when I came, I found it necessary that I convene an emergency meeting of the Parliamentary Commission. In fact, I rang the Leader of the Opposition and told him that we had a meeting and he said he was coming. The Deputy Speaker, who had adjourned the House to Thursday at 10.00 a.m. was also part of the meeting and we thought it was a very crucial meeting that she should not miss. When he came and saw “cancelled” it was not intended. I had to go out and say, “No. The proper term should have been ‘adjourned sine die’.”

About the question of Christmas recess, I had even hinted on it that we were working up to a time when we start Christmas recess. It is a fact, which is very well known that Christmas recess begins on the last parliamentary working day before Christmas and this was Thursday and the decision to have a Christmas recess was confirmed in a meeting we held before we convened Parliament on 29th November. I was equipped with all this and I was equipped with the practice. The practice is that, when you go for Christmas recess, you adjourn sine die. It is only later that we give notice confirming the actual date when you come back.  This is and has been the practice not only in 6th, 7th and 8th Parliament but also during NRC days. Those who were there know it. I regret that the Deputy Speaker could not come to adjourn formally. But weighing the seriousness of the business we were handling and the fact that we reached positive results, I think that compensates the inconvenience you had.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Order Paper, you know under our rules that on Thursdays we have time for questions for oral answer. Today’s sitting is a special one, but I had put a question about three weeks ago, requesting the Minister of Finance to give Members of Parliament the status of tri-star. What is more disturbing is, we are getting information and documents, which are not palatable to us. So, my request is, in the next sitting we could consider this as one of those matters that need urgent attention.

THE SPEAKER: Noted. As I have said, we re-arrange so that -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, basing on the fact that you have agreed with hon. Okupa, now that Government has been unable to have this question answered, I hope Government will not move to inject more billions in this dead tri-star company before the question and the issues are finally discussed by Parliament and disposed of.  I really would like to get that assurance from the Prime Minister because it would be unfair and dishonest of Government, after Government losing over Shs 30 billion, again to inject more billions before we have developed a consensus. Could the Prime Minister give us his commitment?

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That question is not a very hard question and the minister is always disaster prepared. He will answer the question. So, I cannot take any further undertakings. It will be improper on my part to make undertakings because as you know, the Executive has to carry out its work. It cannot always wait for Parliament. Otherwise, we would be paralysed. There are issues, which belong to the realm of the Executive. But the minister will be able to answer that question. He has the capacity to answer that simple question.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and merry Christmas to everybody and merry Iddi -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what we have next is Iddi Adhuha and a New Year.

MR DOMBO: I am a little bit confused. I would wish to be clarified on what exactly is happening.  Hon. Ekanya has just raised information as if he has information that Government intends to inject further money in tri-star. And he seemed to be saying that Government should not inject further money until a due diligence or an explanation to the people of Uganda has been done, which I thought would be a prudent thing to do if that is what intends to happen. 

But what the Prime Minister said that the Executive cannot be prevented from doing its work, might confirm that actually the Executive intends to put more money in tri-star. (Applause) This is what I wanted to seek clarification on. What exactly is happening? Because there has been a fundamental debate on the issue of tri-star; there is public concern. Even Parliament under normal circumstances should be briefed. We need to know because we represent the people of Uganda. (Applause) Now, what exactly is the Prime Minister saying? Does Government still intend to put more money in tri-star?

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, as the Leader of Government Business comes to clarify on this, I would wish that he also clears the air about the rumour about tri-star that the Executive wants to transform it into a parastatal. Can you say something about that? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was disturbed when the Rt hon. Prime Minister said that Government cannot be paralysed by Parliament. Insinuating that in the process of seeking clarification, Parliament was bent on paralysing Government. (Applause) I totally disagree with that statement. (Applause) I would like to suggest that without raising further suspicion, tri-star is being funded by public money of which Parliament is entitled to know. 

In that regard, it is incumbent on Government to explain that there was a problem here and there but matters are being rectified so that public money is put into proper use. For that matter, I would like to call on Government to come out strongly and clearly on this matter of AGOA so that we put it to rest and the public knows that their money is not being wasted. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I wish you a Happy New Year -(Laughter)– including the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Now as I said, the minister can answer that question and he will answer that question. There is no cause for speculation because the minister will answer that question. He has the capacity to answer it.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that the Prime Minister has given an assurance that the minister will answer, could we get a time frame when the minister is going to answer that question.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I do not control the business of this Parliament. Because if, for example, the Speaker declares that we are going on recess, I do not have the power to prevent him from doing so. But normally when a question is asked, the sector minister requires two weeks within which to carry out research and answer that question. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that, I will make sure that that question is included on the Order Paper on the day we shall reconvene because we are going to adjourn. (Applause)

3.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since this sitting will most likely follow with an adjournment, it is only proper that Parliament says something about an event that took place over the Christmas weekend, which was extremely shocking to most of us. This is the issue of the ritual murder televised on WBS. Initially, I joined the news when it was the news in Luganda and I can always figure out what they are saying if I start from the beginning -(Laughter)- but that day I got the news in the middle and I saw this head on the table. I thought it was a sculpture but it looked too fresh and so I decided to wait for the English news. When the newsreader warned us and then I saw what I saw, I was extremely shocked! 

Thank God! We have the opportunity and I would wish, Mr Speaker, you allow Members to express their displeasure about what really happened.  Where an individual is slaughtered like chicken; the head is cut off and the head is carried to a witch doctor on account of land! It becomes extremely dangerous for us that this event constitutes part of what we are and it is extremely worrying. I thought that I should on behalf of Members - because I know every one has probably been agonising as to what to do about it - bring this so that the country knows that Parliament was deeply shocked by what happened. 

I am particularly concerned because about a month and a half ago, I was in Anaka in Amuru District, I passed by some people in the evening and when I stopped, they came to me. A policeman was holding another person. I was told that the person the policeman was holding was a preacher and that the preacher was being held because he had destroyed the witchcraft equipment of a witch doctor. And what had happened was that, the witch doctor went to where the Christian group prayed and started doing his thing there. 

So, the preacher with his congregation came and removed all those instruments of the witch doctor. I was extremely shocked because the policeman was now arresting the preacher and defending the witch doctor! It becomes extremely dangerous because I am not so sure, maybe the Attorney General will let us know, whether many of these witch doctors with shrines are protected in their trade by any provisions of the law. If not, they are the people who are dragging our people into a very dangerous state. You hear songs where people have gone under water. It is very dangerous! So, I thought, Mr Speaker, that I should stand up here –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ogenga Latigo. A similar incident happened in Soroti; Rev. Labeja’s son, about 8 years old, was beheaded last week, just two days to Christmas! So, what hon. Latigo is raising here is not an isolated case. When the man was apprehended, he said that he was taking the child under ground from where he would come out a rich person. So, it is not an isolated case.

THE SPEAKER: Well, recently we had a similar case of a small boy from Lugala. It is something, which is really coming up. It is not an isolated case.  It is something, which you may be asking the minister to make a statement on. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I would urge the Minister responsible for Security or Internal Affairs to brief the House on the extent of the problem and the measures that the country is taking to mitigate it. But, allow me also to end by conveying my condolences to the families of the people who have been brutally killed. Thank you very much.

PROF NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that is a very important issue and unless we handle it right away, it is going to be institutionalised because there are some countries in Southern Africa where those rituals take place and that matter is institutionalised. So, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of Internal Affairs –(Interruption) 

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I just want to note that the people who are killed are not killed just because of ritual aspects. In Masaka, I had a similar case on Christmas Day. In Kyamuliibwa, the husband beheaded a mother of three months twins. So, it is not only because of rituals but even other aspects. So, maybe, when Government is investigating, it should take into consideration some other issues.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, this matter is obviously of a diverse nature and I do request the Minister of Internal Affairs, if he is ready, to make a preliminary statement or to make a well researched statement later on. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, can you make a statement or would you like to make it after you have carried out more research, with your permission, Mr Speaker?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is a pity that we do have elements of this type within our society, and I wish to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for pointing out this incident in this House.

Indeed, we are already investigating and we have the intension of giving a press conference on this matter. So, I pray that I be given more time so that I can come and bring more comprehensive information and what steps Government is taking to control the situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, but I need your guidance. I am looking at the Order Paper where you have communicated very effectively. You have guided the House from your communication and your record of guiding this House is clearly not in question. There was supposed to be a ministerial statement, which you have explained. I would like to be guided under what item on the Order Paper are we discussing these matters? 

THE SPEAKER: You see, as I had indicated first of all, I had got a request that I convene a meeting of Parliament because there were serious matters. Unfortunately, they were not itemised and this coincides with the meeting which we had fixed for 28th but these are some of the important matters people had on their minds including the ritual affairs –(Applause) But, we are about to conclude it so that we can go to the items on the Order Paper. And, when I had finalised my communication, I said let us proceed with the Order Paper and I had made an adjustment but the Minister of East African Affairs was not here, therefore, his statement will not be given.  

But, my attention was drawn to the fact that there were two statements: One, from the Minister of East African Affairs and another one from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Hon. Musumba has got a statement to make and after that, we shall go to item No. 6. But, I will allow the Members since they had requested to generally make some few statements. I will conclude them with hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo and hon. Mukasa.

3.22
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need your indulgence because this one is also one of the most important issues and it was presented before Parliament; it is a petition from the people of Kawempe. I remember honourable members that it was given 10 days before being submitted to the Committee of Works. The 10 days elapsed sometime back and I do not know the progress now. What advice or indulgence can you give me to pass over to the people of Kawempe?

Secondly, also the Minister of Disaster promised something for the people. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much you came and witnessed and you experience but until now there is nothing forthcoming to help the people in Kawempe Division. I do not know whether other areas benefited but I do not know what actually happened to the 478 million –(Interruption)  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to refer to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness as the “Minister of Disaster?” The two are not the same! (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think it must have been a slip of the tongue but he meant the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: So, Mr Speaker, I want to know the progress of the committee and secondly, regarding the money from that ministry, how can it be accessed? Because we have been waiting in vain to see how we can also mobilise other people to come to our rescue as we get assistance from that ministry?

THE SPEAKER: What I would say about the ministry’s assistance to your area is that, you as the Member of Parliament who was here when the statement was made, you can approach the minister in his office and say, “What is happening to the assistance we were given?” That may be more effective than expecting him to give you an answer which may not be followed up. So, I would advise that you go to the minister’s office and demand for the share, which was meant for your people and take it to them, then it will be okay. 

As for the other issue, yes, they did not complete. Actually I contacted them, but I will follow it up so that they come to the conclusion and we see how to use the findings they might have made. It will be handled. But be brief honourable members so that we can go to the next item.

3.25
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The other week, before the House was adjourned to Tuesday last week and we did not sit, there had been a statement that had been read in this House by hon. Okello-Okello on the issue of Acholi land. On Wednesday, I stood here on a point of procedure when I did not see it on the Order Paper because we had been promised that it would be debated, and indeed the Minister for Lands, hon. Omara Atubo, assured this House that he was to make a statement to this House after consulting Cabinet. Unfortunately, when I look at the Order Paper and the matters to follow, nothing seems to show that this debate is going to be brought to Parliament.

I did express to this House that I am concerned about the way the land giveaways are being done in this country. The minister assured this House that he was preparing a statement with the input of Cabinet to be read to this House. Mr Speaker, can I know when this statement by the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the land giveaways will be debated in this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe it can be disposed of by the minister. He is here; he can tell us when he intends to make that statement.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I was very much ready on Thursday last week not only to debate the statement by Members of Parliament from Acholi on lands in Acholi, but also to give to Parliament my ministerial statement. Indeed, I have my ministerial statement ready here plus all the attachments, and I think I forwarded the copies to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the Clerk on Wednesday. So, as usual, I am ready and now it is a matter of business before the House. And to prove that I have been ready, Mr Speaker, may I lay before the House my statement, which is here? Copies can be found together with the appendixes, which I referred to. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So, it is up to us –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: And when it is on the Order Paper, I will just read it after you have already read it. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is the last contribution.

3.28
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have stood up to raise an issue of national importance. One of the leading newspapers, on the eve of Christmas, carried a headline that prominent Government officials sell chits to businessmen to enable them buy sugar from the factory. Mr Speaker, I am raising this because the newspaper went further to analyse that it is these chits, which have led to the increase in the prices of sugar because the cost ranges from Ugshs 2.0 million to Ugshs 6.0 million. I want to urge the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to pick interest in this issue, such that he can investigate and inform this Parliament. Otherwise, the peasants cannot afford sugar –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Christmas Day, His Excellency the President directed me to handle that issue on the Boxing Day. And on the Boxing Day, I invited hon. Janat Mukwaya, Finance and those who produce sugar at my house and we discussed that issue. So, I did not rest on that day. So today, hon. Janat Mukwaya has been making a press conference, but since she is here and she is the minister in charge of that issue, Sir, I request you to allow her to say something because we have got short term and long-term solutions to that issue.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Today the same question of the chits was raised and I said I have not consulted Cheeye. So, I cannot comment on the chits because that is rumour mongering. So, until when I consult Cheeye and he gives me proof that there are those chits, that is when I will comment. 

On the escalating sugar prices, Mr Speaker, I will make a ministerial statement, but I have already made two press releases and I have tried to explain. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to seek a clarification from the minister. Mr Ted Cheeye is the Director of Economic Monitoring, I think in intelligence and whatever, which is part of this Government and –(Interjections)– Well, I cannot be sure because you are even too many, I do not know you. Now, how does a whole Minister of Trade come and tell us that she has not contacted an official of Government who has been saying that the chits are being issued and that Government officials are the ones using them to sell sugar to the businessmen? 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, different managers have different management styles. I am one of those people who work around facts. I read newspapers but I do not take newspapers by their face value. So, I said that I read, and I have said I have not talked to Mr Cheeye. The other day was Boxing Day, I was at this business; today, I was making a press statement. I am going to find out from Cheeye and he must produce facts. I cannot gamble because we are dealing with serious people and if you allege that somebody has been issuing chits, you must have the evidence. I am going to consult the author of the document and I will come back to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr speaker.  My statement is on the progress of CHOGM and I have circulated my brief comments. The decision to hold CHOGM in 2007 was reaffirmed during the CHOGM meeting held in Malta in 2005. The President of Uganda on behalf of Uganda accepted the offer to host CHOGM in the year 2007 in Uganda and the CHOGM meeting will be held between the dates of 20th – 25th November in the year 2007.  

This is an honour to Uganda and it is also a vote of confidence in the leadership of President Museveni and the NRM Government. A country cannot be offered to host this CHOGM, an opportunity which comes once every 106 years to a country, unless that Government has performed very well with regard to certain bench marks such as security, democracy, good governance, rule of law, human rights observance, freedom of press, proper economic policies and so on. 

To host CHOGM, that is attended by 53 heads of state and Government and its tutorial head who is Her Majesty the Queen, is the pinnacle of diplomatic excellency and the envy of countries all over the world. I wish, therefore, to request you to join me in deeply thanking His Excellency, the President, Mr Museveni, for his first class statesmanship that has delivered us to this high ground of international diplomatic excellency as well as the NRM political platform on which such policies have been formulated.

Now, the hosting of CHOGM 2007 raises immense opportunities for Uganda and more importantly economically. In the course of preparing to host this event, there has been considerable public-private partnership, which has led to heavy capital investment in the economy particularly by the private sector in areas that will raise the level of the hospitality industry to international levels. Hotels have been constructed at unprecedented levels and are to be graded and classified to the levels of international standards. This is going to transform the level of preparedness for tourism in the country in terms of service delivery and it is anticipated that the gains into this economy from tourism should more than triple after CHOGM 2007. 

Several other sectors will be improved before CHOGM 2007 such as transport, ICT, infrastructure, Kasese Airfield, Entebbe International Airport, public health as well as beautification of the city, among others.  

The CHOGM event should also come with increased investment either through foreign direct investment or increased foreign trade. The economy should, therefore, benefit from conference tourism, which means that more conferences will be held in Uganda which in turn should earn this country additional foreign exchange.  

In addition, CHOGM 2007 will increase the gains we are making politically and diplomatically. For the five days of CHOGM Summit activity, Uganda will be in the international spotlight. It is important also to remember that even more critical will be ensuring that the gains made during CHOGM continue to be harvested after the CHOGM event but like everything else, opportunities come with challenges. 

The challenge is that all of us (the leadership and the population) must work hard to rise to the occasion. We have to ensure that the whole country is mobilised and sensitised on the benefits arising from hosting CHOGM. I, therefore, appreciate the opportunity Parliament has given us to update the honourable Members of Parliament on the preparations underway to host CHOGM 2007. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to emphasise that the CHOGM challenge is a challenge for all of us. I have for the attention of Members circulated a brief preparatory activity for the CHOGM for the year 2007, which I wish to draw your attention to.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. As you know, honourable members, under our rules - I do not know whether it was an oversight or what - the ministerial statement is not supposed to be debated and I asked the Chairman of the Rules Committee to look into this so that it is corrected or it is confirmed. But that is the position as of now. You can ask a question.

3.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, this being a very sensitive matter, could you not prevail on the House so that important aspects are raised. For instance, let me raise a question that bearing in mind that we are expecting 3,000 to 4,000 guests, the level of accommodation is still wanting. What could be the facilities that are already available so that we can sit back and get assured that right from the infrastructure, accommodation – the statement, for instance, is silent about the ad hoc committee of Parliament that was set up to monitor and oversee CHOGM activities! 

Can the minister tell Parliament how Parliament is getting involved in the preparation of CHOGM and the other critical areas like accommodation and infrastructure? Also tell us where has Government put the money that we have totalling to the Shs 65 billion?

3.39
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is an honour to the government and the people of Uganda to have been selected to host this very important meeting. The President has time and again emphasised that Uganda is a private sector led economy. When a meeting like this one comes where Government intends to spend a lot of money, this money naturally is supposed to boost the private sector so that the people who are investing within the country can also benefit from the hosting of the meeting. 

I want to find out from the honourable minister whether the private sector and the population have been told what to expect and how far to invest and in what areas. For instance, if you moved around Kampala, you will see that many of our supermarkets are full of products from South Africa, even tomatoes and eggs. 

I do not know whether during the preparation of this CHOGM meeting, Government has put up a public relations desk, together with the private sector, so that people can know which areas to invest in. If the meeting is going to be in November, those who are going to buy chicken in order to produce eggs for CHOGM need to be given a time frame so that they know when to invest. Have the honourable minister and the committee given public information, which will enable guided investment so that the people can benefit from this issue? Thank you very much.

3.40
MR SAM LYOMOKI (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the honourable minister for this statement. We have been requesting in the labour community, the trade union movement, for participation and whenever CHOGM is organised in various countries, the tripartite partners are involved and internationally this matter has been raised and through the concerned ministry, it has been passed. But when the statement is being made, there is no reference at all to the involvement of the tripartite partners as it has been a normal practice of the trade union movement in the preparation yet there are many issues that are of our concern.

I just want to find out from the minister whether the statement as it is continues to imply that the labour movement will not be involved at all in the preparations. This matter has been brought to our attention internationally and I think it has been a communication to the government of Uganda and apparently from the communication there is no adjustment whatsoever. 

3.43
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a question to the honourable minister on the area of infrastructure particularly airfields and airports. We have one airport, Entebbe, and I know that on the day we shall have visitors, that airport is going to be very busy. It is likely to affect the people who come from West Nile because there is a lot of traffic between Arua Airfield and Entebbe. 

I would like the minister to allay our anxiety. Are there special arrangements for people who may not be allowed to use the airfield at the time when we are having guests landing at Entebbe Airport? Or will there be another international airport opened in Uganda, say, Gulu International Airport or in Soroti, for some of the guests to land there and then they drive here? They can also see what it looks like in other parts of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it overloading you by so many questions or you want to answer then they ask so that when you finish, then they come in?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I can answer these ones. 

3.44
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala):  For that matter, Mr Speaker, I will raise two questions: The first one is in regard to the joint venture with MEERA Investments Ltd for the construction of Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd. I note from the report that we contributed a sum of Shs 8.8 billion and this one (Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd) is a limited liability company. I would wish to know the nature of the shareholding in this company. What is the share of the Uganda Government in this company?  And what was the contribution of MEERA Investments since it is a joint venture? Since this is an investment by Government, I do not know whether it was approved by Parliament.

Finally, Mr Speaker, in preparation, we have talked about infrastructural development. We got reports recently that the central Government is taking over the responsibility of constructing various roads in Kampala. I would wish to know whether it is correct that the responsibility is being taken over from Kampala City Council and whether the central Government is now going to be accountable for the rehabilitation of these roads and when these roads should be ready for CHOGM. I thank you.  

3.46
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister also for his statement on CHOGM. But I can only share the minister’s enthusiasm if he gives us more information. The minister has broadly said, “We shall no doubt have a lot of benefits of CHOGM.” I would have been much happier if the minister had given us information about previous hosts of CHOGM. Do you know what happened in Malta after CHOGM? Give us concrete facts and figures on the GDP of CHOGM. This information is available on the Internet. That is why we have to look around ourselves –(Interjections)- Am I protected, Mr Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER: Very much so.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I am sure that if it was hon. Nandala, the shadow minister, who came here to tell us about CHOGM, he would have told us about the successes of CHOGM in previous states. They should have told us what happened in Malta last year. We cannot just stand here and speculate and say CHOGM is a good thing where we do not have anything. I am shocked that honourable members -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. As I said earlier, according to our rules, there is no debate. What you can put are questions.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope that the next statement will give us more comfort by learning from what happened in other places.

Finally, I would like to advise the minister to read the human rights report. The minister said that the human rights here in Uganda is very good, but clearly he has not read the human rights report of 2006.

THE SPEAKER: I said you only ask questions. The question is, “Have you read the human rights report?” Maybe the answer is, yes.

MS KAMYA: Has the minister read the human rights report of 2006?

3.48
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy about the minister bringing the CHOGM business to Parliament. I just have two questions for him: One, it is true that all these guests are going to come through Entebbe. In the report, there are preparations as we did approve here, a loan for the rehabilitation of the airfield. But there are issues in Entebbe, among other towns that are going to host CHOGM activities. 

I will give an instance. On the Christmas eve – (Interruptions) - a helicopter crashed near Entebbe and we do not have enough capacity as Entebbe hospital to cater for emergency disasters. Entebbe hospital has capacity to handle only one patient in the disaster department. What preparations are in place, as we are going in for CHOGM? Because we have had instances when the lights on the runway at Entebbe have failed and the planes were referred to Nairobi. Are there preparations for such cases of emergency landing? Entebbe hospital has not been seriously taken care of yet we are going to have the conference in November.

The other question is, alongside Entebbe and other roads, there has been flashing out of roadside traders. What is Government’s arrangement of relocation in terms of funding or places? Because we appreciate that roadside traders are among the majority of traders in our urban areas in the informal sector. So, what are the preparations for these people?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, we set up a committee. There is a parliamentary committee to liase with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on these issues. They will be briefing us regularly.

3.51
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is, is the minister or Government aware that the joint investment venture with MERA was done in absence of the enabling law? If so, when is he bringing a Bill here to enable Government, through the Auditor-General, to audit this investment and protect public interest?

Mr Speaker, as we talk today, the Auditor-General cannot audit any investment where Government has shares below 50 percent. I am informed that in the MERA investment, we have 25 percent and therefore it ties the hands of Government through the AG to audit and monitor public interest in that investment.

THE SPEAKER: Could you answer that, honourable minister?

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Isaac Musumba): I thank the honourable members for the interest they have taken in this matter. Hon. Ssekikubo said that we are expecting about 4000 to 5000 visitors. So what is our hotel preparedness? Shall we be able to accommodate these people? 

The answer is yes. By November, when this conference takes place, we will have enough bed capacity to accommodate all the guests. And we are in continuous touch with the proprietors who are putting up these hotels to ensure that they are finished in time. 

He also asked whether Parliament is involved. Mr Speaker, as you have mentioned, there is a committee by this House to which we are ready and willing to submit ourselves any time we are summoned to discuss with them and clarify to them whatever they want to know as to how far we have gone with these preparations.

Hon. Lumala asked whether Government has put up a public relations desk for the private sector? Yes, if you read the attached document, you will find that we have a media and publicity committee and one of the things that they should be doing is to ensure that they propagate the benefits of the ordinary man and woman in this country so that they can produce for the market that will be created during the time when CHOGM is taking place.

Hon. Lyomoki asked if labour is involved? Yes. If you read the attached document, you will find that the minister responsible for Labour is a member of the Cabinet subcommittee, the Permanent Secretary in charge of Labour is a member of the technical subcommittee and we have people from the Ministry of Labour who continuously participate in the meetings and articulate the interests of people in their departments.

The hon. Member from Arua  -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: The minister has not understood my question. I am talking about the involvement of the labour movement and I will use the term “tripartite partners”. This means Government, the employers and the workers. 

The culture has been that whenever the business and the people’s forum are organised, labour movements are actually involved, and these are the workers, the trade unions and the leaders. So, the involvement of Ministry of Labour does not mean the involvement of the Labour Movement. So that is the type of situation that I was bringing to your notice.

MR MUSUMBA: Sir, in the first instance, I have already said from an institutional point of view - from a Government point of view that the Ministry of Labour, the technical people in the Ministry of Labour, are members of the various committees. But besides that we will be having a people’s forum in which we expect the private sector and the labour movement to be actively involved. So, when that time comes, hon. Lyomoki’s people will be actively involved.

Now the hon. Member from Arua asked a very important question in my view, about Entebbe Airport. What will happen to the people who use the domestic flights since Entebbe will be very busy? 

Arrangements are being made to ensure that domestic flights are accommodated away from the main international airport facility. It is a condition for security measures as well, to ensure that we do not mix international travellers – [Mr Okupa rose on a point of information]- but what information is there before I have even explained, Mr Speaker? (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister, for accepting me. This regards the issue raised about the internal flights. I would like clarification from you. In Uganda, there are only two places where we have a control tower. That is Entebbe and Soroti flying school. They are the only places with controlling towers. But it is habitually Soroti flying school, which is permanently marginalised in this CHOGM arrangement. So, can Soroti flying school handle six arrivals at ago. It is next to Entebbe; why is Soroti flying school marginalised under the CHOGM arrangement? (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: The issue of Soroti is not part of CHOGM, and with your permission, the minister responsible will give the answer. 

So, I will continue with hon. Lukwago’s question –(Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much honourable minister for giving way. I just want to seek clarification concerning the internal flights. May I know whether Nakasongola Airfield is going to be considered? Because it is one of the best airfields in this country -(Laughter)- with good runways and it is very near the city where most activities are going to take place? If you have not included it, I am requesting that you make it part of the arrangements because of its proximity to Kampala. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS TUMA: More clarification before the Minister of Works and Transport answers - (Interruption)– please, can I be protected.

THE SPEAKER: Very much so. Please ask your question.

MRS TUMA: I thank the Minister for this report. But I am equally surprised that Jinja Airfield is not on the list -(Laughter)- we all know very well that the Queen of England is going to visit the Owen Falls Dam at Jinja, so why is it not on the list? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, we may not exhaust all these questions.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I am disturbed by my friend, hon. Okupa who said that Soroti Airport is marginalised. Soroti Airport is the only airport in Uganda with a training school for pilots and engineers. It is the only centre of excellence in East Africa. Is that marginalisation, really? 

Now, with respect to CHOGM, we have to choose alternative airports according to their capacity. You cannot choose Soroti or Nakasongola for that matter; that you will divert a Boeing 747 there. Every airport must have not only a runway but also all the related instruments required for safety. 

With regard to the local flights, our airport cannot be considered as a very busy airport, so we shall accommodate both the local and the CHOGM flights. We have two runways and if you look at very busy airports, they have aircrafts taking off and landing at a rate of one aircraft per minute. But when you consider Entebbe, we have enough facilities to handle them. In any case, we have nowhere to take them. If you come from Arua and we land you at Jinja or at Nakasongola, you have to find some other means of transport to come to Kampala. So, we shall use Entebbe and handle all the aircrafts that will come.

Gulu can be an alternative since we have a radar for it and the length of its runway is also good. But we are all prepared, if there is any need for diversion to use any airport that is suitable - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA:  Honourable minister, you are putting me at a loss. You know I have been on the Committee on Works for the last four years, and we have interacted. You have been the minister appearing for the last three years in this committee and we have been raising this matter of Soroti Flying School on several occasions. We even met the Director of Soroti Flying School together with the Managing Director of CAA. They briefed us and gave us a write up of the facilities that are available in Soroti Flying School. 

Now when you tell me that there are facilities that must be in place and yet they were put to us in the committee- what has happened to these facilities, which the Director of Soroti Flying School together with the Managing Director of CAA told us about?

MR NASASIRA: I thought that you were referring to Soroti Flying School in respect to CHOGM? But if you are talking about the development of Soroti Flying School, we shall address that at another time because I cannot go into those details now.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, not now.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am about to finish. The hon. Erias Lukwago said that he has heard that there is a shareholding by Uganda in MERA Investments. What is the nature of our contribution and what is MERA’s contribution? 

Mr Speaker, we shall supply all the details of this before the committee of the House, which will be set up. But the summary is that when we were privileged to get the offer to host CHOGM, there were conditions. One of them is that the Heads of State must have a place where they will retreat to after the summit – after the meeting in the city centre, a place where they will exclusively retreat for sometime to consider other businesses, and there are standards that are required. 

So we approached the private sector and the people in the sector raised the question, “If you want us to have 54 Presidential suits of a certain status, it is not our core business to have these suits. We will create these suits and when the Presidents go, what shall we do with them?”  

So Government was asked to come in and help that investor to ensure that the standards that were required are attained and that is how we bought shares into this business, and we went into a joint venture in which Government has 25 percent of the Common Wealth Resort at Munyonyo. 

We have the mandate as Government to make a joint venture investment and we have done that. We do have certification to evidence our shareholding and so we have no problem with this. But we all have our books open and when the relevant committee of Parliament, which members are free to join, wants us, we will supply all the information that will be required.

Another question was, “Are the roads in Kampala now belonging to – Oh, the other question was, “Was this investment approved by Parliament?” First of all, for Government to go into a core investment, it is not like a loan that we are required by the Constitution to get the approval by Parliament. But we can explain to Parliament and seek their companionship in this relationship. It is not a constitutional requirement.

The other was about the roads in Kampala City Council. The roads are going to be done hon. Lukwago, and by the time of CHOGM, we shall be proud of the roads in Kampala. The question is whether by central Government or KCC? On that I will invite the Minister of Works to assure you.

THE SPEAKER: No, but is there any harm for the central Government to come and assist KCC? There was a tarmac road belonging to Kampala City Council going through my home, it was there for 30 years without being repaired until I asked the central Government to do it. Honourable Nasasira obliged and now we are happy as well as the city council. 

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Sir. If I may continue, the hon. Betty Kamya asked what happened in Malta after CHOGM? Can you give us examples of what gains Malta has made and so forth? She actually went ahead to say that if I Musumba were Nandala, I would have told them that. 

But sir, I have never been Nandala and will never be. But I can supply information; she says that it is on internet. I invite everybody to visit those various websites. She also asked whether I have ever read the human rights report and the answer is yes. 

There was a question about Entebbe Hospital. I invite people to look at Page 10 of the attachment paragraph 4.10, which clearly says that there is a health subcommittee for CHOGM and it has proposed construction and equipping of a casualty unit at Entebbe, improving of Mulago Intensive Care Unit, casualty, and so forth. We are aware of the need for immediate medical attention if it arises and we shall take care of that.

What are the arrangements for the traders on the roadsides: Government is aware that there are traders on the roadside. However, each of these traders has a different system of tenure on the roadside. Some of them are in the road reserve but others are on the roadside away from the road reserve, in their own land, but in a dilapidated condition. Others just need ordering because they are disorderly. Each case will be handled in its own means. 

The issue of an enabling law for investing with MEERA - there is no need for an enabling law. There is no requirement in the law that hinders Government to co-invest with the private sector in a business venture.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW MONEY FROM COMMERCIAL BANKS TO FINANCE VEHICLES FOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

MR MUTULUUZA: I am seeking clarification from the minister. When you read the motion, you find that Parliament is authorising Government to borrow money from commercial banks to purchase vehicles for members of Parliament. I don’t understand –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable member. Why don’t you first allow the minister to make the statement and then you come in? (Laughter)

MR MUTULUUZA: I don’t even hear what you are saying because of the noise, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to get from Government is whether –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister make the statement and then you come in.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome back the members from the Christmas holidays. I also wish them a merry Idi Aduha. 

This morning, cabinet had a meeting during which they underscored the importance of giving to members of Parliament appropriate and effective means of transport. They underscored the importance of this principle and deliberated at length on the modalities of how to give this facility to members of Parliament. 

Cabinet thinks that there is need to handle the giving out of these vehicles in a manner that is both political and budget neutral. Therefore, there is still need for further consultation and I shall therefore not be in a position to move this motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see the motion is on the Order Paper. Do you want me to keep it indefinitely? 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I listened to the honourable minister and I got lost as to what to do next because the statement he made, if my English has not failed me, he said that, “I shall therefore not be able to move”. I do not know when he will be able to. I thought he was standing here and saying, “I am unable to”. Which is which? Are you still able to or you shall therefore not be able to? 

MR DOMBO: I want to thank the honourable minister. But, Mr Speaker, if you remember, in your communication you gave us the background on how a decision to convene this session was arrived at. You informed us of the progress you made during the meeting of the commission, which was fully constituted, with Prime Minister present. The purpose of convening this session was for us to hear exactly that. It seems the communication you intended to communicate to us does not seem to come out. Mr Speaker, how do we proceed? It sounds strange.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I can say that what I stated in my communication is what happened. On that one, I stand with the statement. The Order Paper was made and this item was requisitioned to be included on the Order Paper. But I think what the Minister is saying is that he is not moving it now and that is why I asked him, “When?” (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we get the answer from the minister?

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As you said in your communication, we will be going on recess, so after recess, I will communicate when we will move this motion -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What will happen suppose the recess is for one week? I think it is up to you to tell us how much time you need to prepare yourself to move the motion.

DR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, we still have consultations as I have already said, and I will request for three weeks to be able to report back to the House- (Interjections)- I have to consult with other relevant authorities.

4.18
MRS LUMUMBA KASULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Mr Speaker,  I am so privileged to sit on the Parliamentary Commission which had a meeting where the Prime Minister - this time he did not delegate and the Minister of Finance also did not delegate. It was chaired by you, Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Commission on Friday last week at 10.00 a.m., but we failed to conclude on the issue of transport for members of Parliament. 

We postponed to have another meeting in the afternoon and in that meeting we all agreed – I remember very well at the end of the meeting, I asked, “Can I go and inform my voters?” if I can use the political language. Mr Speaker, you gave me the permission even to go to the level of mobilising people to be here today. 

Part of the agenda today was to handle the business of transport for members of Parliament because they are tired of moving in taxis and on boda bodas. If you remember even on that day, on WBS news, they said members of Parliament have requested the Speaker to recall them from recess because there is a lot of work. But if you saw the picture, there was an MP jumping off a boda boda. I did my work with my fellow commissioners, we mobilised members of Parliament – they have come here today to listen to the issue of their transport. 

Even in that very meeting, we got the chance to be informed that Government has to borrow money but World Bank gave a deadline of 2nd January. We agreed that we should not let our country miss because we are in a break. So, we agreed that people leave the Christmas break and come to work. In that vein, I do not want to be seen as a liar to my voters, and I also want to protect you, Mr Speaker, in your chair because you chaired the meeting suggesting you could have chaired what I would call “air”.

As members of Parliament, we have moved on boda bodas and in taxis – I even came here at 3.00 p.m. because the small corolla I have could not go through the bad roads of Bugiri. I beg to move that since the Minister of Finance is still carrying out consultations, we give him time to carry them out and we get back when he is ready with a good answer. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker, issues of welfare for members of Parliament are constitutional matters. Under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, we have a Parliamentary Commission constituted and chaired by you, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister, backbenchers and the Minister of Finance. 

The motion regarding welfare of Members of Parliament is moved by the Minister on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission not Cabinet. Therefore, the Minister cannot withdraw this motion because Government is consulting. This is a motion of Parliament from the Parliamentary Commission, constituted by MPs. That being the case, since the motion is on the Order Paper, I beg to move that this motion be discussed and passed. 

MR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This motion was moved by the hon. Minister of Finance and the concept of borrowing actually arose from Cabinet. It is a shock to honourable members because throughout the whole of last week, we had various options where for instance servicing of Government vehicles alone takes Ugshs 68 billion annually while purchase of new vehicles takes over Ugshs 200 billion. 

We tried to analyse and honourable members came up with an understanding with the Executive on a method that will save money. It becomes shocking for the Executive to start working in such a manner to blackmail Parliament. The way the honourable minister is moving is really bad blood trying to depict Parliament as “hyenas”. We discussed these things the whole of last week and it is clear that the Executive is taking a lot of money from the population in terms of Government vehicles. 

We had wanted to move a motion that we stop purchasing vehicles for all officers of Government and this money can be reallocated to very important services in the country. But Government said, “No, let us move on a better front”. Now you want to move in this manner where you want to appear as if you want to borrow money – which issue did not even come from members of Parliament? 

The Government said they have methods how they are going to do this in a manner that was user friendly especially for the population. You put a motion on the Order Paper and now you want to withdraw it in an attempt to insinuate that Parliament is trying to make you come up with a motion that is not for the people. 

I think the Executive should, first of all, apologise for taking the voters of this country for a ride and trying to depict that Parliament, which is one of the arms of Government is moving in a manner that is not for the people yet this Parliament has been trying to support expenditures that are pro-people. 

Therefore Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence because the way the Executive is moving is not right and the debate cannot continue. I want to move that the House be adjourned for further consultations because the way we are moving means that all the other items on the agenda on which we had agreed will not move forward because there is no further understanding as there have been additional meetings outside Parliament. Therefore, I move that the House be adjourned until we sort out these matters and are able to convene.
4.26
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I second the motion because we should be honest to each other in this matter. There is need for consultation between the Parliamentary Commission and the Executive. 

Two weeks ago, Mr Speaker, you took the initiative to see that we harmonise our position with the Executive as Parliamentary Commissioners. This was done and a conclusion was reached. It is very unfortunate and unreasonable that one arm of Government, which sits within the Parliamentary Commission- As parliamentary commissioners or the backbench, we feel that the Executive complicates our work. This is because we sat on the commission and agreed to move together as the three arms of Government. You cannot now turn round, that is dishonesty of the highest order. 

I was not here but a week ago colleagues sat down with Government and reached a conclusion that was to come to the Floor of this Parliament. This really portrays a bad picture that the institution of Parliament is not independent. If we go by the Constitution, we are partners in the development of Government. We are three arms of Government and we have to harmonise on a position. Therefore, one arm of Government cannot turn around and say that the other arm is bad. 

I support the motion– today’s Bukedde surprised me. One minister went on a radio and said that members of Parliament are very arrogant yet he is a Member of Parliament himself. We should not portray the institution of Parliament that way. If we are in business together, let us agree and move in a harmonised way. Therefore, if the Parliamentary Commission agreed with the Executive then we cannot go against what was agreed on. If consultations need to be done – actually by the time this motion was put on the Order Paper, I thought that everything was concluded. 

Therefore, I put the question –(Interruption)– the Speaker should put a question to give the way forward. 

4.30
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The principle of every member of Parliament getting a robust vehicle is –(Interruption)– an all-purpose vehicle is well accepted because it takes place in other parliaments in East and West Africa. However, the mechanism of how that must be implemented needs very careful consideration. Merely following may create budgetary problems.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the Vice President is in order to debate a motion, which is not on the Floor. The motion has not been tabled and he is going ahead to debate the merits and demerits of following it yet the mover has indicated that he intends to withdraw it. So, I do not think he is in order –(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I amend that last bit and – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my understanding of your position is this. The Parliamentary Commission sat on Thursday and reached an understanding. The motion here was requisitioned by the Ministry of Finance to enable him find sources of funds. So the question of entitlement is no longer an issue, it is only the funds. In my understanding he is not withdrawing the motion. Are you withdrawing the motion or not?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I have only said that I am not tabling the motion today. I request for three weeks for further consultation before I come back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: The position is that a motion was moved on the Floor that we adjourn. Should I put the question? [Members: “Yes”] Ok. One thing that should be clear to whoever wants to speak is that you speak on the motion to adjourn.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Justine moved a motion to adjourn but she did not justify that motion. So we are not clear of the reasons that she has to move a motion to adjourn.

THE SPEAKER: I think my assessment of the situation is that when the minister said that as of now he is not ready to move although the motion is on the Order Paper, hon. Lumumba moved that since she had mobilised people and they had come specifically to deal with that motion, we should deal with the motion; however, we decided not to dealing with it so she moved that we adjourn. That is the motion.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, on the Order Paper I see that we have other important issues for discussion. I don’t know whether it is procedurally correct that someone should move a motion without justification just because the minister is not ready to proceed with the motion. I need your guidance, sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to hon. Lumumba- and I don’t know whether it will be decided that way - because we have not been able to dispose of this motion, in her reasoning, she thinks that we should adjourn. Whether justified or not that is the motion.

4.36
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr John Nasasira): I want to declare some interest here. I have on Order Paper something that is so urgent. I wanted to appeal to honourable members to consider this urgent matter before we adjourn. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot transact business unless we listen to each other. He has a right to make his contribution and I have made a clarification that the motion we have is to adjourn and that is what we are debating. Let him make his contribution.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really would want to appeal that before we adjourn there is a very important item for the country and for our transport sector that we should consider and then adjourn. I don’t see any problem with that.

4.38
MR ADAMSON KIYONGA (INDEPENDENT, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have understood the motion on the floor and I am moving a motion that the question be put to end this debate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that I put the question.
 
(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: there were nine abstentions, 29 members voted “Nay” and 96 members voted “Aye”. The ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question on the motion for adjournment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to 30th January.

(The House rose at 4.42 p.m. and adjourned. to Tuesday, 30 January 2007.)



