

Wednesday, 27 December1995
                   
The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

ITEM NO. 2 (i)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995.


THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr Steven Kavuma):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, ‘The Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1995’, be read the First Time. I beg to move, Sir.


THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr Steven Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Bill, l995’, be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL 1995


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX BILL, 1995

Clause 6

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING - ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, Clause 6 page 11, part (a), I beg to move that we insert the word ‘or’ at the end of paragraph (b) and on (b) in paragraph (c) substitute for Clause, foreign suppliers who must register his business in Uganda or appoint an agent to act in all respects as a registered person.  The Clause is the recipient of the imported service.  Mr Chairman, this is just in softening the arrangement and we put the receipt of the imported services instead of foreign suppliers who must register his business in Uganda which is more complicated.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed by the Mover of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

		Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING -ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, Clause 7, sub-clause 2 page 11, part A; I beg to move that substitute the word required, appearing in the end of the first line with the word required; this is actually a correction, D, in the third line of 11 is substituted with the word ‘period’ and in C, in the fourth line, insert between the words apply and registration the word ‘for’.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING - ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move on Clause 8 page 11, to insert between the words already and registered appearing in the first line of sub-section 1, the word ‘are’.  Just an Article ‘are’ I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING -ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, on Clause 24, on page 22, I beg to move that we substitute the word customs appearing in the open statement the word ‘taxable’. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR SIBO:  Clause 25, part (vii).  I would like to move that part (vii) which is Clause 25 to Clause 31 be deleted and thereby include, and Clause 25 substitute, the Minister shall from time to time publish a statutory instrument appropriate formula or formulae of the calculation of tax payers.  

Mr Chairman, these Clauses are clauses detailing out the calculation of the tax; it is a formula that is being or formulae that are being and these are near mathematics and some of these formulae are very difficult to understand for ordinary person and businessmen may not be able to under this and I would therefore, suggest that this should put in form of a Statutory Instrument that can be amended from time to time as when we think that the formulae should be changed.  So, it is for that reason that I am suggesting instead, we give the Minister powers to amend the Statutory Instrument as and when he thinks he should change the formulae.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to support the Mover.  In countries where the VAT has been introduced, unless people in the business really know what is entailed, you find that it is going to end up in a good fiasco.  If we are, therefore, to get the Act and a good one too, at that, the Minister should always come up with a Statutory Instrument.  Otherwise, this law, is going to bring problems in Ghana, where the Minister, himself, the Mover of this Bill, visited, he never told us what had gone there and he came here making it a very big joke, whereas they should have distributed the report of their visit to Ghana where this Statute has not worked very well.  I have a document here, where even the Chairman of the Bill also visited Ghana including hon. Okia and this is going to end up in a fiasco unless if something is done, Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the proposed Amendment that we move this Section, we give the Minister and Uganda Revenue Authority a chance to work out a table where an ordinary trader can go and read off how much has to be charged, other than telling him about A x B, B x C, C x D, it makes the whole thing very complicated.  Now, when we speak of X - Y, and you go on to say M - N, we make the thing very complicated for no point; we just leave this, let us go to the schedule and to make Uganda Revenue Authority work out a table, like we used to have in old days, you just read off, that if your income is so much, you should pay so much.  Why should we bother our traders with working out this formula, they will not follow it.  Let us work it for them, let us go to the schedule and then we make the work simple and straight forward, Mr Chairman. 

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I have heard carefully and understood the sentiments advanced by the hon. Members, but the impression they are creating that this is a formula which will go on changing and the Minister will have the leverage of changing it from time to time.  This is just a formula; a formula is like a container.  If you have a jerrycan, you can put in water, you can put in paraffin, you do not need to change the jerrycan in order to put in paraffin, it is just a container.  For an ordinary trader, we have already - in fact, we circulated among the Members each of you, each of the Members has a copy of the tables to show how you can arrive at the calculations, how much you can charge and how much you are going to leave to the Government and these were circulated, these are simpler, than what is here, this is just a formula, which we do not need to change.  So, since the main reason advanced is that it will give Minister leverage to change, I beg the hon. Members to appreciate that we do not need.

Secondly, these refer to different issues; the one on Value Added Tax in case the tax is inclusive, another one is where a retailer is selling for the wholesaler.  So, these are different formulae, which, whoever is an expert in this area would like to refer and it should be part of the Statute.

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give the hon. Minister is that, if you want to under any subject very well, you should understand the formula; if you do not understand the formula, you will not get the answer.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would only like to mention to the hon. Minister that if he circulated this information to Members of this House and if Members of this House still show difficulty in understanding this information, then he may have sympathy to the Members of the ordinary community who are by comparison, a little less alert and awake than Members of this House.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 25 be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33 agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.
Clause 36

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  In Clause 36, we want to insert between the words of and objection appearing at the end of Sub-Clause 7 of the word be.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36 as amended.

MR SIBO:  I would like to propose the deletion of Clause 36 and Clause 37 and insert a new Clause 36 reading:  

‘Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner General may lodge an objection to the decision with the tax tribunals, as shall be established by Parliament of the purposes of settling tax disputes in accordance with Article 152 (iii) of the Constitution.  Mr Chairman, these two Clauses are referring to how to deal with objections in respect of taxpayer. Now, they refer to the appeal to the Commissioner General and also to, I think the Commissioner of Appeals.  Now, these two, first of all, the Commissioner General really, one does not appeal to him statutorily.  The Commissioner General is the man who is taxing people; every officer who is working in tax authority is working for a Commissioner General.  It is, therefore, false to suggest that you should appeal from a junior officer to the Commissioner General in form of law, because you will do it in form of administration administratively. Everyone who is doing it is doing it for Commissioner General and if he is doing for Commissioner General, you cannot appeal from the Commissioner General to the Commissioner General.  Therefore, you cannot appeal to the Commissioner General.

Secondly, the other part, in Section 37, we are talking of a Commissioner of Appeals.  Now, the new Constitution stipulates under Article 52 sub-paragraph (iii), that Parliament shall establish tax tribunals for purposes of settling tax disputes.  Now, this law is starting on the lst of July next year; the Constitution is in operation.  Why, then are we stating that tax Commissioner of Appeals?  This was actually set up in our Finance Act.  Now, that Finance Act will not be operating on the 31st July of next year.  Secondly, the fact that we have a Constitution in place, we should use the provisions of a Constitution, that is why I am suggesting that, because of that Constitutional provision, we should replace these two Articles with the existing provision in the Constitution. I beg to move.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I do agree with the Mover of this Amendment partly especially this particular area where he talks about making an Appeal to the Appeals Commissioner.  The fact that I do not agree with him is, when he said, leaving part of what he should be doing as a Parliament to another Parliament; because, he is making reference as if we are CA delegates making the Constitution, leaving some responsibilities to another House and for this reason, I still hold it that it is just luck to leave the idea of appealing to the Commissioner General to the Tax Appeals Commission.

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  The information I want to give to hon. Atwai, that he does not perhaps understand.  In Clause 36, we are trying to provide - to attend to the Commissioner General. In Clause 37, we are providing for the appeal to the Commission of Appeals and I am saying that these two shall not exist under the provisions of the Constitution.  So, we should properly set up such tribunals as provided for in the Constitution.

MR KASAJJA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The Amendment which is being brought by hon. Sibo is good in spirit, but if you read the contents of these two provisions, Mr Chairman, these are really very good for a tax payers, they are just only spelling out an area where a person can go and lodge his complaint, come and if for example, you have been over assessed, or if they have asked you a higher rate than what you think you should have paid, then you can go and appeal to the Commissioner General, but then where he was talking of the tribunal which was passed in the Constitution, it is provided for if you read Section 2, where it is saying, on page 37, that an appeal to the High Court, may be made on question of law only and most of the appeals shall state the question or questions of law that will be raised on the appeal.  So, actually, this one, Mr Chairman, is reinforcing that provision in the Constitution, that you can still use the tribunal, but where you are satisfied, especially on something simple, which is not necessarily law, then you can use these two sections, Section 36 and 37.  Therefore, I wish to request Members that this Section should stand, because, they are just helping the taxpayer, Mr Chairman. 

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, time will come when this Parliament will pass a statute on tribunal, they will have to be set.  As of now, we do not need to create tribunals in each of these laws, because there will be a Statute separate and moved appropriately at the appropriate time in consonance with the Constitution.  As of now, what we have, is that if you have grievances, you look to the Commissioner.  Of course, whoever is working on behalf of the Commissioner, the Commissioner would wish to know, - they are also in the wrong, if you are not satisfied, there is a Commissioner of Appeal.  This was to be even stationed in the Uganda Revenue Authority, but we wanted an independent area in the Ministry of Justice or at the IGG’s office.  This steps you would lead it, if you are not satisfied for the time being with Commissioner General and from time, you can even go to the court, until such a time, the tribunals have been set. So, we cannot get each law to talk of tribunals, which are not set.  In that case, I oppose the Amendment.

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification.  I seek clarification from the Minister.  This is a very important law which has got to the eyes and ears of the people; people are going to find out.  Do we have members who know more; so that they can explain it and assist the Minister and the whole country to know.  You see, if we do not set this tribunal now and there will be no Parliament to set the tribunal we are talking, what about when the when the thing starts next year and then people have problems. How can you solve it?  

What we want, this is going to be a delaying tactic; we want the tribunal to be there; so that people know where to go immediately if there is a problem, this is what is in the villages, people in town, they need to know some where to go.  

This country has been there, we have been having land disputes; ever since, there are records there, they have never solved the land problem until we have got it said in the Constitution that we must have a tribunals to care for the land.  I think we do not have it, not because we are hating it, so that there is protection, what we need is justice.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  This said tribunal it is only for this VAT; it should be tribunals for the whole taxation system which we cannot set on this law of VAT, it needs a separate Statute which will come and it will be in consonance with the Constitution and that will prevail all over these and then shall follow; this is just converting sales tax and CTL into VAT system.  It is not the whole taxation system; I think that is the crux of the matter.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 36 and 37 be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40 agreed to.

Clause 41 agreed to.

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43 agreed to.

Clause 44

HON. MEMBER:  I am moving it on behalf of hon. Yekko J. K. Kween. Mr Chairman, I would like to add a new sub-section on Clause 2 and thereafter renumber the others 3,4,et cetera, as follows; immediately after the seizure of the goods, a written statement should be obtained from the owner of the goods or the person who has custody or control, stating the quantity, quality of the goods.  We from the border, we have had experience where goods are sealed and when you go the following day, you are told, they are instead of what had over 100 cartons be told 2 cartons and so forth.  So, this Clause would help at the time of seizure for the owner to know that his goods worthy so much have been seized and I would even like to add that the address of the owner also is stipulated, the names and the address of the owner; so that Article 44, sub-section 4 which now entitles the Commissioner General not to give notice, because he does not know the owner, also becomes not so useful.  

So, Mr Chairman, this Clause, for us, we have had experience, it is very useful, because, the owner as I have said, will know the type of goods, the quantity and the type of goods which have been seized and when he or she is going to claim, will not just get a few of what he or she - will get the goods which were seized.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is moving a very important point, except that his anxiety is taken care of in Clause 44, where we talk about seizure of goods.  If you read 44, sub-section (iii), it says, where goods have been seized under sub-section 1, the Commission General shall within 10 tens after seizure serve on the owner of the goods or the persons who had custody or control of the goods immediately before a notice is in writing.  Mr Chairman, I think this can take care of what he is trying to say.

HON. MEMBER:  I thought he was referring to the Article; the Article he is mentioning does not tell us the quantity, so it is not satisfying the Amendment which we would like to move, Mr Chairman.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a new Clause 45, we delete the word by the space proceeding and then substitute therefore by court order.  The word by the space proceedings appear in 45 (ii) and the space in the last line.  Mr Chairman, I am moving this because, I am aware that we have a provision like that in the present customs and excise legislation but it is a provision that is most undesirable.  It is a provision that would allow the Commissioner General to hop into your house and tell you to get out with your family and he takes over the house without any further ado.  He can find you driving in your car and takes you out and take over the car without any further ado, which is by space proceeding.  It is very bad; in fact, I call it primitive.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest that we use the normal, civilised way; namely, by court order, so that if the Commissioner General has got to cover what is due to him, he should go to court and then I am able to say why I have not been able to pay or when I shall be able to pay and be given an opportunity to put my case.  So, that is why I am asking the Minister to delete the space proceeding.   Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I stand to strongly support the hon. Sibo’s proposed Amendment and I say this because, the tax authorities in this country, have been known to be behind in keeping their records.  The tax authorities have been known to simply pick up forms and tax assessment based on guesswork.  To me, these are what I would like to call fictitious assessments and I am going to give a complete and Mr Chairman, hon. Members will excuse if I have to consult myself.  

Last year, before I presented my candidature to the CA, I went to the Income tax in person, in my town to get income tax clearance. The authorities there looked through my record and were able to say, yes, 1991, 1992, 1993, you under paid or over paid, where there was over payment, there was adjustment, where there was under payment, I paid the arrears and got a clean sheet of paper.  Now, what happens several months later, I get a new set of tax assessment for the year 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, when I had already got a clean certificate.  Mr Chairman, would it be fair for the tax authorities to simply send you tax assessment and then you write back as I did myself, through a registered letter and God knows whether whoever receive a reply.  You send a previous letter to the income tax authorities claiming that this assessment is not fair, et cetera, et cetera and you state of the Income tax authorities or the VAT authorities acknowledging this, they come with these primitive space proceedings. 

Hon. Members, Mr Chairman, I leave it to you to decide whether this would be fair.  I am strongly of the view that a court order based on a proper hearing based on the fact that the court has proved beyond reasonable doubt, that tax payer owes so much money to the authorities and has deliberately refused to pay, then in that case, the tax authorities will be justified in sending the court order, rather than the space proceedings.  I hope Mr Chairman, the House will join me in supporting hon. Sibo’s Amendment.

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING:  Mr Chairman, while I can see the basis of some anxiety in the part of hon. Sibo, yet I would like to draw the attention of this House, certain important facts.  This Clause reads; where a person liable for tax has failed to remit.  In other words, someone who must pay tax, has for some reason refused to pay the tax, then, what happens?  This Clause provides, that then the Commissioner General may move to distress items to pay the tax.  Now, the hon. Sibo is saying, let us get a control in our facts.  I would like to draw the attention of hon. Members, that the fact that in this country, it takes so many months to get a civil action out of court.  So, that means, that where some people deliberately fail to pay taxes of this country, we are going to make it so difficult for the Commissioner General to collect taxes with consequent results and everybody should know this. I can see 20/50 people deliberately to pay and waiting for six months to get a court order; I think Sir that we should know the implication of what we want to legislate for.  I will oppose this Amendment.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, while I sympathise with hon. Sibo’s thing, I would like to agree with the Minister for Finance; yet Mr Chairman, we have very little confidence in what goes on in the courts.  Why, Mr Chairman?  You have seen so many cases of theft from Government, from everywhere, these cases have gone to court, the more the money stolen, the less likely it is to convict the person the person who has stolen the money.  (Applause)  

As a matter of fact, Mr Chairman, recently, there was a case reported in the Papers, where a prosecutor failed to appear in court three times to prosecute the person involved and the case was thrown out of court; as if that was the only prosecutor in the office of the Director of Public Prosecution.  I think we are getting into serious proxy, if we are going to have payments of taxes decided in court, everybody who is going to be paying taxes is going to decide that he get a court decision, it is likely to happen.  Many people in Uganda, in fact, the majority are neither willing nor do they want to pay taxes.  We have a serious problem.  Are we solving this by saying that every time the tax collector wants to collect his dues, he must go to court, when you know very well;

(a) How long will it take him to get a court decision? Unless you people who are going to come here and pass a Budget, you are going to allow this tax man to collect the money, you authorise to be spent, then we have a serious problem. I think hon. Sibo is right to express this anxiety because, many people have been inconvenienced by tax men coming at the most inconvenient time - you are going to a wedding of your son and that is when they will find it necessary to confiscate your Mercedes Benz.  Now, therefore, what I suggest Mr Chairman, we do, instead of passing a law as hon. Sibo is suggesting, I think we should have concentrated training of the tax collectors, rather than passing this law which is likely to cause a lot of serious problems regarding payments of taxes. Mr Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I may not go along all the way with the proposed Amendment by hon. Sibo.  But I take exception to what has just been stated by the previous speaker, that this House has lost confidence in the courts in Uganda.  When we are legislators, and if - (Interruption) 

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I did not say Parliament has lost confidence, because this Parliament would have had to express it. What I said is that, this country, the people of Uganda have little confidence, there is no -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, protect me. Mr Chairman, there is a difference between we and this House; the House can only loose confidence in these people by formally doing so, and I did not say so. (Laughter)  Therefore, Mr Chairman, is it in order, for the hon. Member and Mr Chairman, I take exceptions - (Interruption) - from the hon. Manzi Tumubweine.  Is it in order for the hon. Magezi to put words in my mouth, Mr Chairman?

DR MAGEZI:  Hitherto as it may be, I would like to assure you that Mr Chairman, that I have the full confidence in the judicial system in this country and whatever short-comings the court system, it is the duty of this Parliament to put right and not simply to come here and read to people here who are not able to defend themselves in this august House, Mr Chairman.

Going back to the proposed Amendment, I see the implication of putting the Amendment as proposed by hon. Sibo into this Clause.  I can see that the spinacle of correction of money under the present system are as stipulated in Clause 45 would totally be wrecked if we subject collection to a court order.  On the other hand, how do you stop victimisation, if I can call it that way, being carried out?   This is where I find that there is merit in supporting hon. Sibo; on the other hand, even the culture of the citizens of Uganda, the first thing as a tax payer, I want to pay as a little tax as possible and I tend to find ways and means of registering my tax liability.  So, the arm twisting is a problem, but I believe that we are not writing a Bible, this is going to be a law, it is subject to be amended as and when the Parliament feels there is need and for that matter, I would like to go along with the Minister for Finance, that we oppose the proposed Amendment, but we are watch dogs of the people we represent and we find that this thing is being misused or abused by the Commissioner General and his staff, a proposed Amendment can come in the normal manner of our business in this House.  I oppose the Amendment.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify that usually when there is a matter pending before the courts, some of our people involved with the law enforcement, enforce that law on a Friday, when they know that courts are not sitting on Saturday and Sunday.  Therefore, how could this be corrected unless we first try what hon. Sibo has said and when experiences finds it out that it cannot work out, then we can reverse to the normal ways of doing things.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: I would like to draw the members attention to the Clause which has already been passed, Clause 36 (i), that is to do with the assessment of tax. A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of an officer may lodge an objection to the decision with the Commissioner General within 30 days after the service of the notice of decision.  May I draw your attention to sub-section 4, which says, subject to sub-section 5, the Commissioner General shall only consider an objection lodged under sub-section 1 if the person has paid the tax due under the assessment. So, we are already working under different conflicts here, because, one law hold like this, we are now battling under this, I think there may be need probably for a Session and a series of Amendments of this law to remove the contradiction. Mr Chairman, therefore, I find that probably the Amendment which hon. Sibo is seeking to amend may be very difficult to enforce; because of the other provision.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the hon. Sibo’s concern, because the situation is bad. However, I think we have to read this Clause very carefully, in that, the Commissioner General may recover unpaid tax; that means, the tax will have been assessed, you will have been informed and you will have known which tax to pay but you did state. If it was to recover the assessed tax, that would have been different, but unpaid tax is tax which has been assessed and given to you and you are aware of what you are supposed, but you have not paid within the stipulated time and they come for distress to recover the tax that was not paid.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you.  I just want to give an information but actually, in taxation law internationally; even taking our neighbours, United Kingdom, countries like Nigeria and many others, the Revenue Authorities of those countries have got special powers and these powers are given to them because, it is very difficult to collect tax and a lot of people to try to avoid tax and when they do so, they are given special part to make sure that tax that is assessed, is actually collected and the only way they can do it, is by giving them this special authority, which can be used to get those taxes from the people.  In fact, the Inland Revenue in America, has been described as the only organ of Government that is only second to God, because, it can collect tax and, the America internationally, it is the people who are supposed to pay tax, it is their duty to present themselves to the tax collector, it is not the other way round.  So, when they use this power, it is because, you have failed to present yourself to the taxman to pay your part as a citizen.  Mr Chairman, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 45 section (ii) be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 45 agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  There are some omissions, they are just corrections, briefly the way all these clauses have either to insert or too, they are not substantial, but that is why I have to keep on standing to ensure that they are inserted.  So, on Clause 48, page 45, we want to insert the word ‘to’ and persons appearing in the second line of the Clause 8, the word ‘are’.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are just adding a letter ‘a’?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Yes, Sir, it changes meaning of the whole thing.  Mr Chairman, the procedure is that we deal with clause by clause.  Otherwise, we would - because, we have circulated them –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Those are corrections.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Yes, just corrections.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You read out all the corrections before we proceed.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the Clause 63, Clause 70, Clause 75, Clause 77 and Clause 82 -(Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  But we have to go one by one.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, in Clauses 63, 70, 75, 77 and 82.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 48 as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 49 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 50 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 51 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 52 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 53 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 54 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 55 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 56

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: In Clause 56 and 57, Pages 49 and 50, it is just exchanging marginal notice on Page 56, 57 and 58.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question as read above.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 57 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 58 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 59 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 60 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 61 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 62, Page 52, the marginal notice should read, ‘failure to comply with section 53, 54,’ and the word, ‘thousand’ appearing at the end of the third line should read, ‘thousand’.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question as corrected above.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 63 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 64 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 65 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 66

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment in Clause 66, sub-Clause 1, the last line.  I would like to substitute the two years, for five years.  Mr Chairman, when you look at these offenses by officers and then persons, there is a discrepancy.  When you look at Clause 66, where it is talking about the person, the offence is five years, and both officers and persons, one bribing the for asking for a bribe.  So, why should the officer, if he asks for a bribe from a person, why should he be jailed less than a person who has offered a bribe to the officer?  On the contrary, the officer should know more therefore, suffer more. Therefore, I propose that let the officer also have five years instead of less.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I have not objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 67 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 68 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 69 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I am just making a correction on Clause 70, sub-Clause 4 to substitute for the expression one, appearing in the first line with expression three instead of one.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 71 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 72 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 73 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 74 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I just beg to insert the word, ‘off’ between the expression (c) and sub-section appearing in the second line of the word, ‘off’.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, this Clause I beg to move that in 77, sub-Clause 2, substitute for the words, ‘at the exchange rate applying between the currency and the Uganda shillings and the type of supply,’ that is appearing at the end of the following: Into Uganda shillings using the waited average selling rate of the previous month for the currency concerned.  This is just to synchronise with the currency at what maybe at that material time.  I beg to move.                                 

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I would like synchronisation proposed by the Minister.  It becomes a bit very difficult when you have fluctuating currencies and using waited averages of this nature maybe, we -(Inaudible)- who are going to pay tax. I do not know what measure he will put in place to protect the taxpayer.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the fluctuation cannot go beyond the waited.  Actually this is the only way to protect both; the Government and the trader.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 77 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of this Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 78

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 78 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 79 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 80 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 81 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82

THE MINISTER: Mr Chairman, this is an amendment on sub-section 3, ‘the Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, make regulations amending Schedule’, there is two and three, but I beg to move that we insert there one.  I beg to move.              

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 83 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 84 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule

MR SEBANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, on this Second Schedule, I propose to move an amendment in (d) to delete the word, ‘life’ and add at the end the following words: ‘including management of pension schemes’ so that the whole (d) reads, ‘The supplier of insurance services including management of pension schemes’.  The Minister saw it fit to include ‘life insurance’ under this exemption.  But I want to appeal to him and to the House, that we include all insurance services not only life insurance services, because insurance industry is still a very young industry in this country.  It has got to be protected; it has got to be promoted and very ably protected by the Minister.  The same goes for the management of pension schemes, which is certain kind of life insurance.  Therefore, I would like to move that rather than to take life only, we take insurance as a whole so that the premiums of insurance are exempt including management of pension schemes.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I do seek some kind of clarification because if you are saying that you exempt all insurances, certainly we cannot collect taxes.  Because you are now saying that if I insure my cows, car, lorry, all those should be exempted.  Unless it is very clear to us what we are exempting and the life is a different insurance from all other property insurance.  If you actually exempt all property insurance, all vehicle insurance, then we shall have a problem of raising taxes.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, the meaning is not what hon. Manzi Tumubweine is thinking about.  The meaning of this exemption is that the premiums which are charged for life and the premiums which are charged for any other insurance business are the ones within. For example, the insurance industry would be paying tax in the normal way as a business company does.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the person’s income is what is being taxed.  Now, if I have an income and I spend it on insurance, you are exempting it.  What it effectively does is that you will be using the taxable income and that therefore, the taxation of insurance company is completely separate from taxable good.  Because if I buy goods from outside and import goods, and I pay a premium to insure them, you are saying that that premium should be exempted.  I oppose the amendment, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to respond to hon. Kizito’s request because I see the difference between the ordinary insurance business, that is premiums, which in addition to those would attract VAT, whatever percentage, and the pension funds, which are collect from various subscribers.  For example, National Social Security Fund is going to convert the fund by workers into pension.  Now there is a difference between those two.  I think there is justification in my view for the pension funds to be exempt from VAT.  But I think there are maybe some difficulty in a sustained argument by hon. Kizito in exempting insurance premiums generally.  I could sympathise with life.  But when you talk generally is like business, like any other.  So, I would like that we separate life from the pension funds and from the general insurance premiums

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I just want clarification from hon. Kizito.  This section talks about the supply of life insurance services.  I would like him to explain to understand the distinction between the supply of life insurance services and a premium pay.

MR SEBANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, the proposed amendment is in response or is connected with number (d), which is already in the Bill.  To make it wider, I proposed this because the insurance industry in Uganda as I have said, is as young as life insurance industry.  If you make insurance more expensive, you are going to make it more difficult for people to insure and unless you exempt insurances from this value added tax, you are going to make it more expensive to the insurance public because we shall add VAT.  Insurance Companies will be getting VAT from the public and the public will find insurance more expensive and therefore, they will abandon taking up insurances and as a result the economy will suffer because there will be a lot of things which are uninsured and when the economy is not insured, the economy is the loser.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, it is a matter of interpretation, as to whether you insure the goods and import them, that will be exempted from the VAT and whether the premiums you pay as an organisation in the country for the services, this is what we refer to in (d) and I have not objection.  We delete the word, ‘life’ so that we take all the supply of insurance services.  I have no objection.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I sought clarification but I did not quite get it.  But I follow what hon. Rwakakooko said.  He said, you may ask for exemption of civic types of insurance, but if you are asking for general exemption, he will say, no.  So, Rwakakooko, you may add maybe another.  But this one under the proposed amendment, for the whole thing, I would say no.  Practically, no.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed hon. Sebaana Kizito.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2 as amended, agreed to.

Third Schedule 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 5

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, at the beginning we provisionally and conditionally removed Clause 25 to 31 in order for them to go into the Schedule.  We seem to have closed without them being included here.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: It was total deletion.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (GENERAL) (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, ‘Value Added Tax Bill, 1995,’ and passed it with some amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that he Bill entitled: ‘The Value Added Tax Bill, 1995,’ be read the Third Time and do pass.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, ‘Value Added Tax Bill, 1995,’ be read the Third Time and do pass.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR STATUTE ENTITLED 
‘THE VALUE ADDED TAX STATUTE, 1995’

THE CHAIRMAN: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 December 1995)

