Wednesday, 20 December 2006 

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back to the plenary and to give notice that owing to the forthcoming holiday, I would like to appeal to you to accept to work both morning and afternoon so that we can go on recess tomorrow evening.

I would like to adjust the Order Paper slightly to permit this House to pay tribute to the late hon. Zimula Mugwanya, former Member of this House who is to be buried this afternoon.

MOTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. JOHN ZIMULA MUGWANYA

2.42
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Rule 44(2) of our Rules of Procedure, I move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. John Zimula Mugwanya. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is anybody seconding it?

MR KATURAMU: Seconded, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, 

WHEREAS the late John Zimula Mugwanya was:
(i)	A distinguished freedom fighter;
(ii)	An accomplished politician and able legislator of this august House;
(iii)	A staunch Movementist and a great mobiliser for the NRM party;
(iv)	A conciliator and lover of peace;
(v)	An entrepreneur of great skills; 

NOW THEREFORE, this Parliament:
1. 	Notes with deep sorrow the sudden and untimely demise of the late John Zimula    Mugwanya, which occurred on Saturday, 16 December 2006.

2. 	Pays tribute to the late Mugwanya for the noble, illustrious and meritorious achievements in Government, Parliament and service to the nation.

3. 	Commends His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for the continued support to the deceased, particularly during his hour of need.

4. 	Commends His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II for the trust and confidence accorded to his deceased subject.

5. 	Commends doctors of Mulago Heart Institute, particularly Dr Peter Lwabi and the entire staff for the gallant and tireless efforts to save the life of the deceased. 

6. 	Calls upon Government to immediately improve, upgrade and fully equip the Cardiac Heart Institute of Mulago.

7. 	Collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss and passing on of this distinguished and illustrious son of Uganda. 
I beg to move.

2.46
MR KATURAMU  KIRIBEDDA (NRM, Representative Persons with Disability, Western Region): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand to second the resolution to pay tribute to the late John Zimula Mugwanya who passed away the other day. 

The late hon. Zimula Mugwanya sacrificed his life in order to bring freedom to our country and he has until his demise consistently fought for freedom for this country. 

Honourable Zimula Mugwanya was part of a larger group of members who played a very big role in the Constituent Assembly and came up with the new Constitution, which was promulgated in 1995. We believe that his contribution has enabled our country to move on the democratic path, which we in this Parliament have built on in order to build democratic institutions in this country.

Freedom of association made the late Mugwanya to profess to the Movement ideology, which he has done until his demise. This is one of the attributes, which teaches Ugandans to be consistent in what they believe in as the right ideology to profess. Honourable Zimula Mugwanya has professed to the NRM ideology until his demise. 

Hon. Zimula Mugwanya was in this House and I recall he used to sit behind me here. This was his seat. Although he did not come back after the Sixth Parliament, he remained exemplary and a dedicated Ugandan who served his country in other capacities.  I believe honourable members that the late Zimula Mugwanya has shown us that life can continue even outside Parliament. 

Honourable Zimula Mugwanya tried his level best outside Parliament. He has been an entrepreneur, and for some of you who take Mityana road see the modest soap factory that he constructed. This signals to us that even we, the members of Parliament today, can do something outside Parliament to sustain ourselves and contribute to national development.

Honourable Zimula Mugwanya has been very accommodative, principled and with an attitude of success of purpose in that he wanted to accomplish whatever he pursued.

I wish to thank His Excellency the President for trying to save the life of hon. Zimula Mugwanya and all those who have comforted the bereaved family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I support the motion.  The late Zimula Mugwanya used to say, “I am a son of a chief.” His father was the Minister of Justice (Omulamuzi) in the Kabaka’s Government. He used to say that whereas his father served Buganda, he, Zimula Mugwanya, served the entire country as a Minister of State for Local Government and as a special advisor to His Excellency the President. 

But some sons of chiefs are not enterprising; in fact many of them have drunk and sold away the land of their late fathers. They have therefore, not been good inheritors of their parents. 

But hon. Mugwanya as already noted was a job creator.  I visited his farm where he employed many people who were rearing his cattle and pigs. He also had a soap factory - and that is precisely the point I keep on making as Chancellor of Makerere University that we want to educate people who are job creators. 

 Despite being a Roman Catholic, he was a very a significant political and religious mobiliser who interfaced very well with people of other religions for the good of the country.  May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved.

2.55
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support the motion in recognition of the services that the late hon. John Zimula Mugwanya rendered for this country.  I personally knew the late John Zimula Mugwanya, the son of the late Matayo Mugwanya, the second President of the Democratic Party, which is the oldest party in this country.  

The late John Zimula Mugwanya, as the mover of the motion said was a man who struggled to liberate this country.  I remember very well those days in Kenya when we were with hon. Kiyonga, hon. Rugunda, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja before he left for Sweden and many others who were in Nairobi then. The late used to live in Thika but he used to come and attend the meetings of the struggle then- the NRM external mission political wing to find ways and means of supporting the NRA in the bush.  

The late Zimula Mugwanya started making soap using his brain as the Prime Minister has said. We were in a foreign country where there were so many factories with better facilities than his. But the late Zimula Mugwanya whatever resources he used to make soap out of from Thika where he had a factory, nobody knows! He was able contribute to the struggle of the Movement to liberate this country.  

I remember very well at a place called Nalubugo on Mityana road when he saw that the UFM was becoming weak, he got guns and gave them to the leader of this country to continue liberating this country.  So, I think it is very befitting that this Parliament moves this motion to pay tribute.  

However, I have been reading in the newspapers, and of course the Rt hon. Prime Minister and also hon. Katuramu have said that he had a factory. Mind you a lot of his assets were destroyed when they knew that he was supporting the guerillas then.   I have seen that he has left a debt unsettled by this Government.  I hope and pray that the leaders of this country will look after his children and even pay the debt that has not been settled until the time of his death.  

I want to ask members to support this motion because Mugwanya has not only been a freedom fighter but also reconciliatory. I know many people who had fallen out with His Excellency the President because as I have told you, ever since the struggle, so many things have happened. But Mugwanya would call you and try to reconcile you especially here in Buganda and maybe that is why the President appointed him his advisor on culture.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
I beg to move. 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Oscar Malinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I also rise to support the motion.  I met the late Zimula Mugwanya when I came to the Sixth Parliament.  I know he was a very dignified person who represented his people’s feelings with a lot of honesty. However, I rise because paragraph 6 of the motion calls upon the government to immediately upgrade and fully equip the Cardiac Heart Institute at Mulago.

Madam Speaker, we are in the process of upgrading the Heart Institute - the fundamentals have been addressed.  We have trained the technical people, the doctors, the technical group who carry out tests and most of the equipment is now available.  Our biggest problem now is room; we need a lot more room but it is being addressed.  

There is an Italian group, which at the moment has a cardiac practice in Khartoum. They have visited us and they are coming to sign a memorandum of understanding to construct a cardiac unit at Mulago early next year.  As you have read in the newspapers recently, we have had fairly big donations from one of the Arab countries and we continue to lobby in order to renew the dignity of this country which was the leading in medicine in this region. But we went through a doldrums in the 70s when everything in the nation including medicine collapsed.  But we continue to progress and eventually we shall be able to construct an admirable cardiac unit befitting the status of this nation.   Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.02
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion.  In the Sixth Parliament, the late Mugwanya used to sit directly behind me. I used to call him “neighbour” and he would in turn call me, “neighbour.”

Madam Speaker, the late Mugwanya was not only a job creator but also a very wealth man- a property man.  Actually the last time I met him was in June this year.  I found him in Nateete coming out of the shops, which are below the road level and I asked him what he was doing there. He told me that those were his buildings, which people were renting. But he asked me to help him do one thing.  He said that he had about 15 square miles of land in Kibaale, which land he wanted to sell off but did not know where it was.  So he asked me to help him identify the land. I advised him to go to Fort Portal because the records of the lands in Kibaale are not in Kampala. I do not know whether he did, but he claimed to have those 15 square miles of land.

The late Mugwanya was controversial although at times in the Sixth Parliament he was in a hurry. He was always asking for the question to be put each time there was a debate. Even if the debate was still going on, he would urge that the question be put and we go on.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.05
MR ALI KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA (NRM, Bugweri County, Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand up to pay tribute to one of those people who have made it possible for us to be here.  When we refer to the people who have sacrificed and created the atmosphere for us to be here, some of whom we have not been able to see, we need to be humble. We as freedom fighters don’t normally mourn the dead because a freedom fighter is a solider; and when he falls, it is the duty of the remaining fellows to cover up the gap so that they can continue with the struggle for which their comrade has died.  

What I know of Zimula Mugwanya is that, the turmoil through which our country went at long last crystallised in all of us from different circles being at one front fighting for our survival.  Some of us who had the “misfortune” of seeing what is good for this country at an early age, have for a long time been seen in bad light - as conservative, especially, by different categories of reactionaries. 

Mugwanya being from the family of the entrenched gentry of Buganda, the fellows who along with the British were able to demarcate and distribute land among themselves - the 1000 people. So, for such a person who – to say that the people need to have rights, it was very difficult because the contradiction had not come but by 1980 they had all come up and we found ourselves in the same pitch defending the freedom of these people.  So for him to have come up from that high position to come down and share with us - to fight for the peoples’ cause is the strength of Mugwanya because a person who is in a bad situation cannot assist somebody who is in a bad situation. 

 It is normally a person who is socially high up and also intellectually up who can be able to commit what we call social and intellectual suicide to come down and shed off all his privileges to fight for the peoples’ cause. So the strength of Mugwanya is exactly so, because he dropped from high to so low. We found ourselves fighting for the peoples’ cause and for democracy to expand and allow the young people whom I am seeing in this Parliament to be able to come up and become leaders and decide the fate of their country, he must be seen in that light.
 
As a person with whom I worked right from the time of the armed struggle, with whom we got Government and were with in the NRC from 1989 and also in the Sixth Parliament, his contribution to consolidating the gains of human rights and democracy has been exemplary.  

Even when it was not possible, because again when you are struggling and suffering for the common people and the common people normally are the ones who suffer, new qualifications were set by Parliament whereby we said,  “Unless you are a graduate of a certain qualification, you cannot stand as a Member of Parliament”.  Although during the struggle to establish order, those qualifications were not being called for, it was necessary for him not to stand and therefore that was one of the reasons why he did not take part in the other Parliament.  

He said, “Okay, I have brought a new situation, let the people now try to fight for themselves.” But even then, he never left; he still was, one, a Ugandan and he prayed that nothing ever takes Uganda back to the bad conditions in which we went through, and that is why he spent all his time reconciling people.  If he heard of any misunderstandings, he was always there to try to solve the differences.  That has been a testimony to my former comrade on the opposite side where we are trying to struggle to see how to change the face of Uganda so that it is enjoyable for the people who stay in it.  

So Mugwanya, while we pay tribute to him, I think the greatest tribute to him we can do is for us to dedicate ourselves to what he fought for and uphold it.  We should not do anything that will disrupt this country again so that it would necessitate us to once again go through the conditions to which Mugwanya contributed to turn around. That would be the greatest tribute, far more than this resolution.  If we all dedicate ourselves to debating issues that can create harmony for our people, then our tribute to Mugwanya and those who fell while trying to put this country in order would not have been fallen in vain.  Thank you very much.  

With that, I support the resolution and I pray that all of us dedicate ourselves to the ideals that have made us to be here as judges because we are not the first fellows to lead this country; others have been around, but because they mishandled their times, the country did not gain out of them.  It is for us now to build on what Mugwanya left so that we sustain it.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that this House do pay tribute to the late John Zimula Mugwanya, former Member of Parliament.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, before you adjourned the House last week on Thursday, there was a statement made by hon. Okello-Okello and this House was assured that we would continue on with it Tuesday.  Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, yesterday the House did not sit.  When I look at the Order Paper for today, it does not appear. I as the Secretary for Lands, Water and Environment in DP, I have an interest to see that the motion we are meant to debate today is not on the Order Paper–(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nsubuga, if you listened carefully to my adjournment, I said, next week; I did not say which day.  But anyway it is coming tomorrow; it will be on the Order Paper tomorrow, do not worry.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  May I inform the previous speaker that the statement by hon. Okello-Okello was not a motion. It was a statement by the Acholi Parliamentary Group, which should be treated as under Order 41 of our Rules of Procedure.  Tomorrow I will make a statement in response, under Order 40.  There is a very important distinction between a motion and a statement.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MAKERERE UNIVERSITY STRIKE

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Madam Speaker, the mere fact that no single Minister of Education is around and I am told that they are in a meeting in relation to Makerere University, I beg that we present our report tomorrow because nobody is going to respond to the issues raised by the members.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay we stand over item No.4.

REPORT ON THE STATUS OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FIRST QUOTA

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I promised last week, the Committee on National Economy under Rule 152(1) has the authority to do a number of things like reviewing, scrutinising and considering the economy and the matters thereof.  But, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the Clerk’s office is about to distribute the copies because we run a danger of other people are not following.  Maybe I can proceed as they come?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would members listen while the copies come? Anyway, they have brought in more copies, hon. Mabikke.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, the committee has embarked on a series of activities, which will result in regular reporting on a quarterly basis to this august House. This being the first report of the committee in the Eighth Parliament on the matter, the report concentrates more on the performance of the economy during the first quarter of the financial year 2006/2007.  

The over view of our report

In June this year, Madam speaker, the Minister of Finance presented the Budget Speech and he outlined the key budget objectives as stimulation of economic growth and development, provision of basic goods and services and finally to promote and maintain micro-economic stability. 

The first quarterly report provides analysis of the performance of the economy in the period between July and September 2006 against the objectives outlined in the Budget Speech. 

The report highlights the key economic issues that affected the economy during the reporting quarter and thereafter underpins the policy implications requiring Parliament to decide on the course of action.

The prices

The key macro-economic objective was to maintain stable movement in the price levels for goods and services by maintaining inflation at most at 5 per cent per annum. Table 1 shows the movements in the first quarter. Madam Speaker, we put in tables and graphs for those who might not want to read a lot, but also for those of you who fear mathematics to follow easily. 

Prices rose faster in the period of the first quarter of the financial year 2005/2006; the prices rose by 5.4 per cent in July, 6.4 per cent in August and 6.8 per cent in September. The increase in prices was wide spread across all the consumer groups namely: Foods and beverages, tobacco, clothing, footwear, rent, fuel, utilities, household and personal goods, transport and telecommunications, health, education and entertainment. 

The rise in prices during the first quarter was attributed to shortages in the goods and services leading to excess demand pressures. The overall increase in price was above the benchmark target of 5 per cent and there appears to be structural bottlenecks in the production of goods and services, which are causing this price rise.  These bottlenecks need to be communicated to Parliament so that a joint solution can be sought.

Madam Speaker, there was also a rise in food crop prices during the first quarter of 2006/2007. The raise in food crop prices during the first quarter means that there are serious shortages compared to the same period in the financial year 2005/2006.  This is equally serious because last year the country experienced prolonged drought, which contributed to a drop in the economic growth. The projected growth of 5.9 per cent was partly premised on the recovery from last year’s drought and the first quarter developments put this growth at risk. 

The shortage in goods and services worsens with distance from the production and distribution centre. Given the location of the industrial production and distribution centres in the country, the remote rural areas are likely to be highly affected by the shortages, and in many of these areas access may be a real problem. 

The rural poor depend on the sale of their produce in order to access industrial goods such as soap, paraffin and sugar. As we speak now, you need four kilograms of coffee in order to get one kilograms of sugar. Given the shortage in their production and rise in industrial goods, access for the rural and remote poor is severely limited.  

The Budget

Microeconomic stability is premised on prudent budget management and during 2006/2007 financial year, the revenues are projected to be Ugshs 2,566.8 billion, which would be equivalent to Ugshs 641.7 billion per quarter. During the first quarter, the total URA revenue amounted to Ugshs 566.7 billion which was 88.3 per cent of the required performance. This means that if the same situation continues, the remaining quarters then shall have an 11.8 per cent shortfall in our projected revenue collection. 

The budget was projected at Ugshs 4,248.6 billion, which translates into quarterly expenditures of Ugshs 1062.2 billion. During the reporting quarter, the total expenditure amounted to Ugshs 1,146.5 billion representing performance of 108 per cent. 

The non-tax revenues, which are mainly dividends from Bank of Uganda, were projected at Ugshs 41.9 billion for this financial year and this represents quarterly revenue of Ugshs 10.5 billion. Performance during this quarter shows collection of Ugshs 19 billion representing 181 per cent performance. 

Madam Speaker, the above left a budget deficit of Ugshs 560.8 billion. The donor grants for this financial year were projected at Ugshs 1,118.9 billion, which translates into Ugshs 279.73 billion per quarter. 

During this quarter, donors were very favourable and Ugshs 432.1 billion was disbursed representing 154.5 per cent. When grants are included, the budget deficit reduces to Ugshs 128.7 billion. 

When you look at Table 2, Madam Speaker and honourable members, on total revenue and grants, you see the recurrent revenue. The first ones are the collections of URA, the second ones are the collections from Bank of Uganda dividends, and when you add in the grants, then you will have a budget deficit – before the grants you have a budget deficit of Ugshs 560.8 billion. But when you put in the component of the grants, you will remain with Ugshs 128.7 billion. 

Then down on (e), you have budget financing, on commercial banks - the money, which is put in the commercial banks has a deficit of Ugshs 878.5 billion. This is the money the government pays back to the commercial banks; maybe treasury bills matured and other securities might mature. But the major point of interest is the Ugshs 991.2 billion from the Bank of Uganda. And the difference of these two in the budget speech was supposed to be zero but now you have Ugshs 112.7 billion. So, the Minister would need to tell us why we do not have a zero balance, but we have Ugshs 112 billion instead.

Madam Speaker, on 4.1, we have domestic financing of Government budget and this is what I have gone through. The bank financing for the financial year 2006/07 was programmed at zero. However, during the reporting quarter, the bank financing of the budget amounted to Ugshs 112.7 billion on the net basis. However, when Government payments to the commercial banks of Ugshs 878.5 billion are not considered, the net bank financing of the budget amounts to Ugshs 991.2 billions and this was from Bank of Uganda. Parliament needs to know why net bank financing had to be different from zero during the first quarter yet the performance in the financial deficit appears to be good.

The financial Sector

The first one, we look at the interest rates. Treasury bills are speculative instruments in which one can invest and earn interest over the duration of treasury bill holding. On the other hand, the central bank uses treasury bills to mop up the money in excess of what is required to make the economy stable. 

The first quarter witnessed successive increase in monthly interest rates on treasury bills of all maturities. The increase in interest rates during the first quarter was due to tight economic conditions. However, there are concerns that the bank continues to meet the interest costs as the central bank implements its monitory policy.

Madam Speaker, just to highlight on this, when a central bank sells treasury bills, it is supposed to pay interest to those who have bought the treasury bills. And this interest comes directly from the government. So, the Committee on National Economy wondered why the central bank does not pay this interest rate and it balances its accounts accordingly. 

The domestic interest rates payments constitute 4.9 per cent of 2006/07 budget and 4.2 per cent of the expenditures in the reporting quarter. The Government needs to justify the expenditures on treasury bills meant for monetary management by an independent central bank as I have already told you. 

The second concern is the large gap between the savings deposit rates and lending rates which signals lack of adequate competition. Honourable members, when you look at Figure 1 on the next page, you will see that the lending rates range from 15 per cent to close to 20 per cent. Yet the saving rates for someone holding a savings account range between 8 to 10 per cent, and at the time deposits are the ones which range between 9 to 10 and the saving rates range between maybe 3 to 5 per cent. It could not be shown clearly in this small table in our key. So, you will realise that the borrowing rates are much higher than the saving rates. 

The Domestic Credit to private sector

During the reporting quarter, the stock of credit extended to the private sector was on the rise. Figure 2 clearly reveals that the stock of credit extended to the private sector increased from Ugshs 1477.9 billion in July to Ugshs 1574.4 billion in September. This reflects an increase of 7 per cent and taking the first quarter as a whole, the total stock credit extended to the private sector amounted to Ugshs 4597.3 billion and this reflects an increase of 26 per cent compared to the same period in 2005/06.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, when you look at that figure 2, the white ones are the ones for 2006 and the black ones are those for 2005.

Real Sector: Energy Consumption, during the first quarter, the demand for electricity and consumption was lower compared to the same period in 2005/06.  The table indicates energy consumption across all tariff categories was significantly lower than the same quarter in 2005/06. The lower energy supply has reduced consumption further since July 2006, the number of live – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had no intentions of interrupting my colleagues but this report is very important and as the chairman is proceeding, a number of questions being raised really deserve a lot of attention from the sector Minister for Finance. It is unfortunate that I do not see any of the ministers of finance; how are we going to proceed with this statement? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is anyone standing in for the Minister of Finance?

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: I just want to bring to your attention, Madam Speaker, that management of a Government is a corporate management and everything that is being talked about is being noted and will be responded to in due time. Maybe to clarify to my colleague by corporate management, it means the government acts as one; even if the minister is not here, everything is being taken on and would be responded to at a certain time. I am also here to be in charge of the whole Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me suspend the House for five minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.37 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to apologise for being late. I have been within the Chambers for another consultation with another committee of Parliament.  

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, we were on the energy consumption and the lower energy supply has reduced consumption further since July 2006. The number of live customers has continued to bulge and has increased from 293,922 in July to 296,725 in September representing an increase of 1 per cent.

Total electricity consumption continued to decline from June until September when electricity consumption showed signs of rebounding perhaps due to increased water levels. The above decline notwithstanding, electricity consumption was far higher compared to last year 2005/06. The effect of power on the country’s growth in 2005/06 was significant and the effect is likely to be 5 per cent in industrial and 17 per cent reduction in the commercial sectors. 

In the previous year, manufacturing declined by 1.6 per cent whereas wholesale and trade reduced in growth by 4.9 per cent mainly due to energy crisis.  

The available information indicates the domestic arrears particularly non-payment by Government is a cost that is reflected in the computation of energy tariffs. What is required is for Government to urgently pay its arrears in order to reduce on the tariff. 

In addition, the government can beef up its subsidy for the various tariff categories and this will provide short-term mitigation measures to the power crisis. However, what is required is for Government to be committed to its power strategy and this is what is sustainable. Madam Speaker, according to the information we got, why the tariffs are too high is because these are arrears Government owes the energy sector.

Investment

Table 4 shows that during the reporting quarter, the number of licensed projects by Uganda Investment Authority was recorded at 135. This amounted to $584 million. The majority of projects were in the tourism sector and real estates sub-sector. These were followed by transport communication, manufacturing, water, energy, agriculture, mining and all these had minimal investment.

Arising from these projects, 16,738 jobs were to be generated. In terms of share of jobs created, manufacturing, water, energy, transport and telecommunications and tourism sectors would have the majority of the jobs. This is an excellent performance when you compare it with 2005/06. 

During the same quarter, the number of licensed projects in 2005/06 was only 67 and they amounted to $126.19 million. There is a table just to summarise this for you. However, the problem with Uganda Investment Authority is that they do not make adequate monitoring of the proposed and registered investments. 

For some time, a number of investors have been licensed, but no in-depth tracking has ever been conducted. This leaves a lot of information for monitoring the performance of the economy. During the budget discussion, they singled out inadequate funding as a key constraint. It is our contention that investment without adequate follow up is bound to be misleading – (Interruption)

3.53
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi):  Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion under Rule 52 (1) of our Rules or Procedure and the motion is that the House adjourns until such a time that we have a quorum to listen to these very important statements and to debate it accordingly. You will appreciate that the composition of this House numbers 300 and more members. When I look around the House on either side, I see very many empty spaces and this gives me the suspicion that there could be something wrong.

For that matter, Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the House adjourn as you conduct an inquiry as to why this House that should be full to capacity with some members sitting in the corridors of the Chambers is as empty as it is. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week you are the ones who asked for this information and I said I will give you time on the Order Paper for this matter. Now the Rule you have cited does not apply to the plenary; it applies to committee stage. Those who want to listen can listen; there is no voting. Proceed.

MR KADDUNABBI: Uganda Securities Exchange in the first quarter of 2006/07 started with impressive performance in turn over, over the previous month.  Despite some drop in August, the turn over more than tripled in September. The number of shares successfully increased from 414,441 in July to 2,744,178 in September, which was an increase of more than six times. 

The increasing performance was most attributed to the Development Finance Corporation Uganda (DFCU), which reduced the price of its shares from Ugshs 500 in August to Ugshs 430 in September. This attracted institutional investors and the rise in the price of shares for the East African Breweries Ltd in July also contributed to the increase in the turn over during the first quarter. Honourable members, you will look at Figure 3 for that.

The increased turn over and shares reflect optimism in the economic outlook. Compared to the same period in the previous year, the performance this quarter is far much better.  

The external sector

Exports of goods: The first quarter of 2006/07 witnessed exceptionally good performance in the export sector. Table 5 shows that the value of total exports of merchandise rose to $250 million representing a rise of 20 per cent when you compare with the 2005/06 first quarter: The aforesaid performance was mainly attributed to the rise in non coffee exports from $168.4 million in 2005/06 to $190 millions in 2006/07 representing a rise of 17 per cent.

Coffee exports: According to the background to the budget, 2006/07 coffee earnings were estimated to increase by 24.7 per cent from $145 million in the financial year 2005/06 to about $180 million in 2006/07. This is equivalent to a quarterly export value of $45 million. The increase was premised on a 30 per cent increase in the unit price of coffee. 

In terms of volume, a total of 2.4 million bags of coffee were projected for export. During the first quarter, coffee export earnings were recorded at $42 million representing a decline of 7 per cent compared to the out turn the same period last year. Compared to the quarterly expectations, the first quarter performance represents a shortfall of 7 per cent as earlier on mentioned; and in terms of export volume there was a decline of 16 per cent compared to the same period the previous year.  

Export volumes of those bags of coffee for the first quarter were lowest since 1998 to the same period the previous year. Since 1998/1999, export volumes of those bags of coffee were very low for the first quarter. The coffee wilt disease and unfavourable weather conditions explain the low export volumes recorded during the reporting quarter. 

When you look at Figure 4, honourable members, you will get to know the trend of the coffee prices; how it has been moving, until it reached the maximum in March 2006. The available information indicates that the coffee sub-sector is still faced with the following major challenges:

(a)	Coffee wilt disease 
(b)	International coffee prices 
(c)	Weather 
(d)	Inadequate funding
(e)	Low soil fertility
(f)	Old age of our trees

Coffee production has sunk to its lowest since 1992 due to coffee welt disease, which has destroyed 52 percent of the old Robusta coffee production since 1993. The prolonged drought has further led to flower abortion and hence poor information. 

In addition, the effect of low international prices during 2004 up to the first quarter of 2005 has let to farm diversion from coffee to other crops, mainly vanilla and Moringa in the coffee growing areas of Mukono and Kayunga. Coffee trees were cut yet they are very difficult to replace even if the prices go up.

Under funding in the coffee sub-sector 

Coffee is an important contributor to our GDP and hence sustains the livelihood of many poor farmers.  Unfortunately, it is engulfed in critical funding shortages that has greatly affected the sector and disabled it from realizing its full potential in terms of export earnings and hence contributions to the GDP. 

As already alluded to, coffee production and exports is at it’s lowest and yet the international prices are a little bit favourable. Uganda’s exports stand at 2 million bags instead of the projected 4 million bags. The funding constraints have mainly come from domestic debts, arrears to international organisations and as you might know, all these have an effect on the production.

You will look at the coffee domestic debt, which stood at 3.5 billion, but we were informed that 3 billion will be settled, of the arrears, and that will make the coffee sector to start moving positively. 

The International Obligations

There are outstanding monies to international coffee organisations and this hinders our participation in their seminars and other marketing strategies. There is also an outstanding debt of US$ 1.5 million to the African Coffee Organization.  

Madam Speaker, we looked at the length on the coffee sub-sector and compared its significance to the Ugandan. But since you requested me to summarise, I would request the rest to be covered by members and the Hansard will get it.  

Let me look at the non-coffee exports. The value of the non-coffee exports constituted 76 percent of the value of the total merchandise exports during the first quarter; the value of the non-coffee exports in the reporting quarter increased by 17 percent in comparison to 2005/2006 financial year.  

Table 5 shows that within the non-coffee export groups, the main contributors to the observed performance were maize, gold, oil re-exports, beans, fish which was taken to the region and electricity. 

In view of the above performance, there is need for Parliament to find out whether this performance will be sustainable for the rest of the quarters.  Should the answer be affirmative, then we expect exceptionally good economic growth during 2006/2007 and the contrary is true.

However, the poor performance in tobacco, simsim, cobalt and cotton is of paramount concern. This is because they have potential to scale down the good performance in the other sub-sectors, and may consequently water down the expectations of the exceptionally good economic growth this financial year. 

There is need for Parliament to investigate the cause of low performance and find mitigation measures for the remaining quarter. It is also important to find out more on electricity exports by our country despite the various load shedding.  This is necessitated by the fact that the country is suffering from electricity shortages and yet continues to export to other countries. Exports to other countries in electricity went up by 17 percent. Honourable members, you will look at the table; we compared it to 2005/2006.

Imports

During the first quarter of 2006/2007, the value of the total imports of goods rose to US$ 591.3 million, which is equivalent to 23 percent of the same quarter in 2005/2006. The rise in the imports during the first quarter was driven by a 23 percent rise in the private sector imports from US$ 427.1 million in 2005 to US $ 570.8 in 2006. Within the private imports, the rise of 73 percent points in oil imports was the main driving factor behind the performance in the first quarter of 2006/2007, in comparison to the same quarter of 2005. 

It is encouraging to note the increase in the importance of the private imports and a fall in the importance of Government imports, particularly non-project imports during this first quarter. The share of private imports increased from 89 percent in the first quarter of 2005/2006, to 97 in the same quarter. However, as I earlier on told you, the government imports went down from 11 percent to 3 percent during the same period.  

Given that the exports were 42.3 percent of imports, it means therefore that 57.3 percent of the import bill had to be supported by borrowing in form of grants and loans, which makes the external position vulnerable to changes due to donor economic conditions and also due to short-term external loans.  

The need to reduce the Import Bill of Government is a necessary condition for improvement in the country’s external sector position. The sufficient condition requires that the country’s exports be boosted through deliberate and effective interventions. Madam Speaker, figure 3 explains what I went through. 

Utilisation of on-going Loan Facilities  

Honourable members, I invite you to look at annex 1, which has a table of on going loans. The committee did not look at all loans, which expired but we looked at the on-going loans. It might as well interest you to look at the date of signing or sign date; the date on which the contract was signed and the date the last disbursement is expected. You will realise, honourable members, that the first two loans - you also look at the percentages of disbursed funds –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one are you looking at?

MR KADDUNABBI: Annex 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, Precede, hon. chairperson.

MR KADDUNABBI:  We began with the first two loans: Lake Victoria Environment Management and Northern Uganda Social Action Fund. They were signed in 2005 and one of them is running up to 2009 and another one is running up to 2010. But as we speak now, no money has been disbursed so far.  

DR EPETAIT: I want to make a correction for the Hansard.  The two loans he is referring to are the District Development Support Program and Lake Victoria Environment Management Project, not Northern Uganda Social Action Fund.  Thank you.

MR KADDUNABBI: I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker. The first two - when you come to Northern Uganda Social Action Fund signed in 2002, expiring in 2008 and the value is Ugshs 22 million and only 4 percent has been disbursed so far. 

So, honourable members, when you look through, what we realised as the committee is that many of the loans, which are running are below schedule. It might also interest you to look at the last one on page 2: Sustainable Management of mineral development and the rest. It was signed in 2005 May, running up to 31 December 2011. But as we speak now, all the money has been utilised –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, what did you say?

MR KADDUNABBI: By the time we got this information - by 30 June 2006, all the money for this loan had been utilised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been spent ahead of schedule?

MR KADDUNABBI: Yes, ahead of schedule, so when you see 100 percent that means 100 percent utilised or that the money was used. Madam Speaker, we realised that maybe many of these loans - my committee would request for your indulgence during the second quarter, we want to report to this House when we have visited these projects and actually known what is on the ground. 

Commitment Fees

Commitment fees are run yearly. In the financial year 2003/2004, the government of Uganda paid commitment fees of Ugshs 2.25 billion. In the financial year 2004/2005- there are 2 pages- Government of Uganda paid Ugshs 6.5 billion in commitment fees. In financial year 2005/2006- they are also on pages 2- the government of Uganda paid Ugshs 5.6 billion. 

The Minister of Finance gave us these figures and the analysis is that the World Bank contributes 85 percent of the multilateral funding, ADB contributes 14 percent of this funding and IMF contributes one percent of multilateral debt funding. 

Also, according Government, the reason why the commitment fees were increasing is due to the IDA commitment charges before the financial year 2004/2005. All loans from the World Bank never had a commitment fee, but during 2004/2006, IDA re-introduced commitment charges.

But they have a hope that now that the commitment charges have been reduced from 0.5 percent to 0.3, this might reduce some of the commitment fees, which Government pays. 

Also, according to Government, the factors affecting projects and leading to expiry of disbursement periods includes the procurement process, which they say needs renegotiation. Secondly, inadequate provision of counterpart funding, which they say that some times there is no money for Government counter funding and also the delays in fulfilling the conditions preceding to disbursement. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the debt, the total debt stock to the Minister of Finance stands at US$ 4.35 billions as at 30 June 2006. That IDA has agreed under the multilateral debt relief initiative to write off a debt of US$ 2.88 billion. IMF has agreed to write off a debt of US$ 126.38 million and ADF a debt of US$ 472.41 million. And we hope that this reduction will result in Government remaining with only US$ 73 million for the financial year 2006 a cumulative of 3.2 billion for the next 40 years. Madam Speaker, because this response came in a little later than we had prepared our report, I would like to lay it on Table for the record.

As earlier mentioned, the committee will keep the House informed on the performance of the economy on a quarterly basis and this committee invites all members who have some topical issues for consideration to join the committee in expounding on such and move the nation forward. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to thank the Chairperson and the members of the Committee on National Economy for presenting your first quarterly report in record time and I look forward to seeing more of these reports. 

Honourable members, the report has been signed by 17 members out of 20, so it qualifies for debate and comment.

4.21
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for this report. However, I also wish to extend my disappointment on the report. I have been looking through it, but there are issues that I am not comfortable with. The economy of a country makes a political statement. And while looking at this report, there is no political statement that I can make out using this report to my voters. In actual sense, they will only be disappointed if I meet them with this report and tell them that this is the state of our economy in the first quarter.

Madam Speaker, this report has not shown the direction we are taking in an attempt to achieve the millennium development goals. We do not have anywhere in the report that this is the extent to which we have gone with regard to the millennium development goals. If it is there, then it has not been treated with the adequacy that it deserves. 

With reference to the Poverty Eradication Action plan, what has this report got to say? I am interested in knowing about all the sectoral performances; where are the women? How have they performed? How far from the bottom have the poor moved? And which sectors of the economy and the population are bettering? 

These have not been adequately looked at in this report. Therefore, in my opinion, the report itself is not politically digestive and cannot be informative to a nation that has been independent for so long.

I will be very happy if this were a summary of a detailed report somewhere - that due to time, the chairman honourably brought a summary -(Interruption) 

4.25
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC Ngora county, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few more things to point out in as far as this report is concerned. It is all lamentations. On page 2, paragraph 2, is where the problems show up - where we start to feel the heat; the prices of goods and services rising because of increased demand over supply. 

But in my opinion, the major crust of the matter why prices have risen across the boards is because of the low energy supply. And moreover, while we feel the pinch of low energy supply, you still have the guts to export so much of what we do not have. It is reported that our export of electricity has now increased to 17 percent. The rate at which electricity consumption is growing is 1 percent and yet –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable Shadow Minister of Health in order to debate his own report when he is a member of the committee on National Economy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is your minority report?  Honourable members do not introduce short cuts; you are a member of that committee, you have not withdrawn from it. So, if you wanted to say something different, you would have produced your own and presented it here. -(Interruption)- no, I will not create new Rules either, you are a member of the committee or are you not?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, as lawmakers, we know that agreements are signed and they bind a country. If you agree to supply goods, in this case electricity, whatever problems you may find, breaking that agreement may be more costly than continuing to supply. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have members who are not members of the committee.

4.29
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wish to first seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee and also the honourable minister on what the chairperson said that the increase in commitment charges arising from un-disbursed loans especially from IDA and the World Bank rose because of the introduction of commitment charges, which were not applicable before 2004/2005. That is not true, because I am aware that even for lending agreements that were signed before that date, commitment charges were applicable up to the year 2000. 

I have seen another disagreement for this project listed, that is project No. IDA 3411. The agreement provides for both service charges and commitment charges. So, to say that the increase in commitment charges rose because of the introduction of commitment charges in the funding agreements is not true. 

I, therefore, request the committee chairperson and the honourable minister to clarify on that. I know it did exist before that up to the year 2000. 

Besides that the chairperson drew our attention to the performance of projects. Looking at it on page 1, Annex 1; what should interests us most, if you look at the fifth column of Annex 1 page 1, titled “Last Date of Disbursement”, if you look for projects with the date 2006, especially at the bottom of the page, you find there are about five projects that have expired and disbursed levels are at 31 percent, 35 percent, 40 percent and 41 percent. Those are expired, but we have paid commitment charges on them. 

Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper, there have been loans that have been coming for more borrowing. I would like to suggest that for future borrowing, we should receive a performance report for outstanding loans that have not been disbursed and let the honourable minister justify why we should continue into further borrowing when we have non-performing projects.  

The URA has told us that they need to raise tax to GDP ratio from 13 percent to about 24 percent in order to sustain this economy and kick donors out of the funding basket in Uganda. Why don’t we use these monies, what we are incurring as commitment charges to boost the performance of URA, to give them the power to build that capacity in order to kick the donors out of the funding basket in Uganda. Instead, now the URA is also borrowing to build that capacity. 

So, I would like to suggest that the next time we have a request for loan financing we should have an analysis of this kind by the hon. Minister of Finance.

Secondly, on page 2 of the report, our attention has been drawn to the impact of locating industries at the centre. For instance in the second sentence, “Given the location of industrial production and distribution centre in the country, the remote rural areas are likely to be highly affected by the shortages and in many of these areas, access maybe a health problem.” 

This sends to me a very important signal that the concentration of industrial location in Kampala is a big problem.  It suggests that there has to be a deliberate effort to move industrial location out of Kampala.  It saves the city from the problems explained here, from the difficulties KCC is having in coping with the influx of the population from the rural areas.  

We need a deliberate Government policy to shift location of industries out of Kampala. Last week, we were talking about shifting schools; shifting this and that, why not shift these to Jinja, or to Entebbe. We need to come up with alternative cities. Kampala should not be the only city, we must have Entebbe city; we should have even Bukedea city -(Laughter) 

All you need to do is to ensure that there are no potholes along the roads, that is all you need to do. So, the concentration of industries within Kampala is becoming a real problem here. So, as a matter of policy, I suggest that Government adopts that as a way of eliminating such problems that have been mentioned on page 2.

4.35
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee chairperson for this report. I would like members to recall that when the National Resistance Movement came into power in 1986, they came with a 10-point Programme. One of the key points in that 10-point programme was a promise of an independent, integrated and self-sustaining economy. 

Madam Speaker, it is 20 years down the road and I am very worried by this report. What we are having now is a dependant, donor driven, disintegrating and aid driven economy and the report we have received from the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy testifies to that.

Madam Speaker, when you look at page 2 paragraph 3, it is very worrying that today we are having a rise in food crop prices.  Uganda is one of those countries in Africa, which have very good soils, a very good climate and in fact Uganda has got capacity to be Africa’s food basket. 

The current state testifies to the fact that the National Resistance Movement has failed to come up with adequate policies in agriculture. The neglect of agriculture has presented this ugly picture, which we are reading on page 2, paragraph 3. 

When you look at the last paragraph on the same page, “Shortage in goods and services”, I fear that we seem to be returning to the pre-1986 days when we had shortages of nearly every essential commodity.  

When you go to town, Madam Speaker, the price of sugar is now getting to nearly Ugshs 3000, and this is nearly causing mayhem in the public. Government did not come up with an adequate explanation because you have been telling us that you invested a lot in industries that produce essential commodities, and we are having today a picture different from what we have been promised.

I would also have expected this report to touch on unemployment. I come from an urban constituency and I meet my people every morning. But the biggest challenge today whenever I met my constituents is looking for jobs, and we have not received any report on the state of unemployment in Uganda. What is the rate of unemployment?  What is Government doing about it and why is unemployment soaring to these levels that we have not experienced before. 

This brings me to the other element of electricity crisis. All of us will agree that the current power crisis has had a very big impact on the growth of the economy. And at a later stage, I would like to say that – I am coming up with a serious proposal, I hope honourable members will support it - many countries have done, Canada has done it, South Africa has done it and I think even Kenya is in the process of doing it. So many countries committed the mistake of privatising the power sector, and all of us are aware that power is more or less a human right; that power is an engine of civilisation and there is no way you can leave such a sector in the hands of private companies that are aiming at making profits. What other countries have done, having committee this mistake, is that they have reviewed their policy on privatisation on this specific sector.

Madam Speaker, at a later stage I would like to propose that Uganda follows the same trend or else our economy is going to continue on the decline. Privatisation of power in Uganda has not led to adequate supply; privatisation of power in Uganda has not led to affordable prices for the domestic and even industrial consumers and it is just prudent that the government of Uganda reviews its policy on power privatisation.  

I would like to wind up by noting that this report has brought out very vividly and very evidently a big deficit. Our economy is run on deficit financing. But it is very surprising that despite the fact –(Interjections)- yes, I know that many countries run a deficit budget, but they do not brag about programs like “Bonna bagagawale”. 

If you know you have a big deficit, you cannot continue parading and masquerading and lying to the population that you are going to give them money. You are talking about “Bonna bagagawale”, where are you going to get the money? Do you create wealth out of deficit or out of surplus? Why are you confusing the population that you are going to give them money when you are in deficit?

I think there is a problem and we must admit there is a problem and it is high time the National Resistance Movement came up and admitted failure. When you admit failure, we can then come up together and help you; we come and give in ideas, which can take you out of this current economic abyss that the country seems to be facing. 

I hope that when the Minister of Finance comes, he will admit failure or confirm that it is because we have been undertaking an experiment that is why we are in a decline instead of being on the rise. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

4.43
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report, but in my view, there are quite some important issues left out.

Let us start with the Budget. You are saying that in the budget, there was a shortfall in URA and we spent 1,146.5 billion while we collected 566.7 billion. The question I put to you is, what about the balances, which were transferred at the end of the financial year? Under which account have you accounted for them? At the end of every year, any balance, which is unutilised, is transferred back to the consolidated account to be spent again.  

You further went on and said that we have got domestic financing for the government budget. You got Shs 991.2 billion from Bank of Uganda. What is the state now? Did you try to reconcile these figures? Which is the real finance figure for domestic financing?

The next point is about domestic debts. You are talking about commitments and penalties on foreign debts. What about local debts? Are you saying locals are not supposed to be paid a return on their money, which has not been paid on time? Somebody has provided a service to Government and has not been paid but we just see arrears. You do not even add interest to those arrears. What plans do you have as a committee? I would propose here that even domestic arrears should now attract commitment judges and interest because these people borrow money to be able to do business with Government.  

You talked about commitment fees to debts. Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is unfortunate that the chairman is talking about these commitment fees. Maybe I do not understand. The commitment fees and penalties, which we are talking about, are those which arise when you have borrowed and you do not utilize the money. You may have been given $100 million and then you decide that this year you are going to use 20 million. That money is now committed for your use. If you only use two million, since the 18 million was also committed and you have not used it, it will attract a commitment judge and penalty. That is our argument. 

We are saying that if you are going to borrow, you must have a well-planned borrowing problem. If we do not have counterpart refunding then we should plan in such a way that we do not attract a penalty for non-utilisation of money. This money would have otherwise done a better job. I will give an example. In 2004/05, we paid Shs 6.5 billion; in 2005/06, we were going to pay about Shs 12 billion. In 2006/07 it is going to be worse. 

You also talked about debt relief. Since we have got debt relief, this means there is no need for us to budget for paying the debts. It has gone down. If we do not have money to budget to pay out in form of loans and interests, this means that money will be ploughed back to finance the budget. How does the deficit come when we have got debt relief?  

On average, every year we have about Shs 500 billion used for repayments and interest. This means that monthly it is about Shs 42 billion. I believe that we should have gone further to reduce on deficit financing. Are these the actual figures or they are paper figures?

On investments, I see that you are talking about planned investments. Uganda Investment Authority is fond of using the word “planned”. Where is the actual? We should always have the actual. Having planned this month, next month you should have the actual. Mr Chairman, where is the actual? Where are the planned and the actual employment as far as the issue of foreign direct investments is concerned?

On interest, you say you are very happy with Bank of Uganda mopping up the liquidity. It is using treasury bills to mop up the liquidity. Those are the instruments. Do you know the effects? The moment you mop up, money for investors to borrow becomes less. The moment it is less and the demand is high, the interest rate goes high. The best person to lend your money to is, of course, Government. You are sure that even if this Government goes, the other one will come and pay. That is why people rush for treasury bills and bonds. Are you happy that the interest rates should go high as Bank of Uganda tries to mop up liquidity?  

What are the implications of interest rates going high? The moment there is less money for borrowing, the investments will go down. The moment the investments go down, employment will increase. Are you happy to see employment increasing or reducing?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought I am the shadow minister of finance and I am entitled to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I thought in that capacity you should have stood up first but you allowed other Members to speak first.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was talking about employment. Each of us should be talking about the employment policy and what plans we have.

On the energy sector, recently we reinforced Shs 92 billion for the energy sector. Last year, we had Shs 20 billion reinforced into the energy sector. That means we have about Shs 112 billion for the energy sector. What steps has Government taken as far as the energy sector is concern? We were told that in 44 months we shall have everything done. We were told in March and now we are in December. That is nine months. I do not know what the economy chairman has to tell us about the energy sector. He is saying the consumption has gone down. Yes, it has to go down. Because the supply has gone down, the demand has increased. What is the current demand in Uganda? That is what we should be addressing. You should have told us about the plans we have for the energy sector.

Madam Speaker, the chairman talks about exports and imports. Yes, you have gone ahead to clearly say that the imports are more than the exports and that is a very bad issue. When we came in 1986 from the bush –(Laughter)- we said we were going to build a self-sustained, integrated economy. This meant that we were going to depend on ourselves. 

In the 21 years we have been in power, instead of the imports declining they are increasing. Chairman and Ministry of Finance, what do you have to say? Did we divert from the policy we came with from the bush or are we still on course? If we are on course, the situation is becoming worse. This is because we are now funding the borrowings using loans and grants, which should be used to develop our country and this is a dangerous phenomenon. We are now focusing on consumption and the moment a country does this, it is finished. 

We should invest in production and you can see for yourselves that all the money we have borrowed has been consumed. How? Workshops every weekend and trainings in capacity building! We have been building capacity since 1986. When are we going to stop capacity building? On every loan request you see there is a 20 percent component of capacity building. I am looking forward to the Chairman of the National Economy Committee rejecting capacity building since you have the numbers now –(Interruptions)- yes, I had no numbers. I think you are happy that I was capable and never needed capacity building. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you have all seen for yourselves that there are complaints that roads are bad and that there are traffic jams in Kampala. Let me give an example of Kampala. The Ministry of Works has money and if you see their budget it is about a trillion per year. These people are not using this money yet together with Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Health they are bringing the biggest penalties and commitment charges. The absorption capacity is not there yet a penalty comes because you have not consumed. 

Why do we have potholes when we have the resources? The moment there is a pothole there is traffic and the moment there is traffic that is a cost. How is it a cost? The more you stay on the road the more time and fuel consumed and the more fumes, which is also dangerous. Therefore, Members, I think we need to go back to the drawing board and look further to where the problem is. 

I have heard people saying that Parliament is irrelevant because it gives ministries money which money the ministries do not spend as they are supposed to do and because of that they are the ones causing the economy to degenerate. Why do we accept such situation to go on? It is time for Parliament to stand up and look at Ministry of Works, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Health and ensure that they absorb the loans and grants we get.

Finally, concerning loans, I want Members to look at page 1 and 2 towards the end where below nutrition and early childhood project there is what we call regional trade facilitation. We approved this loan in the year 2001 on December 13th. Nobody knows about this loan and what we see here is only the commitment fees that we are now paying because of non-utilisation. It was $20 million from IDA, which you people approved. 

Furthermore, we approved $34 million to build landing sites in 2001. I would like to ask Members of Parliament here, among you who has seen a landing site built since 2001 yet we got this money? What is it doing yet it is attracting penalties?  

If we go to livestock production, actually I do not remember that account but you know there was a corridor that was identified for dams and cows. However, I do not know how many have seen this corridor being cleared for dams and cows. When Executive comes for a loan they say it was due last week but when you pass it, it remains on the shelves. This money is got from the taxpayer and is being spent for bad money not required. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.00
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report that they have just presented to us. My contribution is basically on two issues: one on the issue which my colleague hon. Nandala Mafabi was talking about which is loan utilisation and the growth of the economy as a whole.

I will begin with the loan utilisation. If you go to annex one of the report on page 1 and 2, we are always rushed into approving loans but you wonder what happens thereafter. When you look at the annex the last disbursement is on 31st December 2006 for the Force Power Project (UEB). There is also the Vegetable Oil Project whose last disbursement will be on 30th December 2006. However, only 59 percent of this loan is disbursed. For the other loan only 50 percent is disbursed. 

There is also a loan on small water town supply that was signed in 2001 and we only have about two years to go yet 84 percent is not yet disbursed. When you go to the last page it is the same story. Loans that were signed in 1999 are going to expire in 2006, actually this month, yet 43 percent of them are un-disbursed. The loan that was signed in 2001 for Force Power Project (UEB) is expiring this month, actually next week, yet 45 percent is not disbursed. What is this?   

It is for that matter, Madam speaker, that I call upon Parliament to invoke our powers using the Budget Act Article 13(1), which reads: “The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament information relating to the total indebtedness of the state in that financial year showing inter alia –

(a)	the total principle and the source of the loans and debts;
(b)	the accumulated interest on each loan and debt;
(c)	provision made for servicing or repayment of each loan and debt;
(d)	the balance on payment under (c); and
(e)	the utilisation and performance of each loan, or debt including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets of  each loan.” 

So, Madam Speaker, it is for this matter that I call on the Minister of Finance not to wait for 15th June to bring this information. Because the Act says, “Shall before presentation of the Budget or at presentation of the Budget.”  

Act 13(2) of the Budget Act says: “The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or at any time before the 15th day of June of each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament information relating to the total sum of grants extended to the state and their source showing their utilisation and the performance of each grant, including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets of each grant.” So, the loans that we are approving here are being abused. For example, we approved a loan for Kabale - Kisoro road –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Health to come and start sleeping in here?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the honourable minister is thinking about health issues –(Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, if I may proceed, I was talking about the loan for Kabale - Kisoro road, which we approved recently. I was the happiest because I thought that work was going to start. But the information we are getting leaves one wondering when that road is going to start? They are giving flimsy reasons and yet that money may never be reimbursed. So, the Minister of Finance should have something to say about the issue of loans. 

When we talk about the economy of the country, we are talking about revenue and expenditure. That is the money we get and the money we are going to spend, which is the general performance of the revenue. In the report, it has been shown how our sectors have improved between July and September this year. Page 9 shows the distribution of licensed investments by sectors between July and September 2006. Some of those sectors like say tourism, which is number one - it also shows 67 projects that have been licensed with planned employment of 6,195 people and share of all that. The table is very clear. 

We know very well that some of these projects that have been licensed have attracted a waiver on taxes. Some companies have been exempted from taxes especially in the tourism sector like the hotels, which are springing up in this town. 

Again, Madam Speaker, Article 15(1) of the Budget Act is very clear on this. It says:  “A person or any authority having power to waive or vary any tax under Article 152(2) of the Constitution, shall make a quarterly report to Parliament which shall be on or before the 30th day of September, the 31st day of December, the 31st day of March and the 30th day of June in each financial year.” I have never seen a report of this kind in this House. What is the Minister of Finance doing? Why is he not bringing this report? We are ending another quarter before the 31st day of December. Where is that report? 

So, issues of the economy touch us all. Hon. Mabikke raised the issue of increasing prices of commodities. As I speak now, I have just been receiving calls on the increasing price of sugar. The minister has not come up with a strategy and yet we have a policy of protectionism of industries. Why are we protecting these companies in the sugar industry at the expense of Wanainchi? Because we cannot allow businessmen or traders to import sugar, that is why sugar prices have gone up. There is scarcity of sugar, but there is protectionism. We have to protect some few individuals and companies to make extra-ordinary profits. What is this? [Members of the Opposition: “Cross over”] - I will make my contribution from this side. Don’t worry. 

Madam Speaker, I have to give some other Members a chance to contribute. I thank you for giving me this opportunity.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is very interesting, but please let us try to be brief.

5.12
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I wish to add my voice to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for having submitted his first report for this financial year. As the Chairperson of the Budget Committee where the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and other chairpersons are ex-officials, we recently issued a circular requesting all committees to submit reports to this House. Our committee will indicate the performance of the various sectors. This is definitely the first report from the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. I thank him for that.

This report covers only a period of three months and he indicated that it is his first report. So, he is expecting and I think he is sitting down there noting all the comments that the Members are raising so that next time he will definitely produce a more comprehensive report especially for the second quota. I, therefore, hope that Members have noted that this is the first report for this committee. 

Secondly, I also note in the report the poor performance by some national exports and he also raised a lot of concern about the performance of these national exports. I would request that we note a poor performance most especially for cotton, cobalt, sim-sim, tobacco and early means of investigating the reasons instead of casting the report. He has actually raised some kind of red flag and I think these are some of the products, which have been performing very well but they are now performing badly. It is best for us as a House to come out with maybe an ad hoc committee or something to investigate why these are performing poorly so that we can curtail this decline before it becomes too much.  

Regarding the loans which are not being spent and yet they were signed for sometime ago, I would request the House to come out with a solution to this problem instead of casting the chairman of the committee because it is not within his powers to do that really.

MR ODIT: Hon. Okecho might be new in this House and so he thinks that we should constitute a committee to find out the poor performance of the agriculture sector in terms of output and export. The question of cotton was a very big issue in this House where the price was raised from Shs 450 to 600 and then down 300 the following year and we warned Government. We warned CDO that expect there would be no production the subsequent years. CDO was confident that by the year 2006 this country would be exporting one million bales of cotton.  Today we are exporting only 100,000 bales. Is such a person competent and this does not need a committee. It is clear we debated it here.

Secondly, we talked about fisheries sector. When you use bar trestles (three pieces of timber joined together) when our neighbours the Kenyans are using high technology vessels to go to the deep waters inside Uganda’s shores of Lake Victoria with their six percent control of Lake Victoria they are exporting five times more than Uganda which controls 43 percent of Lake Victoria.  Now, that does not need another committee. That would be a waste of time. We have had sufficient information. If Government wants to act, it should act. If it does not, these are the repercussions. I thank you.

MR OKECHO: I thank you very much for the information but with respect to cotton, honourable member, I think I have been in the cotton industry for a very long time. I have also been a member of the board of the Cotton Board of Uganda for quite sometime. I know very well that this figure only covers three months of this year and the cotton season has not yet started, we expect that by the end of this second quarter we shall definitely come out with a better report on the cotton sector, sorry to say. The season is just starting and we know very well that a better figure will come out. 

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I am getting a little bit uneasy. I come from a cotton-growing district.  I want to be clarified by the speaker whether he is sure we are going to produce the promised one million bales.

MR OKECHO: I never said that we are going to produce one million bales of cotton this year. I am saying that the cotton season has not started and this report covers the period from July to September when cotton is still growing everywhere in Uganda, I may say.  So, really – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that we have invested a lot in the cotton sector. If you as a Chairman of the Budget Committee have looked at your budget, the cotton sector, the strategic intervention is taking about Shs 8.5 billion. Compare this with 100,000 bales. Are you right to pass such a budget?

MR OKECHO: Here I am not talking about the amount of money we have spent on cotton. I am talking about the amount of cotton that is going to be produced vis-à-vis what was produced in the last quarter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us leave that for the right time. When the time comes you will tell us what you have produced from the Shs 8.5 billion.

MR OKECHO: I think that is all I wanted to say. Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

5.20
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a comment on the energy sector, which is on page 7. It is stated, “Total electricity consumption continue to decline from the June position until September when electricity consumption showed signs of rebounding perhaps due to increase in water levels.” I thought the committee should have gone further to indicate where Government has put an input in that particular area in the increase in the power consumption because leaving it to the rain alone does not seem to show that the sector is doing something. 

I know there is some power now. In Kireka where I stay, instead of load shedding starting from 7.00 p.m. to 10.00p.m. it has now been cut down to from 7.00 p.m. to 8.30 p.m. So, you can also notice that there has been an increase in the power consumption. So, I think, Chairperson, maybe it would be better to highlight areas where Government has given an input in the rebounding of this power, like the thermal power, and then also other areas where power has been boosted up by Government. 

Madam Speaker, the second one is on page 8, still on the energy sector. This one goes specifically to the Ministry of Finance directly because it talks about what is required for Government as to urgently pay arrears so that the computation of energy tariffs to the local person does not go high. It again gets back to the Ministry of Finance that something should be done to pay the tariffs so that the energy tariffs that affect all of us, including the local person, are not shot up.  As I talk now, the energy tariffs are very high and I know the local persons - I was in Soroti a few days. There is a big problem in payment of UMEME because the tariffs are very high.

The other one is the beefing up of subsidy. Again the report encourages the government to beef up the subsidy of the various tariff categories. Maybe the minister again will clarify to us what is being done particularly in that area since it has been highlighted by the committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5. 24
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for this report. Regarding the non coffee exports, which is on page 14, especially on the apparent poor performance of the tobacco, sim-sim, cobalt and cotton, I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that the case of cotton poor performance in this season which is under consideration especially on table 5 which appears on page 16 - as some people explained earlier, what is being reflected here for this quarter, July to September, is the balance stocks from the 2005 season and it was very evident from the budget speech that there was poor performance of cotton in 2005 at 100,000 bales compared to 150,000 bales in the previous season of 2004, which is now being reflected on the second part of this table and this was due to drought. 

Cotton is one of the crops, which require a lot of water, over 50 inches rainfall in its production cycle. This reflects that here now we are still on the balance stocks. Now, it will be interesting the next season next year to look at the performance when we have got these rains which are quite abundant but I am sure it is even over abundant in that, even cotton today is opening prematurely in the gardens due to abundance of rainfall. But that is at least one explanation for the case of cotton, and it may be rightly true for the case of tobacco and sim-sim. 

Another thing to note here is that, with cotton you get only one crop in a season. So, you cannot expect that the crop for this 2006 is now being marketed. We are just starting marketing.

I would also like to make a comment about hon. Odit’s comment about the case of pricing. Yes, the price of cotton in one year was Shs 600 per kilo but it dropped that season to 450. That was not a fault of the CDO. The problem is because we are dancing to the tune of the international markets especially when we are selling raw lint, and this is what the President has been saying that our way out on prices of cotton is to do value additional on our products in case of yarns and in case of textiles.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR SERUNJOGI:  I have finished, Madam Speaker.

5. 26
MR PETER PATRICK OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would also like to thank the chairperson for this timely report being the first one of this kind to this august House. I will basically praise him for that and also talk about the issues of the second quarterly report, which is almost due. 
 
However, I have a number of concerns. The very first concern is the issue of Uganda’s fish. It has been highlighted here on page 14 that among the non-traditional exports is the fish. Most of the fish that is exported in this country comes from Lake Victoria an area that I represent. Much as we have talked about all this, as hon. Odit put it, we control over 46 per cent of the whole of this Lake Victoria as compared to the rest of the countries of East Africa. Kenya, for example, only takes 6 per cent. However, they are getting more than US$500 million. We are almost 1000 and something. What is the problem? 

The problems are the rudimentary system that we are using as Ugandans.  This country was tasked with a view of trying to alleviate this issue. Money was provided. Uganda has been sharing the project under Lake Victoria management organisation. There is also Lake Victoria fisheries and in something like this there is money. Today money is here. 100 per cent of this money has not been utilised ever since it was brought to this country.

Madam Speaker, what these people have done is that, the Ministry of Fisheries failed on its own and invited the military to enter the lake to destroy the little that there was. That was an initiative by the people themselves. They came and destroyed all the boats, dismantled the nets, did everything. They were so abusive and they did not want to listen to anything from any leader and many of them came and specifically said they were coming from President’s Office. 

I remember one time I came to your Office with this problem. What am I going to tell them, now that they are listening to the report, that five or six years down the road, the money was availed to them by some willing parties, which money has not reached them to a tune of 100 per cent. As a Member of Parliament in this House, what am I going to tell them?  And on top of that, they are utilising the little that they have to pay for penalties. Somebody must take this shameful act on his own head.

Madam Speaker, as if that is not enough, there is a problem of what we call electricity and the road sector in this area. I am so surprised to see that the loans that are much needed and in fact were needed last week have not been used to the tune of 46 per cent. Even in this very town, go through Kampala–Jinja road and see what is happening just in front of BAT here and money is here to the tune of 60 per cent, which was supposed to be used by the end of August of this year. What happens at the end of the day when this deadline is made and money has not been used? The people who were intended to get this money are still languishing in pain.  

There is also electricity transformation for rural areas. Madam Speaker, that tune is amazing. It was supposed to expire last month. This is billions of dollars! Electricity has not reached my landing site to better the production of fish. They need electricity. What kind of situation is this that we are running? I am very sorry, but it is really a big problem.

Finally, there is this issue of energy. There was an impression that these investors would do something good for the public. Instead, they have not benefited anybody. People have tried to justify their presence; they have tried to justify whatever wrong they have done. The truth is that, they do not have electricity today not because we do not have it but the problem is that, these machines were old. When these people came, they did not have any intention of refurbishing the machines. What they did was a temporary “juju” system of working. These machines now guzzle a lot of water, like the old vehicles that we had. That is what is causing a decline. Today as I speak -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I have heard a new terminology of language here. Could the honourable member holding the floor explain to us what he means by “temporary ‘juju’ system of working”?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I do not have the time but I can explain all this in detail. These machines were installed some time back. The generators I am talking about are at Owen Falls Dam. They were installed sometime back, yet the best way of refurbishing them was not used. What these people came up with was to try and make the crack, which they did not even make properly.  I am filing a minority report in view of that. I will seek support from the Members to alleviate this issue. The truth has not yet been seen and I will provide that truth in the near future.

In conclusion, the issue of coffee: Coffee seems to remain one of the export-earning commodities in this country. However, where are the main stakeholders in coffee? I worked in coffee for the last ten years and I am one of the people who have provided all these machineries you see in coffee.  I have seen those areas go down to the level they are now. 

There was a time when there was a boom. All the coffee producing areas of this nation and those who were part of the coffee arrangement got a lot of money. They invested most of this money. I also got part of this money because I was a sole person distributing all this equipment here. Immediately we had a small shortfall, a drop in the world market, everybody was left to die and they died miserably. Today, there is not a single one. All the big names in coffee are nowhere to be seen.  Some of them have sold the factories; they have sold their plots. They sold all the equipment they had bought to a few people. Others are being run by the banks, which banks cannot even manage. They do not know the intricacies in coffee and the situation is not good. 

But the problem is that, there are two organisations that were formed in the coffee sector: the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and Uganda Coffee Trade Federation. Members, these people were charging a lot of money for every bag of coffee that left Uganda. This money has never been explained to the public. Now that these people are in problems, how do we help them?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, I thank you. It is a fact that coffee production has lowered. In fact, at one time we had gone to the extent of exporting over four million bags of coffee. However, at the moment it has lowered to two million four hundred bags. What does this mean? There has not been much planting and that means many people who had invested in the processing of coffee had less volumes of coffee. Therefore, what we require is to plant more coffee.

The money he is talking about, when UCTA was established, in order to run, it has got to run on cess. I think this is about one per cent of the export coffee. I think that does not have any direct bearing on coffee production. It is normal.  I thought I should give that information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ochieng, Please wind up. 

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for the information. However, I talked about two organisations. I know these groups and I have been part of them for a long time. It is a big amount of money. To be sincere, how can we lower production from four million bags of 60 kg? The report talks about 500. 500 means in a quarter we produce less than two million. But you know that for sure UCDA was charged with the responsibility of spreading the new coronal coffee system. How much seedling have they distributed and to whom have they distributed? Where is the value of all those distributions?  

Madam Speaker, because we do not have enough time, I will finalize by the issue of why our loans are not performing. There is a tendency in this country of what we call piloting. When there is an inception of an idea, they come out with a system of piloting this project. It is as if when they get an idea, they look for where it is needed most and once they have found out where it is needed most, they go and address that small problem there. As soon as they have addressed that problem, everything is left for God, just as our motto says.  

Look at how the piloting has been done.  Today I am talking about water.  I want this to be part of our issues. There are areas where piloting projects have never been and why? Even when they are in their need, why is the piloting being done in a small region and in many cases, always there? I thank you very much.

5.40
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My main concern is about coffee. I talk about coffee because it is a very important crop for this country. It is about the fourth or fifth foreign exchange earner and supposed to employ a number of people.  

As pointed out in the report, the volume of coffee being exported has continuously gone down and the reasons for the fallen production were well articulated on page 12. What I find insufficient in the report is that, I do not seem to see definite and deliberate action being taken to revive and even strengthen the coffee sub-sector which is important for the economy of this country and which is also employing a substantial part of our population. 

For example, one of the reasons highlighted for the fallen production is the drying old age of the trees, which is a very correct analysis. As my colleague has pointed out, I think that was supposed to be addressed through the UCDA, through provision of coffee seedlings.

I would like to note that, for example, this financial year I think for about one or two years now, UCDA has not been providing the coffee seedlings to the farmers and even those who supplied the coffee seedlings before have not been paid.  Besides that, we were informed in the report that some Shs 3.5 billion is owed to the farmers who supplied the coffee seedlings and Shs 3.0 billion was provided for in the current budget. I can testify that I have been going to UCDA to follow up the payment of this money to the farmers, an old debt for a very important crop and nothing is coming up.   

Madam Speaker, how are we going first of all, to enhance the earning capacity of our farmers if we are not providing the coffee seeds? The President has informed us that he is attracting people to bring factories to manufacture instant coffee so that farmers can have more money. How are these factories going to be sustained when we do not have even coffee grown here? Are we going to be importing coffee from abroad and make instant coffee from imported coffee?  

So, Madam Speaker, I think a lot has to be done about coffee. UCDA was saying that with effect from this year –(Interruption)  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Agriculture Committee. UCDA was giving out seedlings and for sure there is that debt which Government is committed to pay. But UCDA discovered that the method it was using to give out the seedlings was bad because the farmers were going to the nursery managers who were giving them the seedlings and they would take them but later on they would not manage them very well. So, most of the seedlings withered and died out and some of them were even just kept in the back yard. They were not planted. Right now, UCDA has developed another approach. If a farmer has two acres and above in a specified area, he/she just informs them. They come and look at that area and then supply the seedlings. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, my honourable brother. I would like to inform you that I have been to UCDA myself. I have submitted the names of people who are ready to grow the coffee and I have been going there for more than three months and no action has been taken. I would also like to remind my honourable brother that I am standing by my statement that it has taken them a long time, of more than two years, to take collective action so that they can provide the seedlings to the needy farmers. Thank you very much. 

5.46
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I also thank the committee through their chairman for this report. I have problems with the report in regard to the prices, which have been escalating. On page 2, the committee is ignorant about the increase in prices where they are saying the increase in prices were spread across the consumer namely food beverages and tobacco etc not taking into serious consideration the taxes which have been levied on some of these products. You have not indicated that so you do not know why these prices have been increasing. That is simply because of the taxes that have been levied on these products and that is why the business community is now reiterating on some of these products.

Now, go to down town especially this Christmas season, you expect prices to just increase like that but initially we have done very little to ensure that the prices are stable. When is the economy going to stabilise and the prices of some of these commodities. That is the only indicator of a good economy. Prices would be stable. When are we going to have prices lowering down in this economy? I think that is not expected because we expect to get revenue for our budget through increasing our taxes. So, it is unfortunate that prices will have to increase and people will continue to suffer every other budget. That is a very unfortunate situation.  

Madam Speaker, I think the next cause of prices to increase has been indicated by other honourable members: electricity and the road network system in this country, which should help the production, have been a very serious matter. When you go to investment side and you look at how we plan roads and cost them, I think there is a problem. 

Recently, we wanted a bridge, which is about 30 metres across the river built in my constituency.  A planning unit at works came out with a request that I should help them look for Shs 1.5 billion but we built the bridge about five years ago at Shs 180 million. This bridge is still there.  Now, when down the road five years building a similar bridge means Shs 1.5 billion, what is wrong?  I think when you study these projects where we are getting the loans there is a very serious problem with the planning and how we are monitoring the works. That is why we are getting very poor results and therefore we are not helping the production at all. 

On export crops, I think we have some important export crops, which you have minimised information about. These have ever helped this country in development. They include coffee, cotton and then tobacco. It is unfortunate now that the tobacco is shifting from Uganda to Kenya. We are just going to produce but when we are talking about these investments. You are showing how we are going to have about those 16,000 employees while we are reducing tobacco industries. I think there is still no development. Let us just rule that one out. So, unless we are serious in addressing some of these traditional export crops - because when the argument is put in helping the coffee sector with seedlings, what are you doing? What is the government doing to help the cotton sector? Because that is a big push in coffee sector and nothing is done in the cotton sector.

In regards to crisis, are industries using the import commodities or our local materials? And funny enough, when you look at the local materials say cotton, coffee and so on, every time the prices are going down. Why are the prices you are talking about going up and prices for the imported materials that we are going to use in our industries going down? Now, when are we going to stand firm to ensure that the farmers, those who produce the local materials that we need to use in these industries are also benefiting? Because unless they benefit, you will realise that these commodities will be just for a show and, therefore, when it remains there, the prices will either increase because when you do not increase you will not get the profits you are estimating. So, what are we doing? 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, it should have been some of our ministerial sectors to be here to answer like in cases of the roads. We do not need to discuss that one. It needs a full day because at the moment when you are going to Gulu or to Lira, you expect to go over one million potholes which have been created over the time. I think some of the ministers have overstayed in these offices and they need to be changed. 

You see, change is a good thing. Sometimes we have to accept it. Because when we are arguing that the NRM is improving and we are talking about this beginning of the first quarter, the first impression is the best. Now, honourable chairman, what is you description of this kind of state of economy? Is it a good one or a bad one? You have not described it. But to me I want to tell you that it is a bad start because this is a competition in which we must start very well in order to win. 

We have a long way to go. Now we have started this way, how are we going to end? This NRM is nothing bad. It is an old vehicle and you know there is now fear. The driver now knows this is an old vehicle and this is what it is starting because we have started in the first gear now. We are all scared. Are we going to end safely? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.53
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to thank the chairman of the committee, some comments that have been given by my colleagues notwithstanding. I would like first of all to comment on the amount of information given by the committee in its report and specifically to highlight the issue of Annex I, where in my opinion, I do not believe the committee offered sufficient information in as far as disbursed and un-disbursed loans are concerned. I would have loved the committee, for example, when you talk about small water town supply to specify which towns fall under that programme. This is especially important because of the fact that we get to receive this report after coming in to the House.

Secondly, how I wish these questions were being bombarded to the various sector ministers and not to only the Ministry of Finance. That way, I believe the respective ministers would be able to bear their own cross because some of the failures you will agree with me are as a result of failures within specific sectors. 

What this report reveals indicates that there are people in this country who are not doing their job. And it is necessary for the chief executive and members of the executive at different levels to wake up to this revelation. A country like Uganda cannot continue this way. I would like in this respect to refer the House to issues raised by the committee on page 2. On page 2, there is an indication and I would like to agree with the committee that there is a rise in the prices of food, and the reason that is being given among other reasons is that this has been caused by drought. The very mention of the word “drought” indicates there is something wrong going on in this country. 

As we will all agree, Uganda is a country that is endowed with a lot of resources especially water resources. We know of countries in Africa and in the world where rainfall is very minimal and these countries do not rely on rainfall. I would like to see a situation where Government comes up with a clear policy on how to utilise water for production. I am saying this for the eighth time on the Floor of this House, but in all those times I have not received response to this. What is happening to water for production? Why are we not utilising water from Lake Kyoga and water from Lake Victoria to produce food when there is an occasion of drought? I want that question to be answered probably by the Ministry of Agriculture through the Ministry of Finance. 

The report goes ahead to say that the rural poor, who are 80 percent of the population - these are our voters. The people we pride with as having power. Power is in the hands of these people but they are unable to produce in order to be able to buy manufactured products. Some of the reasons given here are lack of access to markets and the roads being terribly bad. Yet, when you consider Annex I, there is a slow absorption rate. This is why I think somebody is not doing his job. Part of the Executive is not doing their job and they need to wake up.

I would also like to reveal that it appears there is reluctance on the part of Government to encourage certain cash crops. This is because in the Northern and north-eastern part of the country, food crops have turned into cash crops. It is the sim-sim and sweet potatoes that are being sold for cash. We do not have a stable cash crop. It should be in the best interest of Government to ensure that these areas have a sustainable or a reliable cash crop. In this era in the 21st Century, we cannot afford to be selling the little food that our population has in order to get cash.

I would like at this point in time as the shadow minister in charge of roads to comment on the road network in this country. I recently toured the West Nile region -[Members on the government side:  “Come to Government”]. We are coming to Government. There is no doubt about that. (Applause) I have looked at the roads and bridges in the West Nile and Northern parts of this country. There are bridges that have time and again come through the policy statement of Government. These are the famous six bridges of Northern Uganda.

Hon. Omach, the Minister of State for Finance, knows how narrow their bridges in the West Nile region are. I am surprised that he has not talked about this. What is happening in Kampala shows you what should be happening in the countryside. In Kampala, there are even potholes that can swallow a vehicle. I am serious about this. It is no longer enjoyable to move around Kampala. This is a national disaster and a shame, which calls for some people in Government to resign. Nothing related to fixing these roads seems to be going on in this city. 

I would like to encourage Government to wake up from its sleep and do something about these roads. One needs a four-wheel drive vehicle to move along the roads in Kampala. This is a national shame. Government should not play the ostrich. They need to come out in the open and address this issue courageously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.  

MR AMURIAT: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. Another issue is about electricity. I am angered by the fact that ministers can afford to come and bravely stand on the Floor of this House to say, “The situation has improved because it is now raining and the level of water at the dam has increased.” We do not have control over rain. If we had, we would probably be having a minister in charge of rain. So, Government should not pride itself in something that is temporal.  

The report has alluded to the fact that this is something that will not take long. But reports upon reports have come to the Floor of this House indicating that there was a technical error made when the new power station was being erected. It takes a simple study of hydraulics in order for one to know that there was a technical error made at the Owen Falls Dam by opening up a canal and dividing the outlet of water into two. Despite the fact that Government is aware of this, no one has been brought to book for this technical error. In advanced countries, somebody should have been taken to task. 

I would like to challenge Government to ensure that this country does not continue losing money unnecessarily. This is a total loss to this country and yet we are here appropriating huge sums of money to try and mitigate this error. The designers of this project and its implementers are very much alive and no action has been taken to try and bring them to book. I want to hear this from Government, what has Government done? It is common for people to come into this country, rip it of money and go away scot-free as if we are a rich country. Even in the case of a wealthy country, they would not accept these kinds of loses. 

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about money borrowed for the road sector and specifically to ask of the committee whether they were not in error when they talk especially in reference to Kafu - Masindi road project. As I have told you, I visited that part of the country while doing my work as a shadow minister and I am aware that 75 percent of this road has been done, which is collaborated by Government reports. If this is true, as it is, I do not know where the extra money was got from, given the fact that the committee reports that only 60 percent of the money has been disbursed. I would have expected a direct proportion of the amount of work that has been done to the amount of money that has been disbursed.

Finally, on Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have taken quite a lot of time.
 
MR AMURIAT: Just the very final, Madam. It is important that I make this point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, just in one sentence.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much. 14 percent of the money was disbursed but when our people in the Northern and north eastern parts of the country apply for the money, they are turned back and yet time is running out for this money to be spent. I would like to get an explanation from the Prime Minister’s Office as to why the rate of disbursement of this money is so low and yet the demand is very high. As a matter of fact, these regions are bleeding -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Amuriat. Madam Speaker, there is a lot of mess in NUSAF. As we speak here, there are so many people who have borrowed money to open up bank accounts so that money can be dispersed. Some of them have been waiting for six months to get that money yet according to this report, only 14 percent has been dispersed. What is remaining?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR AMURIAT: It is as low as four percent. Any serious Government that thinks about its people should be ashamed about this rate of disbursement. We passed this law long ago and the project is advanced in as far as implementation is concerned but this is a national shame and it shows what Government is.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to be guided about what the House hopes to achieve at the end of this debate. Looking at the presentation of this report, you do not see a recommendation, suggestions or any direction for the House. What shall we be doing when we conclude this debate? I am actually inclined to request you, Madam Speaker, that you provide guidance to the chairperson of this committee to go and look in detail into matters of this report and then probably come back with things that give direction to this House. Otherwise, this is just a statement but what do we do with this report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, the committee is complying with the rules of this House to provide us with a report on that sector of the economy as required. Secondly, you wanted some information, which has come. Thirdly, I would have expected that some of you make recommendations that we could adopt. For now we should receive the information and maybe in the next report we can improve.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I agree with you but you know the standards for reporting to this House. This report is so air conditioned that it does not give us any direction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I do not know whether you were here when he was presenting. You know this report has opened our eyes to so many things about the unutilised loans. So, please, do not just blast this report. I think we should appreciate it.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the chairperson is not even asking us to adopt this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think when he comes back he will tell us what to do. Let us hear from the minister. 

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. When we presented the budget of this financial year on the 15th of June this year, we as Parliament collectively owned it when we appropriated it and also passed the aspect of the collection of revenues. The implementation of the budget should rightly and fittingly also be the responsibility of Parliament. That is why we have this committee. I am happy that this committee was able to give its first quarterly report on schedule. 

My ministry has deliberately given all information to you including information that you did not have ordinarily in the past, for example, on loans and how they are being utilised. We have given this information so that Members can go into more details even after these deliberations and come out with additional guidance on how this economy should move. For instance, I can give one example concerning the members of Parliament from West Nile. We have a north-western smallholder agricultural project under ADF and this was signed in August 2001 with a total of Shs 21.8 million. To date, only Shs 5.1 million, which is 24 percent of the total loan, has been disbursed. 

Although this particular project was meant for the people of West Nile, it was being housed in Entebbe. Therefore, it was up to the Members from West Nile or north-western Uganda to take charge and see that this thing is moved back to West Nile. Thank God now that it has moved to West Nile and the disbursement is now moving a little faster. 

The same applies to the project under NUSAF, which originally was handling 18 districts of the greater Northern Uganda. It is up to the Members of Parliament to ensure that this project actually fulfils its aims and objectives. It is our responsibility as MPs to ensure that what we pass here is taken to the letter. 

I would, therefore, like to thank the committee for bringing out this report and thank Members for coming out with whatever you have given today. We as Ministry of Finance are going to look at the Hansard and take the views that you have given us and ensure that in the next report, which is coming as at 31st of December, as much as possible of what you have suggested is implemented and answered to the letter. 

As one of you has said, it is the responsibility of all line ministries to come and defend as to why a particular portfolio is behaving the way it is. If we are talking about the cotton sector then definitely there is a minister responsible for cotton production. Some of these need to go into full details. If we take NUSAF alone, it would take us a full day to debate it. Cotton alone would also possibly take us a full day.

Having said this, the honourable Member of Parliament from Arua, Christine Bako, mentioned the political direction that this report is taking. I must very proudly state that Uganda is among the very few countries in Africa and maybe in the whole world that has a GDP growth rate of over five percent and this has been consistent for over the last ten years plus. This is a very great achievement. 

The country has also been going through the issue of maintaining a stable economy particularly concerning inflation which has been held under a single digit for now that is over five percent – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, one Member is seeking clarification.     

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I would like to wind up. I am giving this as a general background and we are going to have another opportunity to look at the quarterly report as at 31st of December. As for the shadow minister who is sitting in the wrong place, if he wants to give any clarification as a shadow minister, he should be sitting in front so that he can hear better. 

As I was saying, the country has actually maintained a very stable inflation rate at five percent at single digit for a very long time and this is something that many countries have failed to do. I urge Members to adopt this report. We shall look at the different aspects of the report, which have come out and try to answer the issues that are raised by Members appropriately.

As regards concentration of industries in Kampala rather than going to Jinja, Entebbe and other areas, I think this is what the government is trying to do. First of all, we would like to move away from being in the third world and go to an industrialised world and improve on the diversification of industries and also locations. As I talk now, a number of industries are moving out.

There was also the issue raised by hon. Mabikke about the Ten Point Programme, particularly programme five, which talks about an independent, integrated and self-sustaining economy. Definitely, the government is trying its level best to do this. Given that we have had a very stable macro-economy for a very long time, we are in the right direction. We are now trying to move towards industrialisation and that is why the issue of the energy crisis has been handled head-on by Government. 

Concerning the issue of ring fencing of Shs 991 billion, we are in the right direction. As you can see, there has been great improvement as far as the energy crisis is concerned.

Government is definitely concerned about the high prices that have been talked about by many Members of Parliament and Government is working on this. As you know, the prices are seasonal. There are times when in a certain season prices go higher, maybe due to drought or they can come down. In the final analysis, we will have prices that are reasonably within what has been in the budget. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister is the one to lead by the best example by allowing us to seek clarification from him and learn from him because he is well informed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, can you please come back here where I can see you better.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to seek two clarifications from the minister. One concerns prices. You are saying these prices are because of scarcity of rain or whatever but we are seeing the price of sugar has gone up. We have got information that some people have permits to import sugar. Why is the price going up if you have given people permits to import?

Secondly, you mentioned GDP. Surely, the GDP of Uganda is very good but this is very good GDP on paper. If the GDP is growing, that means production has gone up and income has gone up. Why are people poor if the GDP has gone up?

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is accusing the rain for our failure of production. I know that this same Government came to this House presenting a specific loan requirement under livestock productivity improvement project. That project had a number of components. One of them was to provide water for production. Here we only tend to debate on the crop sector if it is export but when it has declined because of drought we also attack coffee and others. To what extent have we gone away from focusing our attention on the crop sub sector as an export commodity and also brought on board the livestock component? This I am sure and I can talk of with authority. 

In the presence of the Committee of Agriculture, the President launched this project in Soroti for the entire cattle corridor in the hope that today we would be exporting livestock and livestock products. I want to know how much of this livestock component has been used to subsidize the crop sector, which is a victim of rain all the time. Thank you.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, about a week or two ago, we had a seminar on the millennium development goals and poverty. By the end of the seminar, it had been realised that actually the poverty level has gone down nationally. I think prices are going up because of that change in poverty levels. A reduction in poverty increases consumption levels and that increases demand. Unless demand and supply are equalised, the prices are bound to increase because of the increase in consumption. I wanted to help the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is information for you, Minister.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am glad that hon. Mafabi, the shadow minister, is now sitting in the right place. So, I can now give the clarification.

On the issue of the prices of sugar, Government is not controlling the prices of sugar. There is the issue of demand and supply. Unless you want us to go back to the regime of fixing prices because the excess rain also affected the production of sugar particularly in Kinyara. A comprehensive report as far as the sugar industry is concerned can be given.

On the issue of poverty levels, recent reports indicate very clearly that the average number of people living below the poverty line has reduced from 38 percent to 31 percent. I believe that we are in the right direction.

Hon. Odit talked about the issue of rain. We would be very happy if we could have a shadow minister in charge of rain so that he would help us with the issue of rain. For the time being, as a Government and a Parliament, we can only see how we can improve on the amount of water for production in the next budget. I think we can do this together.

On the issue of domestic debts particularly domestic arrears, we have already indicated that we shall be retiring this over a period of three years. These include the interest payable on domestic arrears. This was from hon. Nandala Mafabi -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to get real confirmation from the Minister in charge of Finance that you are going to pay all the people domestic arrears with interest. You have said they are going to be retired with interest. We want you to confirm that all domestic arrears are going to be paid with interest. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues: One, the minister has said we do not want to go back to the regime of fixing prices. Can the minister tell me why we fix cotton prices in this country? (Laughter) 

Two, the minister has also actually in my opinion avoided the question of the programme of water for production when we even got some moneys for it. Why doesn’t the minister explain to this House as the minister in charge? Actually, he sent me a Christmas card where he had drawn money notes on its top. (Laughter) I know most Members got that card. As the minister in charge of all the money in this country, can he explain the moneys for water for production project? This House needs to know.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whatever is due in the domestic arrears will be paid in accordance with the schedule that has been given and this is very clear. 

Now, as far as cotton is concerned, we give indicative prices, we do not fix the prices.

As for water for production, some of the issues that you are raising require formal questions so that they are appropriately answered. What we are giving now is what is pertaining in the first quarter of the performance of the economy. [Members: “Status report.”]. It is a status report but if you need more details, you can make formal questions -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, the question is already there and it is only a matter of time. It is on the way coming to the Floor specifically for the Minister of Agriculture to handle.

MR OMACH: And I already said at the beginning that some of these require the sector ministers. But as I told you, Madam Speaker, I am happy that we are able to give all this exposition and go into more details. We shall appropriately respond to the issues of the economy because it is for all of us and it is our responsibility to ensure that we are moving in the right direction. I thank you. May God bless you all!

THE SPEAKER: Please, Chairperson.

6.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi Lubega): Madam Speaker and honourable members, my colleague the woman MP for Arua District said that she wanted this to be a summary. We could well have done it but considering that the summary has taken us all this long, just imagine if it was a 500-page report how long it would take us. Furthermore, this is not a political statement and we do not want to make political statements. We want to make economic statements and this is what is in this report. 

Hon. Oduman said the information given to us about the commitments charges is not true. I just want to tell you, as I reported earlier on, that in our next quarter we want to first of all visit and analyse some of these things that are given to us because as you might be aware, this information concerning commitment fees is coming from the ministry. We will internalise the information they have and compare the movements of the fees and then advise Parliament accordingly.

Hon. Nandala, my predecessor, said that a lot of things would have been done in this report. But he should appreciate one thing, which is that in the five years he was a chairman, something like this was not here but we went ahead –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Speaker, I think it is wrong for my colleague to make such a statement. I have reports on the Floor of this House, and even the last report we made was a detailed one, showing the movement of the economy and how it should be managed. I even had to give you to keep some of the things. 

Madam Speaker, is my colleague in order to come and state that I have never made a report in the House when it is common knowledge that the Executive has even feared to debate some of these reports? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some reports were made but not as organised as they should have been according to the rules. (Interruption) You want me to disclose? I do not want to say certain things, let us not dwell on that subject.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, about the bank financing money from Bank of Uganda amounting to Shs 991 billion, this is a question, which has to be answered by the minister. This is because as we rightly noted in this report, we want to know why Government went to Bank of Uganda to get this money and what it was used for? 

About the issue of domestic debts, in our next report we shall give a breakdown of what is outstanding as per the end of the second quarter.

Concerning commitment fees, we got information from the ministry. 

Concerning land investments by Uganda Investment Authority and the actual figures, when we went to these projects all the information given to us was verified and we shall come to this Parliament and report the actual figures against the plan.

Madam Speaker, I had earlier on invited Members who can make an input in the way we reported to come forward and we improve it because this is something new. I want everybody to be free to contact us so that we can improve the way we report and I have no problem with that. We shall improve in our next half-year report.

Hon. Amuriat said that Annex I does not give enough information. We were just limited by the paper otherwise we would have given some breakdown on what has been done so far. We felt that the percentages could tell you how far the disbursement has moved and in essence how far the project has been implemented.

About the Kafu-Masindi road, our report Annex I is as at 30th June 2006. From June to date, there are six months and much work might have been done between this period. 

Lastly, the concern by hon. Alaso. As we said earlier on, this was a report on the status of the economy and it is general practice that when something comes to this floor, we request that it is adopted by Parliament. In the same vein, I would like to request my colleagues, honourable members, to support that Parliament adopts this report. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and honourable members. Other than the criticism on form and content, everybody supported this report. I did not hear anybody rejecting it. For that matter, I would like to put the question that the first status report of the Committee on National Economy be adopted by this House. Those in favour say “Aye” to the contrary “Nay”.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, when we started, I indicated that we shall sit in the morning. So, I would like to remind you that the House will sit in the morning from 10.00 O’clock to enable us finish what is on the Order Paper.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. We are aware that we have a lot of business to consider but the perpetual absence of Members especially of the Executive who are supposed to handle business already put on the Order Paper is becoming an issue of concern. By default I don’t know whether to call it by omission or commission but they decide to abstain thereby causing a lot of strain on our time and even making the work of the Speaker a bit challenging. I want to call upon the Executive to take parliamentary work seriously and be there once an issue has been indicated on the Order Paper. Otherwise, I think it is becoming a very big malady now. Thank you.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, while I appreciate your guidance that tomorrow we shall continue with what appears on the Order Paper, I want to plead with you that our report on accountability of statutory bodies is not a small one. It is quite big and very detailed and we wanted to be given appropriate airtime so that we can make our submission and honourable members have time to look at it. With that, I would like Members to pick their copies so that they can go and study overnight so that tomorrow we can find time and where possible skip some things when they have had sufficient time to read through. 

I am saying this because I am aware that unlike PAC, which is well funded to provide the Auditor General’s report for every Member, the one of statutory is normally in limited supply. That is why our report provides sufficient detail to guide the Members when they are deliberating. Therefore, when we come I would like us to get that time tomorrow so that we are not blamed for failing in our constitutional duty. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odit, if you really need the truth, I have been debating here with my clerks. Shall we receive this report now and then they start debate tomorrow? The Members look tired. But I was prepared to go that far so that you can present your report. So, let me assure you that you will get sufficient time tomorrow. 

Leader of Government Business, you have heard the concerns of the Members about the regular absence of certain sector ministers. Lets not have that tomorrow. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 December 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)
  


