Tuesday, 22 December 2009

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to the last sitting before we break off for Christmas. I have a few announcements to make:
 
One is that we should work very fast today so that we can go for “kyamucation” in the evening. We are going to have an end–of-year party in the Parliamentary gardens. So please, prepare your dancing shoes.

Secondly, I would like to adjust the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Local Government to present a Bill for first reading and also the Minister of Finance to present another paper for consideration.

In the meantime, I would like to welcome back hon. John Arumadri, the Member of Parliament for Madi-Okolo, who has been in hospital for the last three months. We are delighted that he is back to join us. We wish him a speedy recovery. 

On a sad note, I wish to announce the death of Mzee Kafabusa, the father of the Minister of State for Housing, hon. Michael Werikhe. He died abroad, so arrangements for his burial will be announced probably after Christmas. Those were the major items I wanted to communicate.

2.43
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I have two brief issues of national importance to raise. 

The first one, if you recall; this Parliament passed the Atomic Energy Bill after about 12 years of struggle. The purpose of this Bill was to provide for peaceful application of ionising radiation. Since we had to pass this Bill, it was imperative that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development quickly selects a council – it was quickly accented to by the President because has was also fast-tracking it and they were supposed to put in place an atomic energy council and a secretariat with an office. The International Atomic Energy Agency could not allow us to have the equipment and begin operating unless those two were put in place.

As I speak now, we have challenges. Many of you have been travelling through Entebbe – and we have the URA scanners and the radio-active source, which have been imported for mineral exploration and petroleum. Then most importantly, the cancer-treating machine at Mulago as you know, it went “kaput”. We provided money for its purchase but the institution is handicapped because we have no regulator, which is the council, the secretariat and its staff.

The atomic energy council and secretariat should urgently be put in place because if you have cancer patients, what will you do? If this old machine has to be disposed of, how can we do it without a facility? 

I am asking Government to fast-track this. I am happy that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here. He should ask the minister in charge to do this urgently because it is very important.

The second issue is about bio-technology and bio-safety. Hon. Members, as you know, we have come a long way. In 2003, you remember the Ayume Report when Ayume was asked to research about the bio-technology and bio-safety law and they recommended that a bio-safety law be enacted immediately to allow us regulate the genetically-modified organisms, particularly in the crop industry. As we speak now, we have GM bananas, which are resistant to the black Sigatoka. We have GM cassava, which is resistant to the cassava mosaic. We have GM cotton, which is resistant to the bollworm and herbicide treatment. In the laboratories, we have bananas, which have been bred to resist bacterial wilt and those, which have vitamins and iron. 

But as you know, we are signatories to Cartagena Protocol of 2000, which we ratified in 2001 and we are waiting for a bio-safety and bio-technology Bill. Due to climate change and poor soils, our people cannot produce enough food. We need these GM products to be able to produce enough food because we have erratic rains, which are also scarce. Unless this Bill comes – I know the policy was enacted. We have been waiting for this Bill; Kenya ratified theirs in 2008 and Tanzania has a regulatory mechanism, which allows them to commercialise GM products. 

Our border is porous. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know that GM maize is coming here from Tanzania and we have no regulation. It is going to affect us. This is a matter of national urgency and I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture to urgently bring this Bill to this House so that we do justice to our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.48
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): I would like to use this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues for your prayers when I was hospitalised and operated upon due to a Lumbar Disc problem.

I also want to thank the medical staff of Mulago Hospital headed by Dr Nadumba, a senior orthopaedic surgeon, all the staff of Ward 6C and the Physiotherapy Department for their dedicated service.

We need to do a little more to assist our healthcare service providers. While I was there, I noticed certain glaring loopholes, which we, as an institution, can help handle. Increasingly, the provision of medical services is now dependant on technology. We need machines to diagnose certain ailments. One machine, which we, as a country do not have at Mulago, is the MRI, which I am told means Magnetic Resonance. You have to be sent to a private place to do that test at a whooping Shs 650,000. 

I was wondering whether we as a nation cannot have a machine which one private individual is able to own. In the Physiotherapy Department, the machines are very few, one or two, and there is a long queue such that patients either miss out or get half doses. Machines like vibrators and nerve stimulators are very essential for patients of neurosurgery and orthopaedics like the one I underwent. 

I will implore you as an institution, the next time round; let us put our hands together so that we upgrade our referral hospital. Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and God bless you.

2.50
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to raise a matter of national concern; those of us who have been close to the media must have read an article where the people of Sironko District – the Bagisu blocked the people of Sebei from going to their land in Bunambutye. 

This morning one person was taking food to the camp where these people are settling. While on his way, he was stopped, beaten up and is now hospitalised. On top of that, a number of people have been beaten in my constituency. I want to urge Government and particularly the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take a very keen interest in this and provide security for my people. 

Secondly, I would like is to request the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to provide food for those people who are in the camp. 

But as I make this statement, it coincides with the period when we are creating Bulambuli District. So, I want to go on record that I will be the first person to vote for the creation of Bulambuli District; I do not want to stop that but the matter of concern is the land ownership in Bunambutye. I rest my case, Madam Speaker. 

2.52
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of public importance and I want to inform this House that last Wednesday, the Iganga business community nearly rioted resulting from actions of one of our ministers who is well known for protecting his people against evictions but is not shy of getting involved in evicting people of Iganga from their pieces of land. 

I urge the Prime Minister to ensure that the Minister in charge of Economic Monitoring is reminded and oriented on the mandate of his ministry. I wonder under which terms he went to mediate or to intervene in matters that have been under other ministries. Hon. Rukia Chekamondo has been mediating and the office of the IGG has investigated and this matter was being sorted out amicably. From nowhere did the minister wake up one morning and go and tell the people of Iganga to leave their land to Indians. Two weeks ago, we passed the law regarding evictions. I am surprised that some Government officials, and specifically this minister, are not honouring decisions of this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that Government reminds hon. Nyanzi about the mandate of his ministry. In addition to that, I also pray that just as he likes the people of Busunju to live a harmonious life, it is in the same spirit that I am praying that the people of Iganga are also interested in living in the houses that they have been paying for. This property used to belong to the African Trade Development Fund which was to be under divesture as per Cabinet resolution. That is my appeal to the Prime Minister, to restrain minister. Thank you very much. 

2.55
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is an issue of importance regarding what hon. Alice Alaso talked about last week, concerning our roads. It pains me that the Northern Bypass was opened and there are certain sections where our people are dying almost on a daily basis. I am just going to bring out – and I hope the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will take it on with the minister to urgently move in before we get more people killed, maimed and or permanently disabled. The section I am talking about is the one where you have the roundabout near Bwaise. 

They made two lanes that leave the main road to join Bombo Road but one of the lanes leads you to the drainage, which is a dead-end. One time I talked to hon. Nathan Byanyima the then chairperson of the committee and even informed many people. The most recent accident was where a car being driven by a lady with her family overturned but luckily enough no one died. But this is almost on a daily basis. 

This section is very dangerous because most of the road has no signs; it is neither on the tarmac nor on the sides. I appeal to Government and particularly the Ministry of Works to come out urgently as we go into this festive season where people are going to enjoy many things. I know so many things are happening where Parliament is meant to come in, like fake goods, but on the roads like the Northern Bypass, as this is the last sitting as we go for the Christmas recess, I pray that something is done. Otherwise, many people are going to lose their lives. It has saved a lot on some of the traffic jams but it is now becoming hell. If you take the statistics now, it is becoming totally unbearable. I pray that they either put the signs there or they completely close some of the lanes to save the boda boda cyclists and also the heavy traffic. 

That is my major point of importance that I hope the Prime Minister will come and help. We are suffering from the water in Bwaise and the rest, but please do not let us suffer from this road again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the government wishes to respond on the issue of the Atomic Energy Bill and then on the issues of the Sabiny and Bamasaba interference in Iganga and the Northern Bypass. 

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I am extremely sorry that I came in late but I think I can respond to some of the issues which have been raised, for instance, on the Atomic Energy Bill being accented to urgently. The hon. minister is here but what I know is that it has been accented to and the Atomic Energy Council has already been named by the minister. Maybe minister, he will throw more light on this by even giving the names of the members of the council.

Regarding the issue of bio-technology and bio-safety and the fact that there is no law to regulate importation of GM products and bio-safety, the fact that there is no law to regulate importation of genetically modified products, I think I will have to get a written response from the Agriculture and Finance ministers so that we are in position to give an authoritative response. I do not know whether the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would like to say something about this. Prof. Kamuntu, would you be in a position to say something on this right now? The minister was advising that you come up with a detailed response to this matter. 

There is also the issue of the dispute between Sironko and Sebei boundaries. We have dealt with this matter in Cabinet and the President has directed the Minister of Lands to take up this matter. For all I know, it is just a question of time that this matter is going to be attended to. I remember the honourable minister briefed Cabinet that he is preparing a team to send on the ground to interact with the people of both Sironko and Sebei and thereafter undertake the demarcation of the boundary. So, I think this is a matter that is being attended to and I would like to make an appeal to the hon. Members of Parliament from that area and the neighbours to remain calm – you can now even remain calm. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the neighbour.  

3.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I am a neighbour and quite familiar with issues to do with border conflicts. My thinking is that while it is good that Government has set up a Cabinet team to go there, I think what we need in the short run before the Cabinet team goes and reports, is an immediate intervention to prevent people from hurting each other and destroying property. 

We thought you would give us the assurance – perhaps maybe because it is the Government Chief Whip but if it were the Minister of Internal Affairs, perhaps he would have assured us that the Police have taken charge and there is not going to be any more stick wielding people across the border of Sironko and Bugisu – something like that but just to wait and this team comes and writes a report, Madam Speaker, would make many people vulnerable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think after your Cabinet meeting, certain events have really taken place like physical fighting between the Sabiny and the Bamasaba. I think that is why hon. Sabila is asking for help.  

MR MIGEREKO: Hon. Sabila has raised this matter on a number of occasions and I know the matter has received the urgency that it deserves. Hon. Omara Atubo is in charge of this exercise and all I know is that he has mobilised his officials and he is also working with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to make sure that the situation does not get out of hand. Other than the assurances that I have given right now, I do not know what other assurances I could give although I am going to find out what is exactly happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Sabila was explaining. Hon. Sabila, can you briefly explain what has happened?  

3.04
MR SABILA: Thank you, MADAM Speaker. The issue is not a small matter as the Government Chief Whip is trying to imply. I have said that somebody was this morning blocked with his motorcycle as he was going with food to the camp where these people are staying. They beat him, destroyed his motorcycle and as I talk now, there are about 20 people in Kasereni Health Centre undergoing treatment. As I talk now, there is one person who was cut and injured yesterday and is in Mbale Referral Hospital. Now these are very serious matters. I requested for security intervention and we need security to put up the case in a clear way. 

The other issue is that the directive that the Chief Whip is saying is three months old. The President wrote the letter on 1st September. To date, this matter has not been handled and that is the concern. We need a specific commitment from Government about this matter. 

Another thing that has not been commented on is the food provision. I want through you, Madam Speaker, to request the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to give food to my people who are settling there because the road is blocked and there is no supply of food at the moment. 

3.05
MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Minister of Local Government is here. Hon. Prof. Kabwegyere and hon. Ecweru are all in. Kibaale Wambi is in Budadiri. Really, if there is a contention around Bulambuli in respect of a border issue, what a colleague has to do is to go to the office of hon. Adolf Mwesige, see hon. Musa Ecweru whom we even call around midnight and the Minister of Lands, hon. Omara Atubo or hon. Kiyingi who is here and sort out those issues at that local level. Discussing it here so that it goes on record or is written in the papers is not effective. Hon. Adolf Mwesige is here, Kibaale Wambi is down there in Budadiri – this issue can be sorted out at that local level; if there is starvation, foods are in store and hon. Ecweru and hon. Kabwegyere are here, so what is the big deal? These are LC matters –(Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to the minister.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that there was a meeting of the National Security Council this morning in the Ministry of Internal Affairs which reviewed the situation on the dispute between Kapchorwa and Sironko. What became apparent in that meeting is that there are two distinct issues. There is the question of demarcation of the border between Kapchorwa and Sironko and then the issue of people who are coming from across the boundary, from Kapchorwa, to an area which is now disputed in large numbers. 

What became apparent again is that this area, for some time, had been insecure and had suffered raids from the Karimojong cattle rustlers and so people had deserted the area. As a result, some people who are not necessarily the original owners of the place had come to settle there. The owners of the place are now coming to reclaim the area after peace has returned, and this is causing conflict. So, the real issue is not really a boundary issue but a land ownership issue between the Sabiny in the area and Bagisu.

But what I can assure honourable members of is that interventions have been made to separate the two communities that are at loggerheads. Police has deployed and the leadership of the area from both Kapchorwa and Sironko are going to have a meeting tomorrow at 8.00 a.m. to review the situation and agree on a concrete way forward. Definitely, the area has been secured.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, regarding the evictions taking place in Iganga Town Council, this is a matter which I will have to take up with the relevant ministries and then we shall be in a position to report back.

Similarly, on the issue of the Northern Bypass, we shall pass this to the Minister in Charge of Transport and I am sure we shall be able to respond. I had indicated that the hon. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development who is in charge of the Atomic Energy Council is here and he should be able to throw more light on this particular issue. Thank you.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Atomic Energy Council is already constituted. We have Dr Akisoferi Kisolo as chairperson and five other members. They are all nuclear physicists and professionals in radiology in various institutions from Mulago Hospital. There is one lady, Byanyima, from Mulago Hospital. She is a medical doctor and a professional in radiology. We also included Eng. Kabanda, a seasoned public servant who has been serving as Permanent Secretary.

They have already been given a home at the Ministry of Energy and a budget of about 1.3 billion, to start with, has been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance in order to establish the institution. We expect to have in place, within the next three months, a secretariat with a functional organisational structure and staff to start managing atomic or nuclear technology in the country. So, they are already in place. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the She Cranes, who are up there in the Gallery. They are the winners of the East and Central Africa International Netball Cup 2009. (Applause) They have come with the cup. Thank you very much.

3.13
MR JOHN ARIMPA KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Energy for putting the council in place but as I said, what is urgent is that the secretariat and staff must be in place. He has promised two months but as you know, there are urgent issues like the URA Scanner at Entebbe, the radioactive source for petroleum and road and the main thing which is the cancer machine in Mulago. These have to be done. You know it is the requirement of the International Atomic Energy Agency and as you know, Mr Minister, these things are already here and if we do not have a regulation, our people are in trouble. And you know we have crooks- these people who have primitive ways of accumulating wealth. As you go to Entebbe, if you have been travelling recently, the other simple machine in which you put the card to allow you to pass, the one which regulates vehicles for payment, is already down. A person who can do such a thing - because we have crooks in this country - can easily import unregulated radioactive equipment and our people would be in danger. So I request the minister that within two months as you have promised let the secretariat and the regulator be in place so that we safeguard our people. I thank you. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

3.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009, be read for the first time. I refer to Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 and I beg to state that this Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to be handled expeditiously. (Laughter)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

3.17
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. The Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications issued by the Ministry of Finance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW US $190,000,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

3.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to present papers for a request to borrow US $190,000,000 from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Transport Sector Development Project. This loan is going for the upgrading of gravel to bitumen of Gulu-Atiak road and upgrading of the Vurra–Arua-Oraba road and designing bidding documents for the Tororo-Soroti road. I beg to lay the request on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also beg to present a request for the proposal to secure a loan of UA 10,210,000 and another loan of US $10,000,000 from the African Development Fund and the African Development Bank Group and the Islamic Development Bank respectively for financing the Rural Income and Employment Enhancement Project. The bulk of this money is going to the Micro Finance Support Centre for wholesale lending to SACCOs and micro-finance institutions. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both requests are committed to the Committee on National Economy for scrutiny and report back.

STATEMENT FROM THE PARLIAMENTARY FOOTBALL TEAM

3.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I stand here to present a statement from the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team. I stand here as the Parliamentary Football Team Manager. The Parliamentary Football Team participated in a football tournament organised to mark the 10th East African Community anniversary from 8th to 20th November 2009 in Arusha, Tanzania. The tournament brought together teams of national assemblies of partner East African Community states; Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Arusha wazee sports club; this is a team of the UN body based in Arusha and the EALA-EAC football team.

Uganda Parliamentary Football Team emerged as the first runners up after humbling Kenya on spot kicks 4-2, Tanzania we drew 1-1, Wazee sports club 2-1 and lost to Tanzania 2-0 in the final game. We were not beaten until the final game so we were doing well. The team exhibited a lot of talent despite the loss to Tanzania in the final game and hon. Balikuddembe was voted the man of the tournament and he received a trophy for the talent he exhibited in the tournament.

In commemoration of our fallen member of the Parliamentary Football Team, the late hon. Balikoowa, a football match was organised against Uganda Parliamentary Press Association who suffered a 6-3 defeat. A similar match was organised between the Parliamentary Football Team and Kamuli District Council in Kamuli on Sunday, 20th December 2009. We beat Kamuli District Council 3-1. Madam Speaker, we were honoured to have you as our coach and guest of honour at this match.

The following Members participated in the football tournament that was recently concluded in Arusha:
1.	Hon. Hudu Katuramu, who is the chairman
2.	Hon. Odonga Otto, the captain
3.	Hon. Okupa Elijah, the team manager
4.	Hon. Lule Mawiya
5.	Hon. Isaac Sejjoba 
6.	Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe Mutebi, who was the best player
7.	Hon. Kibedi Zaake
8.	The late Hon. Henry Balikoowa 
9.	Hon. Moses Musoke Mutabaali 
10.	Hon. Michael Mabikke 
11.	Hon. Ibrahim Kaddunabbi 
12.	Hon. Denis Obua, our commissioner
13.	Hon. Charles Ngabirano 
14.	Hon. Kajeke, the former Member of Parliament now
15.	Hon. Simon Oyet
16.	Hon. Emily Otekat 
17.	Hon. Alintuma Nsambu
18.	Hon. Milton Muwuma 
19.	Hon. Moses Kabuusu 
20.	Hon. Rose Namayanja (Applause) Hon. Members, the Rwanda Parliamentary team had ladies participating in the tournament with the men.
21.	Hon. Rose Akol 
22.	Hon. Mariam Nalubega 
23.	Hon. Faridah Najjuma Kasasa
24.	Mr Tom Lwanga, the coach
25.	Mr Musoke, the team doctor.

We also had parliamentary staff in the team:
1.	Mr Kassim Nsimbe Kayinja
2.	Mr Robert Joseph Kayigwa
3.	Mr Peter Busiku 
4.	Mr Daniel Sekidde, who was the goalkeeper
5.	Mr Godfrey Olok, the substitute goalkeeper
6.	Mr Patrick Malagala
7.	Mr David Waddimba 
8.	Mr Patrick Kaggwa; and 
9.	Mr Steven Mayinja 

Allow me at this juncture, to lay on the Table, the trophy of the recently concluded football tournament organised to mark the 10th East African Community anniversary. This is the trophy for the first runners-up that was the Parliament of Uganda. I beg to lay it on the Table. Thank you. (Applause) Thank you so much and thank you for all the support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, team manager. On behalf of Parliament and the people of Uganda, I want to thank you very much for bringing us pride and this cup will be put in a place of honour within this Parliament. Please, defend it and do better next time. Thank you very much.

In the meantime, I have on this side of the gallery the Uganda Cranes; and this side is the She Cranes. (Applause) They are the winners of the East and Central Africa Senior Challenge Cup 2009. Again, we congratulate them and thank you for doing us proud. (Applause) We hope that we shall be able to see you at the World Cup one of these days. (Laughter) 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE UGANDA CRANES FOR RETAINING THE EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA CHALLENGE CUP (CECAFA) 2009 AND THE SHE CRANES FOR WINNING THE EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICAN INTERNATIONAL NETBALL CUP, 2009

HON. MEMBERS: Where are they?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The She Cranes are on this side, with two trophies. 

3.27 
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the Uganda Cranes for retaining the East and Central Africa Senior Challenge Cup 2009, and the She Cranes for winning the East and Central African International Netball Cup 2009 moved under rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker and honourable members; 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, under the provision of the National Objectives and Directives Principles of State Policy No. 17, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for good governance based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy;

AWARE THAT on Sunday 13 December 2009 through the excellent performance of the Uganda cranes, Uganda retained the 2009 Orange East and Central African Senior Challenge Cup after trouncing arch rivals - the Rwanda’s Amavubi Stars 2-0 in the final played at Nyayo Stadium Nairobi;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the She Cranes also won the East and Central African International Cup after trouncing South Africa in Dar-el-Saalam in October 2009; 

AWARE THAT the She Cranes Under-21 Girls Netball Team also captured the Africa Cup of Nations in July 2009 in Zanzibar after trouncing Tanzania;

NOTING THAT Uganda has now won the CECAFA trophy the eleventh time thereby emerging as the country with the highest wins in the competition so far in the East and Central African region;

NOTING THAT these successive victories present a requisite launching pad for the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes to make a decisive move to capture bigger cups;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT the Government of Uganda needs to take an upper hand in enhancing the realisation of the dreams of the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes in reaching greater heights; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

i)	Parliament of Uganda extends its lustrous appreciation and congratulations to the Uganda Cranes for retaining the prestigious East and Central Africa Senior Challenge Cup 2009 and the She Cranes for capturing two trophies in Africa.
ii)	The Government of Uganda continues increasing the annual budget support to the sports sub sector to facilitate the development and re-energisation of sports countrywide.
iii)	Each Member of Parliament contributes Shs 100,000 only as a token of appreciation and reward to the players of the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes, to be deducted at source. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute to the triumphant Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes, permit me to also take this opportunity to extend our deepest congratulations to the new FUFA leadership for the trust bestowed upon them in leading football in this country for the next four years. 

On Sunday, 13 December 2009 and in July and October, Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes respectively emerged as the unbeatable champions in the entire East and Central Africa region. It is indeed a fact beyond reasonable doubt that in sports, a journey from the opening match to the finals and eventually winning is a long way. It involves a lot of struggle and it involves a lot of hurdles and these two teams who definitely are the champions in the entire East and Central Africa deserve to be appreciated by this Parliament. 

Having said that, let me briefly touch on the importance of sports to a nation like Uganda and why a country should heavily invest in sports. It brings about unity and diversity and unity of purpose. In a country like Uganda with a cultural diversity, it is only sports that can act as a point of convergence for national integration. It is a question of social inclusion, Madam Speaker. 

This is a country with different social backgrounds, different economic backgrounds of the rich and the poor; the old and the young; the educated and the uneducated. When it comes to sports, people leave their respective status in society and we all come in and support our teams as a country and this is very important. The Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes have proved that through sports, Uganda can achieve social inclusion. 

We have been talking about patriotism and nationalism. Sports can inculcate that spirit of practical nationalism and practical patriotism. I want to give an example; recently, hon. Odonga-Otto and I were the twin strikers of the parliamentary football team in Arusha. There was a critical stage at the semi finals when our Parliament team was playing the team of the Parliament of Kenya. Towards the end of the first half, the score was zero. I asked hon. Otto in the local language that “Jal, watim-ngo?” literally translated to mean “My brother, what must we do?” 

He responded by saying, “Obua, the name of our country Uganda is at stake. We must protect it.” (Applause) that demonstrated the highest level of patriotism and nationalism in my brother, hon. Odonga-Otto, because that was the point at which we all realised that we were defending the name of Uganda irrespective of NRM and FDC; irrespective of being a Muslim or a Protestant or a Roman Catholic. So, this was very important and if we really invest in sports, I think we shall go a long way in really looking for the common good for this country. 

Madam Speaker, one other thing that I should emphasise as I move this motion is that it appears like the local sports has been invaded by the western sports. I am saying this because many of our young people including myself, I can confess that I can give you the entire line-up of Manchester United but I can fail to give the line-up of Uganda Cranes. That means that the western sports have invaded our local sports. This is something that we need to work on so much as a government and ensure that we support and promote our local sports. No other proof is needed by this Parliament and Government itself to regenerate the national spirit of our young men and women. The only way forward is for us to invest heavily in sports because it has already acted as a way of engaging this generation in appreciating the goal of nation building because it creates a beautiful national identity that we can all be proud of.

I want to take this opportunity now to thank the individual players of Uganda Cranes who did us proud. We are very proud of you; you have given us another name in East and Central Africa. 

I want to thank the individual players of the She Cranes. I do not know the number of the members of parliament who know about the She Cranes. It could be news to some of our colleagues but She Cranes has equally done us proud in East and Central Africa and the Entire Africa region; they have brought for us two trophies. 

I want to thank the administration of the two teams. I thank the two coaches especially the one for Uganda Cranes, and we have been keenly watching you in Nairobi. We want to thank you for a job well done.  In most of our cultures here gathered as members of Parliament, when a child performs well at school, he/she is rewarded and that is the gist of our prayer No.3. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I beg to move once again.

3.38
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I stand up to support the motion. The mover of the motion has articulated the importance of sports in this country. The thing which has been lacking is funding to sports sector. I am happy that over the years Government has gradually increased the funding. We only urge the government to continue increasing the funding to the sports sector.

We are only just giving a token. We were there in Nairobi on the 13th December with hon. Byandala, hon. Byanyima, hon. Amuriat, and hon. Grace; we saw how our boys exhibited talent. We need to exploit this talent. The support they received from Ugandans living in Nairobi was overwhelming. The streets were swarmed by Ugandans just celebrating.

I want to thank our High Commissioner in Nairobi, her Excellency Angelina Wapakhabulo. She was there on the field from the beginning up to the end when we received the trophy from the Prime Minister of Kenya.

Hon. Kutesa, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, you have one of the best High Commissioners in this country, Ms Angelina Wapakhabulo. We saw it in Nairobi. She did not only stop at that, the following day she hosted the Uganda Cranes at her residence and the members of Parliament who were there were invited. She has Uganda at heart and we need to support her.

The message she gave to us was that we need to tell our Government to increase financing to the sports sector such that we are able to excel and promote the name of this country. The issue of motivation is key; the motion last time of each member contributing Shs 100,000 to the Uganda Cranes motivated our players and we are seeing the results.

I must also thank His Excellency the President who contributed US $3,000 to each player. That is the spirit with which we want to promote the sport. That time when the Uganda Cranes had a dinner with His Excellency, there were seven players who had already gone back to play for their teams. Those seven players have never received what the President sent them. We urge whoever was responsible to make sure that we do not de-motivate our players.

I want to congratulate the She Cranes for the job well done. Some members were whispering that, “Where are they?” Can you stand up and we see the trophies? Those are the two trophies that the She Cranes won. Thank you so much for making this country proud. I wish you all a Merry Christmas and a happy new year.

3.38
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I also raise to support the motion by hon. Obua and to congratulate both teams, the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes for lifting Uganda’s name high. I want to thank the individual players and our coach for the Uganda Cranes. If they were to give a trophy for the smartness, the one of Uganda Cranes would have won it because he was the smartest in the tournament.

He has exhibited leadership ever since he took over; getting a record 11 titles, in the East and Central Africa shows that Uganda has talent. The challenge now is for us as leadership to unlock that talent; the potential that they do have because they have shown it. Because of this victory, the FIFA ranking of Uganda has gone high. In the region we are the highest as far as soccer is concerned. I think there is a lot that is being done. We want to thank the current FUFA leadership despite their able leadership; they are faced with a number of challenges. 

Recently I was reading in the papers and I was seeing that FUFA Limited has started its new term. I was concerned by that word “limited.” I think it is important for the Ministry of Education and Sports to bring the stakeholders together because despite their good leadership they are being bogged down by legal battles. The Ministry of Sports should come up to really clear the air. They have moved very well and changed the sports in this country but they are bogged down by the legal frame works. If we need to revamp the National Council of Sports Act, we should do that otherwise we have talents and the fans are supportive but the problem is the management of soccer in this country.

Players earn foreign exchange; we have a number of players who have gone for professional football and they are doing a lot. I want to urge Government to priorities sports. I know of countries like Cameroon which is giving a lot of support to sports. Our leadership may not reach that level but we can do a lot better.

In 2004 Africa Cup of Nations, there was a Cameroonian player who was left out of the squad and he is called Patrick Mboma, it took a head of state to make a directive that he should be included in the team. That shows the level of commitment of head of state. He did it and the player was included and he made wonders for the team.

We also need more commitment in terms of funding otherwise as we speak we are congratulating the She Cranes for the Netball and then Uganda Cranes but the female football team even after defeating Rwanda and they were ready to take on Zambia but they could not go because there was no money. FUFA had to cancel because there were no funds. 

We need a more strategic approach to develop grassroots sports in order to have a better team. I want to say that if we do that, local sports will improve. Hon. Obua has said, many of us can mention names of those foreign teams. When I was growing, I was supporting KCC but today if you asked a youth about the team he/she supports, they will tell you about Arsenal or Manchester United. I believe that it is until we raise local sports that corporate sponsorship will be got and Government will be assisted.

3.48
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): I Would like to congratulate all those who participated in the three victories of Uganda Cranes, the She Cranes and the Parliament. Sports are a voluntary activity but success from such an activity goes to the whole country. If you look at the current national team, there is no Karimojong, but the victory also goes to them.

Uganda was at one time a holistic sporting nation. It was a top football nation in Africa, athletics and boxing. For example, in 1978 the Cranes made it up to the finals of African cup of Nations. I think this is a stimulating victory that we need to look beyond.

In athletics, the first African woman to get an international award was a Ugandan by the names of Ayaa Judith. In boxing, Ugandan was in the finals of the 1968 Olympics. Here I have the former international Olympic competitor, Awori. Sports have become commercial and that means that as a Government we need a sports ministry which is autonomous in its activities. We the legislators in this House should come up with a sound sporting policy to support sports in this Country. We should be in the finals in London.

3.52
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I am the captain of the Parliamentary Football Club. I want to appreciate the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes for putting such a considering effort to bring glory to Uganda.

I also want to thank my team mates who put up a spirited fight such that we brought a trophy home. Appreciating players is very easy as I am doing now, but the actual playing is not an easy thing. You can imagine having members of Parliament having to run for 90 minutes. It was a very fast game in Arusha. 

I really want to appeal to members of this House that other than the individual contributions of Shs 100,000 that we are giving to Uganda Cranes, we should institutionalise parliamentary contribution to various sporting activities. Today it is football and tomorrow it may be cricket.

I would like to inform the members that we have been given a green light by the Speaker of Parliament and the patron of the Parliamentary football club to produce a budget framework for sporting activities in the next financial year. I would like to thank you very much for this green light you have given the Parliamentary football club.

I am happy the minister is speaking after me; we need a law on players who retire. When these players are 40 or 50 years, they live a miserable life and no one wants to think of them. I want to give an example, my colleague there from Karamoja, hon. Pirir said that the first Ugandan to bring a Gold Medal was Ayaa. But she died at the stone quarry in Bweyogerere near the UBC land while she was mining stones for a living. At the time of her death - it was so pity - as if she had not been someone who had brought a gold medal to this country. 

When you look at the children of the late Akii-Bua; they were thrown out of the house the other time until it took some political intervention by the President to save face. 

Last week I was in West Nile and I would like to say I was so impressed with the Government of Uganda for making good its pledges in time by finishing Inzikuru’s house –(Interjections)– yes, I am very happy and it is a very decent house in that area. However, I would like to point out that there are very many ex players – I have noticed that in the gallery we have people like Jackson Mayanja; we had people like the late Sadiq Wassa and there are very many ex players like the hon. Aggrey Awor who is only lucky because he is a politician. Otherwise, he would be –(Laughter)– suffering. Hon. Pirir is also lucky because he is in Parliament; he would be in the kraals.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my request is that the minister should come up with a clear statement and a policy to help football players who retire because running for 90 minutes every day makes someone not to leave a normal life like the ordinary people who do not undergo such exercises. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from Minister of State for Sports.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I would like to say I support the motion. But I want to first and foremost appreciate the contributions from all the members who have spoken in support of this motion.

However, before I express my appreciation and pride to the She Cranes and the Uganda Cranes for those successful events, I want to clarify to the members the background of our support. I was one of the founders of this parliamentary team. I was also one time its chairman –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I do not know what is happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order, hon. Members! 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, I was once the Chairman of the Parliamentary Football Club. I am the person who took it to Rwanda to bring us a trophy. So, as you talk about the support and development of sports in this House, I would like to thank you, colleagues who have carried the flag ahead. I also would like to congratulate you – I was with you in Arusha and I witnessed us get the second position in the tournament.

I also would like to express my congratulations to the coach and his co-coaches for the good and wonderful job they are doing. I also do the same to the coach of the She Cranes. I cannot forget to recognise the solidarity that the players of both for the She Cranes and Cranes have expressed. I recall that in Nairobi we played on a Sunday, but on Saturday night I had been with the boys giving them some little motivation. The next day they were in good gear to fight for the nation and they did it. I would like to salute you for that. 

My colleagues will agree with me that some of us could be seeing the She Cranes for the first time, but they really made it for this country; it was not simple. For them to bring the African Cup they met with South Africa, which is not a simple team, but they floored it nicely and brought the trophy to us.

Similarly, I would like to express my gratitude towards the Cranes. However, I want to point out two things that have been raised about the development of sports in this country, which I would like to comment on. 

There was a point on the development of sports in this country. However, I would like to say that as we talk physical education in sports is an independent subject in schools. This is already a foundation for developing sports in Uganda.

Hon. Odonga Otto talked about recognition and I would like to inform you that the draft policy is already in place; we call it a recognition policy purposely for those who have excelled. We did this after we realised that what the ministry was doing was only to appreciate those who participated in various sports and continue with education by giving them four points. Our concern is on those who do not continue with education. The question is about how to appreciate their effort. That is why we now have this draft policy.

As far as the wrangles are concerned, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think I am ably handling them. What I know is that the sports field is dynamic. It is not some field where people just go and keep silent. I would like to inform you that I have been able to handle most of the wrangles and indiscipline in this year. I want to add that I will not entertain any nonsense of that nature in 2010.

Without wasting time –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. I just want to chip in as sports administrator. Just one issue to put across to honourable members is the fact that bringing a trophy is not an event; it is a long process, which starts with allocation of funds to various sports activities. (Applause) Therefore, it is our duty – we can contribute Shs 100,000 or Shs 200,000 to the Cranes, but it will really not do the required job. So, it is better for us, as Members of Parliament, to allocate resources to the sports field. Thank you very much.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Mr Minister, for giving way. I want to seek a small clarification. You have mentioned the fact that now a draft sports policy is in place. I want to find out from you whether you are taking care of the welfare of the sports persons in that draft. Let me explain: to be a good sportsman, you have to be contented. I was a football [An Hon. Member: “Football fan.”] No, player -(Laughter)- I played football for the junior team of Uganda for four years. I know what I am talking about.

If you look at the Cranes’ squad of 78, which went to Accra, you will realise that most of those who played in that squad were gainfully employed by Government. Denis Obua was in police; Paul Ouma was in the Army; Wassa was in the Army; Debia was in the Army; Philip Omondi was in KCC; Okay I think he was in Coffee – no, he was in Prisons; Otii was in Coffee. I want to find out from the Minister, what sort of commitment are we talking about when dealing with sports persons? We are not going to run to Parliament all the time for parliamentarians to contribute money whenever the Cranes are successful. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate and congratulate the teams for the good job but I also want to know from the Minister what plans he has to ensure that talent is tapped countrywide. We know that in the villages there are a lot of young people with talent who will never join Kampala teams. But if you tap that potential, you will definitely ensure the future of football in this country. 

Madam Speaker, on a lighter note, I watched the Cranes as they were playing and they were putting on red. Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will respond quickly to what has been expressed. Hon. Kikungwe who is currently the Vice-President of Uganda Amateur Boxing Federation raised a pertinent issue. If you look at the trend, you notice that Parliament has been helping in the development of sports in this country. By the time I joined the ministry, I think the allocation was about Shs 400 million. But the last financial year was about Shs 1.7 billion. Now it is about Shs 3.143 billion, of which only about 45 percent goes to the development of sports. 

My problem now is the quarter releases. As we talk now, we have received only 25 percent. So we need to see that we push that higher to achieve our goals. When it comes to what hon. Ben Wacha was talking about, the welfare, we are building a policy as I said. I have been making consultations with the secretary of FDC and she had some good ideas. She even poses the question of what happens to a player who participates in a competition that have been organised by Government if they get an injury? So we are still working out ways to address that. 

On the part of welfare, it can be addressed in two ways. We build the national team from various clubs. I recall that Simba came up with a policy just recently. For them if you want to play in their team, they have to incorporate you in the Army and get on their pay roll. Those who wanted joined and those who did not want left the team. So those are some of the strategies that we want to use, and with your support, we shall achieve it.

Lastly, I want to say that sports is the modern tool for social development, political mobilisation, economic development and for peace and unity. We need all to embrace it and support it. I support the motion once again. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I put the question that this House adopts the motion as move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I could add is that we should continue supporting the Parliamentary Football Team. It was a pleasure to watch hon. Balikuddembe – you cannot believe the speed at which he moves. If you know him –(Laughter)– if you look at his size, you cannot believe the speed at which he moves. So, let us institutionalise sports, support them and attend their matches. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had not completed some of the work. So can you ring the bell so that everybody who is outside comes into the Chamber? Members in the lobbies, please come into the Chamber. Okay, let us start with the front row, please raise up your hands so that the clerk can count how many people are in the Chamber. We want to establish the numbers first. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

MR KIKUNGWE: Procedure, Madam Speaker, there is a problem. I can see people voting twice. I do not see why the people standing there should continue voting twice –(Interjections)- yes, I do not see why the people standing there should continue voting twice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can you move down? Okay, I have counted the Members on this side. Now let me count the ones on the front row. We are first ascertaining the numbers before we vote. Okay, let us move to those on the second. Can I ask those Members who are standing to move near where hon. Omach is? Please, move down to the middle. Yes, hon. Wacha?

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to suspend the provision of the Rules of Procedure that requires the Members on Government side to sit on your right so that everybody finds a seat in this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes! Hon. Members, you can take on the seats on this side – please sit on all the benches. Can the clerk now ascertain the numbers? The voting Members on the front row please raise your hands.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we just lifted the rule on the sitting arrangement, but Gen. Elly Tumwine is seated on the Floor like an orphan. That kind of hatred for the Opposition – can he come and sit on the Front Bench this side?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Members on the front row, please raise your hands. We need to ascertain the numbers before we start voting. Hon. Members, we are 179 Members now, therefore, we can start voting. 

I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Namayingo District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those in favour of Namayingo are 169; none against and one abstention. Namayingo approved. (Applause) 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Luuka District.

MR MULUMBA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to move a motion that we change the name from Luuka District to Kiyunga District with its headquarters at Kiyunga Trading Centre. That is what is contained in the report of Parliament. I beg to move.

MR MWESIGE: I have no objection to the amendment, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I need to announce the results – those in favour are 179; one abstention; so Luuka District, or Kiyunga is approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, when we were creating a number of districts, including Manafwa and Bukedea, there was a long list and I moved a motion for an omnibus passage of those districts. The only districts, which we stayed in that motion, were those which had contention. At that point, the only two districts, which had contention, were Tororo and Pallisa. I moved a motion for omnibus passage save for those two. Under such circumstances and with such precedent set, I beg to move that we pass these remaining districts omnibus -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can somebody speak for it?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, I suggest that the Attorney-General guides us? We do not want to get constitutional problems; the Attorney-General should guide us.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I would find it irregular to start this process by voting one district at a time and then reach somewhere in the middle and change the procedure. I think you are going to have a problem and as far as I am concerned, we should continue with the procedure with which we started. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Kiryandongo District.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of Kiryandongo District are 179; one abstention. Kiryandongo approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Ntoroko District.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 184 are in favour of Ntoroko District and there are two abstentions. (Applause) Ntoroko District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Serere District -(Mr Okupa rose_)- let us first vote. While they count – yes, hon. Okupa?

MR OKUPA: We have taken the vote and I have voted in support of the creation of Serere District. I wanted to put on record that the people of Kasilo County, whom I represent and given the reason that the minister gave of getting services nearer to the people, will be disadvantaged because of the location of the headquarters. Kasilo’s two furthest points are about 60 kilometers apart –(Interjections)- just a moment -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please listen!

MR OKUPA: We will be disadvantaged and I do not want to derail the issue of the vote. My only plea to the Minister of Local Government, with whom we have shared notes, is that to cure that, could we be granted a town council – and I am ready to put that in writing to him such that we do not haggle over this issue of the headquarters. (Applause) I do not know whether I can move a motion to that effect since the Members are all supporting me on the creation of the town council. May I now move that this House approves the creation of a town council for Kasilo County? (Laughter) I thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government. 

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Under the law, town councils are not created by Parliament but Government will consider the request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 183 members are for Serere District; and there are two abstentions. The district is approved. (Applause) 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the creation of Alebtong District. Alebtong is coming out of Lira District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, in line with ICT, I propose that the name of this new district Alebtong be changed to laptop –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will have to check with the Moroto county council authorities to tell me that. Hon. Members, 185 for Alebtong District and one abstention. District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the creation of Gomba District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are 184 Members in favour of Gomba District and two abstentions. Gomba District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the creation of Buvuma District. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In favour of Buvuma District are 183 Members and two abstentions. Buvuma District approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank honourable members for the support and make a correction on the headquarters for Buvuma District -(Interjections)- yeah! We agreed with the minister that because there is no location which is called Buvuma, the headquarters will be at Kitamiiro Trading Centre -(Interjections)- I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the creation of Bulambuli District.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 181 in favour of Bulambuli District and two abstentions. Bulambuli District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the creation of Kyankwanzi District.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have 173 Members in favour of Kyankwanzi; four against and two abstentions. Kyankwanzi District approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the last part of the resolution is that the headquarters of each new district, which is not yet a town council, shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Governments Act. That is a general one - creating a town council out of all the headquarters. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is another urgent item on the funding of political parties. Can I invite the Attorney-General to make the closing remarks before we conclude that Bill?

5.32
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members will recall that I presented this Bill, the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008 for the second reading on the 16 April 2009. 

I would like to thank honourable colleagues for the useful contributions that they made during the general debate. I note that most of the points they made are taken care of in the amendments proposed by the committee, which Government does not oppose. Therefore, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008” and passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.36
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that this House adopts the report of the committee and that the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008” do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009”
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. Hon. Members, we debated this second reading extensively; it is on the Hansard. I want to thank you very much for the work you have done. I wish you a happy Christmas but in the meantime -  

HON. MEMBERS: What of CBS?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, there was a motion on CBS. Yes, I had forgotten. But where is hon. Mabikke? Is anybody representing him? 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT RECOMMENDING THE IMMEDIATE RE-OPENING OF RADIOS; CBS FM, AKABOOZI FM, AND SUUBI FM

5.39
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament, recommending the immediate re-opening of radios; CBS FM, Akaboozi FM and Suubi FM. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as we all know, a radio station cannot commit an offence. It is the persons who work in the radio station that have potential of committing the offence. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi, a prominent lawyer, would agree with me. By leaving the three radio stations closed - and we have been following the matter keenly in the newspapers, we have not heard of any serious commitment from Government as to when they would want to officially open CBS FM, Suubi FM and Akaboozi FM - it now becomes a prudent and a political job for us, the movers of this motion, to urge Government in good faith to get up and give the permission for the three FM stations to be re-opened. 

We may all recall when His Highness the Kabaka of Buganda visited State House. We, the political spectators at that time, were hoping that they could arrive at an agreement at State House and that one of the conditions for an amicable relationship between the kingdom and the government was the re-opening of the radio stations. But we were disappointed that nothing of the kind took place. 

By leaving these radio stations closed, we are making them more popular because the ordinary people down there feel that there is something that they are missing from those radio stations. So, as we move this Motion, we urge Government to open the radio stations and moderate them. No one can speak seditious statements on a radio station and walk away scot-free. They can be prosecuted. 

We have very many people who are employed in those FM stations, as we are adjourning for Christmas today; they are having sleepless nights as to how long they will be unemployed and they have families to protect. Supposing their children do not go to school in January and they start robbing people in the streets of Kampala, it will have a greater implication.

There is a concern that we should limit local investors. The situation outside is such that the Government is vindictive of the Baganda establishment. (Laughter) Those are my views and I live here in the Mengo establishment. As we urge Government to immediately re-open the closed FM stations, freedom of speech is a constitutional right of course with accompanying clauses in the Penal Code for responsible statements.

In the spirit of good relationship every Saturday before they close the FM stations, I used to Club Obligato, which was a medium where very many youths would express themselves and at least go home and say, “We told them”. We were not sure whether you were listening to what we were saying. Now that that medium was closed, you do not know what the youth are planning. I am just appealing to Government - let us give the youth an opportunity to express themselves; to feel part of the political process with control such that such skirmishes like the ones where many vehicles were burnt do not happen again and we will all condemn that. But for now give us an audience to make us feel part of the political process and then we hope that the radio stations will also act responsibly when opened. I think these four months of being out of business could be a serious eye and ear opener to the proprietors of those radio stations.

As I sit down, I want to stand firm and move the motion on behalf of my colleague, hon. Lulume Bayigga, that Government immediately re-opens radio CBS, Akaboozi and Suubi FM. I beg to move.

5.45
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I stand to second the Motion for a resolution of Parliament to recommend for the immediate re-opening of Radios CBS FM, Akaboozi FM and Suubi FM. You will appreciate that these three radio stations serve a large population especially the population in Central Uganda. Those of us who understand Luganda will know that this was a tool for education, a tool for cultural advancement and a tool for economic development. All these have been lost with the closure of the FM stations.

I would also like to observe that a precedent was in this country following the riots in Kampala and other towns in the Buganda region. Some action was taken against some radio and television stations in our country. Notable among these was WBS. In the case of WBS, it is only the journalists who were reprimanded and a punitive action taken against them. In the case of Radio Sapientia, it was temporarily closed but after negotiations with the proprietors, this station was re-opened. My question to Government is why this can’t apply to the three radio stations that we seek to be re-opened.

There is no doubt that jobs have been lost –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to seek a clarification from the previous speaker that CBS and Akaboozi are legal entities which can sue and be sued; why have they not taken that path all this time?

MR AMURIAT: All along, there have been protracted negotiations between the leadership in this country and the proprietors of these radio stations. But in any case, this does not stop Parliament from carrying out its responsibility. As members of Parliament, we represent the population in this country. We have got a duty to speak for the voiceless, we have a duty to speak for those who cannot come to Parliament physically and so I would like to call for the indulgence of this House, you Members of Parliament, on both sides of the political divide to rise up to the occasion to express your patriotism and your resolve to promote freedom of speech by voting with us. I believe there cannot be any excuses; we have a duty as members of Parliament to pass this motion. 

I would like members of Parliament to know that many people are languishing out there because they have lost jobs. We are denying people who were employed in these radio stations a livelihood by continuing to support the continued closure of these radio stations. I would like to appeal to you to support this motion. I rest my case.

5.50
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listeners tune to radio stations for three reasons. The first is to be entertained; the second is to get information and the third one is to be educated.

In Kampala, we now have more than 100 FM radio stations. This means the listeners have to make choices. When they make those choices, they get stuck on them. I have for example, chosen two. I cannot imagine what has been going on in the minds of those who were tuning to these three radio stations. They have been denied their right to be entertained, informed and to be educated for four months. I would like to appeal to both sides of the House, on this particular issue, to behave as nationalists. You cannot punish buildings and machines – those radio stations are just rooms with machines and gadgets –(Interjections)– if anybody misuses those gadgets and the rooms, such people should be punished and not the innocent very many listeners.

So, as I said, I would like to appeal to Government to come to the rescue of our people who have been tuning to these three radio stations by immediately opening them so that we all enjoy Christmas together. I thank you.

5.35
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, we took oath to defend and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. This Constitution gives the people of this country the right to freedom of speech. We have the Media Council and the Broadcasting Council. Whereas some of us have no problem with the enforcement of laws in this country, it would have been prudent for these two institutions to exercise their powers as enshrined in the law. Some of us are so disappointed that the licenses for these radio stations were withdrawn in a barbaric manner without giving a fair hearing to both the management and proprietors of these institutions.

The International Media Index, which ranks freedom of speech in the world, has for the last five years been ranking Uganda third among the countries where electronic media freedom is highest in the world. But with these kinds of actions, it is a reversal – some people, including staff of this Parliament, have been fundraising money to help management of some of these radio stations to instead change and invest in print media to sustain the niche. I used to be one of the frequent debaters on CBS Radio Station. And I have been told by some of my listeners that having missed listening to me, they are now falling sick –(Laughter)– because they have been enjoying my debates. Therefore, it would not be good for some of our listeners who have been using these media to get into suffering innocently.

Lastly, these radio stations, as has been indicated in the motion, employ nearly 500 people. I would like to say they indirectly employ over two million people when you consider the fact that there are people who also advertise with radios in order to sell. So, by closing these radio stations, we are cutting the chain of distribution. As I speak, some of our farmers are now stuck with their products because the consumers who would get information on those products are now unable to do that. 

Therefore, based on the position of the Constitution, I would like to call upon this House to direct the relevant minister – we really do not beg because we are here to defend the Constitution. By Government delaying to open these radio stations, it is sending very wrong signals on whether we shall have a free and fair election in 2011 –(Interjections)– yes, it is a serious matter. Today, it is CBS Radio, but tomorrow it might be some of you being denied nominations; be careful. If you do not support CBS Radio today, tomorrow it will be you and there will be nobody to defend you.

As I end, in Ghana, when some people started funding violence, the radio stations alerted the security agencies. They helped the agencies to protect people’s lives. Of course, I know that in other countries, radio stations have promoted violence, but in this particular case, it was the error of Government to stop His Highness, Kabaka Ronald Mutebi of Buganda from visiting his people in Kayunga. That is what caused the violence; it was not the radio stations. That is why I beg this House to support this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we hear other views? Let us start with hon. Lumumba.

5.38
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA KASULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. (Applause) This Government has always promoted investment by giving incentives though it gives them only to foreign investors. I am yet to be informed of any incentives that have been given to the many of our local investors.

As an investor, these days, in order for one to manage business, they cannot avoid getting loans. If I have an investment running on the basis of a loan, it means I have to meet my obligation every month. If Government encourages people to do investments through loans, but the same Government comes and closes their investments, how should they meet their obligations to pay the instalments of the loans?

Madam Speaker, we have the problem of unemployed youth in this country. The people who study journalism or mass communication have very little space for employment in government. So if the private sector comes up to employ those people, then we should support them. When they make mistakes, we should go back to the drawing table to make sure that we protect the youth who are employed in that industry.

These days the banking business is booming in Uganda. Basically, banks now give loans for agriculture and to those who have salaries. We have guaranteed our employees to get salary loans and we have investors. So when you close down the business, the investor has to face the burden of paying the loan which he or she incurred to put that investment in place and to bear the burden of paying the instalments to the banks where he or she guaranteed the staff to receive loans. 

Government should care about the people employed by these radio stations. Let them sit down with the owners and draw up new terms; otherwise, you will soon see people committing suicide. Will that be good for their families? Do we have enabling laws to cater for the orphans? Please, let us look beyond the individual owners of the radio stations. If government insists on not opening these radio stations, then they should meet their financial obligations to avoid disrupting the employees and banks. 

By the way, some of these radio stations have been mobilising the people for development. Let us not just focus on what went wrong on one or two days and forget what was good for five days in a week; let us be objective. In fact, CBS would sometimes broadcast programmes on reproductive health. Besides that, CBS would go beyond the central region; it reached even eastern Uganda. So, let us go beyond politics and look at the country in a broader sense. Let us consider the investments put up by the people who started the radio station and consider the employees of CBS. In the villages, there are small stalls where people would post their announcements to bring to CBS and they would get at least Shs 1,000 for food for the day. 

Hon. Members, just imagine you were the owner of Ssubi; how would you feel? That is the best way to judge. If they closed my school, for instance, just because some worker messed up or because of some other mistake, I would not be happy. Many of you have small investments –(Member timed out_)

6.04
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by thanking the movers of this motion. It is true that people have been affected by the closure of these FM radio stations, namely the employees and some of the listeners. However, in the motion there is an attached statement, which has a paragraph which states, “Un-refuted media reports have quoted an intelligence brief by Mr Peter Ssematimba, the proprietor of Super FM, addressed to hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister for Security, warning that re-opening CBS FM and Akaboozi FM without substantially weakening their positions on the airwaves could be counter-productive.” I hope the movers of the motion will shed more light on this because it is a very serious statement. It is blackmail beyond what we understand. 

I visited my constituents and some of them told me that they would like to have CBS re-opened. However, they said that there are some programmes that were not good, that were quite abusive. CBS has more than one frequency and some of their frequencies were good while others were bad. They recommended that those programmes and the presenters should be reprimanded. 

This means the movers of this motion should come up with a statement about the radio stations so that we can get a balanced position. This motion is wanting in some areas. I do not want to say that it is biased, but it is not sufficient and it requires a lot of homework. We should ask them to take it back and come up with a better motion that gives us a better picture of the other side. That will give us the chance to check the minister or the broadcasting council and understand where they have failed to agree. Let us give them the chance to do that and we give them a timeframe within which they should come and inform us so that by the time the stations are re-opened, every side is satisfied. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion on the Floor deserves support. For sure, these radio stations, just like any other communication media, have a development aspect. I am sure that government has benefited tremendously from these institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I must thank government for having given the green light to all media houses. The work they have done for the country can be quantified and qualified. However, for any good business to flourish it must consider some things, among them is control. What was lacking at CBS was control. What we see is beyond what meets the eye. Since there is something beyond what meets the eye, I would request that the minister in charge comes up with a clearer statement to this House to ensure that we qualify this motion so that this radio station is opened. When we find out where we can be useful and contribute and be given assurance that whatever went wrong will not be repeated, then we should support this motion. I am sure Government did not just close it without noticing some flaws. So, when we get a clear statement, we should support the motion. 

In the central region we do not now have the capacity to mobilise and yet CBS was doing a good job at this. It is true that CBS had very good coverage and good signals, which signals it was getting from Government. Since people were using CBS for business purposes and for mobilisation of the local person, I concur with hon. Kasule that mothers now face a problem and communication is also a problem. People now miss burying their dear ones because CBS was the channel they relied on for such information.

We need to support this motion but I prefer that we get the information behind all this so that we get the motion properly qualified and have CBS re-opened as early as possible. 

6.11
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that at the time of closure of these radio stations, Government could have considered the circumstances that were prevailing then, also bearing in mind that in Rwanda the radio played a very negative role in the genocide. So, at that time of closure, Government could have had those considerations, so it might have been relevant to do what they did. 

It is also true that some radio stations have been re-opened. It is also true that some journalists who had been banned from hosting programmes on radio or television have also been reinstated. As far as CBS is concerned, I want to agree with hon. Muwulize that CBS had the widest coverage especially in Buganda region. I also want to say that there were programmes on CBS - this is something that I got from my people when I was in the district – that were very radical, inciting and abusive. That is the fact of the matter that any right thinking Ugandan cannot deny. However, as I said, it is also true that there were also other programmes that were very educative; programmes like Nsindika ngyake, Omuzira mu bazira, and ebirango. Actually, it was only CBS, of all the Luganda radio stations, that was airing ebirango for the people. 

As far as staff is concerned, whereas there were individuals on CBS that were using abusive language, the majority, I believe, were not very abusive. We have got calls from these people who are now languishing because the radio station is closed. At the end of the day, a radio station can be closed and it affects an individual who had been depending on it as a source of salary and his/her children cannot now go to school. So, my plea is that the minister should tell us about what we have been reading in the media. 

I want to state categorically that the intention of the motion is okay but like hon. Muwulize said, we need to get a harmonised position. We need to know how far the minister has gone, because we have heard that there are meetings going on. We cannot just direct that it be opened but there must be a mechanism in place to control the excesses that could be there. So, can the minister tell us how far they have gone? We do not want a repeat of this. We want the radio station opened and we want a regulatory mechanism. The minister should tell us, in meeting with the directors and the stakeholders, how far they have gone and what parameters were used for opening one radio station and not opening the other. -(Member timed out_)

6.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you. I would have restrained myself from speaking but for those who are supporting CBS as a commercial venture or as an investment, they forget that actually what took place alienated Buganda from Uganda -(Applause)- and some of us have been working tirelessly to bring back Buganda into central politics. So, I cannot accept these simplistic arguments. What about people who lost their lives? What about people who lost business or property? (Applause) Children have been orphaned and there is no welfare state in Uganda. So, Madam Speaker, I appeal to those people who support the kingdom and people who support Buganda not to take us back into the days when a good Muganda was a dead one. Those statements have been said –(Interjections)- yes! Those statements have been said –(Interruption) 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, this motion was crafted specifically to ask Government to immediately re-open Suubi FM, which is privately owned by a businessman in town; Akaboozi FM, which is owned by an entrepreneur aligned to the Movement; Sapientia FM, owned by the Catholic Church; CBS radio station, which is partly owned by the Kingdom of Buganda. Since this motion was crafted, Akaboozi FM and Sapientia FM have been re-opened. Now we are remaining with Suubi and CBS FM stations. Is it in order for this honourable minister, who happens to be a Muganda from Mukono, married to a Muganda who fought in Buganda –(Interjections)– this is a point of order; order on top of order?

MR ONEK: This Parliament of Uganda deserves better quality debate than directing reasoning to individuals’ tribes and background. We deserve better quality debate, you Opposition members. You cannot refer to a Member of Parliament by tribe but refer to his or her reasoning. If you have a superior ground, give your superior ground. So, I am asking whether it is in order in this high level debate in a national symbol, the Parliament of Uganda, to refer to people on tribal and sectarian lines when we are reasoning issues? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your tone of debate is intended to stigmatise an honourable member of this House and I will not allow it. You are out of order.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you. I am a very rational and also an intelligent person. If you go to page 2, in addition to the debate, paragraph 4 says: “Whereas the Electronic Media Act provides for the setting up of the Broadcasting Council to licence and regulate radio and television stations, its mandate does not include the power to withdraw or revoke a broadcasting licence or close a radio station.” I am trying to point out to you the motive behind the people who brought this motion and hence the debate. 

“… Even if the Council had legal authority to withdraw the licence, the procedures followed were ultra vires and an infringement of fundamental constitutional rights.” The last paragraph: “The Broadcasting Council exercised its mandate arbitrarily, excessively, selectively and unconstitutionally. The actions of the Broadcasting Council seem to be politically motivated and a ransom to broadcasters as to this day it is unclear how long these stations will remain closed.” 

If hon. Mabikke and his seconder think that the actions of the Broadcasting Council were unconstitutional, go to the Constitutional Court! You should not be here. You must produce evidence to this House that actually the procedures that were followed were ultra vires and an infringement of this.

I want to appeal to all republicans in this House -(Interjection)- yes, those who believe in monarchies integrated in a republican state and who wish us well, to leave Government to do their work. Tomorrow if you pass this motion as it is, you are the same people who are going to turn around and say, “Buganda has been pampered as they have always been pampered”. We do not want that. Thank you. (Applause) 

6.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): First and foremost I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for affording me this opportunity to react –(Interjection)- I believe you have the powers to restrain my honourable colleague on the other side of the House from trying to intimidate me. My capacity to defend myself is quite considerable but I do not want to exercise such functions. 

First and foremost, I acknowledge that any honourable member of this august House has the right to raise a matter of public interest. The issue of revoking the licence for CBS, among other stations, was taken after serious consideration by the people who manage this state. 

I hasten to dislocate two of the items attached to this motion, that is, the two stations Suubi and Akoboozi. As I speak now, Akaboozi is back on air for the last three weeks and Suubi has been given permission to broadcast but they have their own internal problems. I believe when they sort out their problems, they will be back on air. 

Coming back to CBS, I would like to assure the august House that the matter is of serious importance to the state and as a result His Excellency the President appointed a committee of the Cabinet consisting of eight senior members of the Cabinet and myself as the chairperson. We have also co-opted Gen. Salim Saleh as the liaison between the committee and Mengo or the principal stakeholders in CBS. 

The committee’s terms of reference, among others, were to interface with the principal stakeholders in this broadcasting organisation. It is my pleasure to report to the august House that since the committee was set up, we have interfaced with the board of directors of CBS and only yesterday we also had the opportunity of interfacing with the Ow’ekitiibwa Katikkiro of Buganda, J.B Walusimbi, and exchanged views regarding this matter.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is about the committee. Has this committee been given a time line or is it open-ended? Is it working without a timeframe so that we can be guided? What are their terms of reference? If they are open-ended, then this may go on until 2012 and that will not help us.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Indeed we take into consideration that the government has a lot of issues to handle and that CBS is an organisation, which is commercial and would like to get back on air to make money as their principal occupation. We take that into consideration and therefore for us to dilly dally in making a decision would be totally misplaced. However, when handling a timeframe, you have to take a number of things into consideration -(Interjections)- I am used to heckling; I could write a PhD thesis on it. So please bear with me, my former colleagues, so that we get the correct information.

In terms of timeframe, we would like to come back to this august House preferably after reporting to the person who gave us the task before it is too late. When I say –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The Minister for ICT who was my former presidential candidate made a statement that, “before it is too late”. Can he be specific and tell us the timeframe? When will he come here and make a formal statement to that effect? There should be a government assurance or commitment on their position and they should state it here in this House.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. You are sticking to a timeframe and I have given you the factors that can determine the timeframe. Number one, as I said, we need to interface with the principal stakeholders. So far, we have met two of the categories and our last interaction was with the principal stakeholder in the Office of the Ow’ekitiibwa Katikkiro of Buganda. We have promised to meet him again. 

Secondly, on 28th of this month, we shall be meeting the CBS Board of Directors for the second time, at their request, to interact with them. So you may want to start pegging your time. 

My honourable colleagues, it is a matter of proper legislative decorum. Once again, I would like to appeal to my former colleagues that if you are interested –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Hon. Awori is a minister of this government and an ex-officio member of this House, and we are Members of the Eighth Parliament; is it in order for a Member of this Parliament to refer to the Members of Parliament continuously as his former colleagues? In what context is he referring to Members of Parliament as former colleagues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really hon. Members, the hon. Member is an old face in this House; certainly, he has former colleagues who were here in the Seventh and Sixth Parliaments. I think he is speaking in that context. Please, conclude.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe if I could elaborate on the Speaker’s answer; when I referred to some of you as former members, I was a former UPC. I left but you are still there. I am no longer in the Opposition but NRM proper. (Laughter)

To pick up from where I left off, we have been having interactions with the principal stakeholders in CBS. We are continuing and I have given a part of the schedule. We are going to meet again on 28th. We shall report back to the person who constituted the committee and with his permission, we can come back and report to this august House on how far we have gone or when we are going to re-open the station, depending on the answer.

I would like to add that as an experienced presiding officer of this august House, it is established practice and proper legislative decorum that a matter that is still current and before the Cabinet is not a subject of debate outside that particular forum. As I said, it is a Cabinet rule –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need some clarification, please. I am happy to hear the minister outlining some steps that have been taken so far to restore CBS back on air. However, whereas he is still wondering about that and in view of the fact that he is failing to give us the timeframe within which we should expect positive results, the honourable minister should be aware that in the absence of CBS, there are other mouthpieces that have come to take over that vacuum and have virtually confused the airwaves of this country. I know my colleague, hon. Anifa, will support me on this. We have Radio Mbabule in Sembabule. It is just a mouthpiece of confusion and even the minister who is the proprietor and has been here has abandoned it. 

Is the minister aware that as he is dilly-dallying, there are some more dangerous media waves that are coming up and filling the vacuum? Is the hon. Minister further aware that the closure of CBS has occasioned extreme harm, suffering and grief to people who can longer make their announcements for others to bury their dead? 

Is the minister aware that this black out does not augur well for the relationship between the central government and Mengo? Therefore, is the minister in a position to assure this House that in due course, and indeed here and now, he is giving us steps that will lead to the re-opening of CBS? Short of that, the people of Sembabule are in deep grief; they are suffering, they are in a blackout and other sham media houses have come to take over the airwaves formerly used by CBS, notably Radio Mbabule. It has done great harm to the people of Sembabule. 

MR WACHA: I am happy that hon. Aggrey Awori has brought to light what I think is very important. I am also glad he is taking a stance which is reconciliatory, not like my sister-in-law who tried to enflame the debate. I want to know from him; in their discussion in that meeting, is the committee trying to make a distinction between the radio station and the operators of the radio station? To me, the closing of the radio station and the fact that no particular action is being taken against the people who are supposed to have perpetrated the violence speaks volumes. Are you making that distinction?

If the radio station will continue to be closed for some time, are you considering opening CBS for purposes of only birango, which is non-political?

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. These are some of the considerations we are putting on the table. For instance, the last part you have mentioned - are we considering re-opening CBS for limited programmes such as birango and others - are some of the issues that we are discussing with the stakeholders. There are people who have suggested –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to end this.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister. My concern is beyond the birango. Is the hon. Minister concerned that if CBS continues to be closed, it speaks about our path to 2011 - a clampdown on media freedom, a clampdown on the possibility of freedom of expression? Is he aware that some of those private radio stations have been facilitating the path towards multi-party politics? As we talk now, the government broadcasters almost have no room to host those of us in the Opposition. It is those private stations that host us. If you are committed to free and fair elections in 2011, don’t you want to consider the option that you open up - some of us are not shy about this – so that some of us will at least have access to the airwaves?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to react to two points raised by my colleagues.

A number of items are being considered. The kind of programmes that shall come back on air when and if CBS is restored will be determined by this interface. It is pointless for the committee to interface with the stakeholders on a pre-determined position. We have interfaced with them. The board of directors might acknowledge some of the faults they made that led to the closure of the station and they say in light of a, b, c, and d we are not going to do one, two, and three. However, as you know - we are all legislators - you do not make a law in anticipation. Likewise, you do not make a decision in anticipation. So, we have to interact with them. Maybe at some suitable and opportune stage, some of our colleagues might appear before the committee. We would like to hear your views about it. At the appropriate time, I could even invite you to appear before the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, hon. Members, it is important to listen to this debate so that as the honourable minister, his committee and the stakeholders take into account the views of the people, they take note of the fact that CBS and other radio stations had created a niche in the market and there are citizens who believe and subscribe to it and who would want to listen to it. This matter should be resolved expeditiously so that you can report to Parliament when we resume. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will take your guidance but at the same time, I seek your protection that we come to the end of this matter with minimum interruption from the other side.

Your guidelines are absolutely correct, except for one. I pray that you allow this committee to report to the appointing authority, seek his permission and come back and report to Parliament on how far we have gone. 

As far as the motion is concerned, the way we are moving so far –(Interjections)- can I seek your protection from the honourable colleagues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have guided you. I do not know why you are dwelling on this matter.

MR AWORI: As soon as we resume the sittings of this august House next year, I will bring a report. So, I pray that we stay this motion until such a time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we possess enough information to vote on this matter now. Let us give the opportunity to the government to conclude their discussions and report back to us.

Hon. Members, I would like to thank you for the work we have done. I am inviting you for a Christmas party this evening. Go and put on your dancing shoes and I will meet you there at 7.00 p.m. in my jeans so that we dance.

I want you to empty your pigeon-holes so that the documents do not over-flow.

I adjourn the House sine die. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

